CODE OF THE CITY OF MIRAMAR, FLORIDA 
 
____________ 
Adopted: November 20, 1990 
____________ 
Published in 1991 by Order of the City Commission 
____________ 
 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
MIRAMAR, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Wayne M. Messam 
Mayor 
____________ 
Yvette Colbourne 
Vice Mayor 
____________ 
Maxwell B. Chambers 
Winston F. Barnes 
Darline B. Riggs 
City Commissioners 
____________ 
Weiss Serota Helfman 
Cole & Bierman, P.L. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Vernon E. Hargray, City Manager 
Whittingham Gordon, Assistant City Manager 
Michael Moore, Assistant City Manager 
____________ 
Denise A. Gibbs 
City Clerk 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
MIRAMAR, FLORIDA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Vicki Coceano 
Mayor 
____________ 
William H. Cresswell 
Mary Forzano 
Dan Lewis 
Fred Schaefer 
Michael J. Tagg 
City Commission 
____________ 
Rafael Suarez-Rivas 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Betty S. Tarno 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Miramar, Florida. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1964 Code, as supplemented through February 5, 1990, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city commission. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1964 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-2 and the first section of Chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Indices 
The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indices themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Alyce A. Whitson, Supervising Editor, and Ron McLaughlin, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
Ordinance No. 91-9 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE. CITY COMMISSION OF THE CITY OF MIRAMAR, ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF MIRAMAR, FLORIDA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COMMISSION OF THE CITY OF MIRAMAR, FLORIDA: 
Section 1. The Code entitled, "Code of the City of Miramar, Florida", published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 26, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before June 4, 1990, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is otherwise expressly provided by law, every person held by a court of law and/or a municipal board or agency to be in violation of any provisions of the Code or any ordinance adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits and/or any other civil actions(s) provided by law. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city commission to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after June 4, 1990 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. Such ordinances which are amendments to the Code shall be, in the regular course of business, transferred by the city clerk for codification as supplements to the instant Code. 
Section 7. Severability. If any section, sentence, part of section, paragraph, clause, phrase or word of this ordinance is declared invalid, the remaining provisions of this ordinance shall not be affected. 
Section 8. Effective Date. This ordinance shall become effective as provided by law. 
Passed and adopted on first reading on this 5th day of November 1990. 
Passed and adopted on second reading on this 20th day of November 1990. 
	/s/ Vicki Coceano 
      MAYOR 
 	 
	/s/ Michael J. Tagg 
      COMMISSION PRESIDENT 
 	 
11-21-90    
DATE SIGNED 
ATTEST: 
/s/ Betty S. Tarno 
      City Clerk 	
 	 
APPROVED AS TO LEGAL FORM: 
/s/ Rafael Suarez-Rivas 
      City Attorney 	
 	 
 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Miramar, Florida. The City of Miramar was originally incorporated by Laws of Florida, 1955, Chapter 31007, as amended by Laws of Florida, Chapter 63-1627, which is the Charter of the City. The editors in compiling the Charter, in the interest of the user and for purposes of a simplified index, have divided some sections into two or more sections where the subject matter involved is varied. However, editor's notes are included in the applicable section explaining such procedure. In many instances the editors have moved sections into more significant article headings. However, no material within the sections has been disturbed and appears here as recorded in the official journal in the Secretary of State's office. The section, subsection and paragraph numbering and lettering for this compilation of the Charter and amendments have been supplied by the editors, as well as catchlines and article headings. The true identification of each section as to its chapter, paragraph, article and section number appears in parentheses at the end of each section. Sections that consist of mere legislative dicta have been omitted. All words, phrases, corrections, etc., supplied by the editors in the actual body of any section are placed in brackets. A comparative table immediately following the Charter compilation shows the disposition of each section herein. Emphasis is placed on the fact that the omission of any section herefrom does not act as a repeal of such section. The official record of the acts of the Legislature are as contained in the Secretary of State's office. Section 2 of Ord. No. 81-20, enacted May 4, 1981, states that: "The city council shall hereafter be referred to as the city commission, and the council members shall hereafter be referred to as commissioners." Pursuant to § 4 of that ordinance, upon revision of any pages in the Charter or Code, the above-mentioned changes will be made accordingly. In addition, the Charter has been editorially amended to reflect the effect of the Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, specifically F.S. § 166.021, and an editor's note has been inserted explaining the disposition of that section pursuant to F.S. § 166.021. Subsequently, Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, adopted December 2, 2008 and passed by the voters at the election of March 10, 2009, amended the Charter, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. See the Charter Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 
 
ARTICLE I. - CORPORATE EXISTENCE, FORM OF GOVERNMENT, BOUNDARY AND POWERS 
 
Section 1.01. - Corporate existence. 
A municipal corporation known as the City of Miramar (the "City") is hereby confirmed and continued pursuant to this Charter and the Constitution of the State of Florida (the "State"). 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
Section 1.02. - Form of government. 
The City shall have a "Commission-Manager" form of government. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
Section 1.03. - Boundaries. 
The corporate boundary of the City shall be as follows: 
Commence at the southwest corner of Section 27, Township 51 South, Range 41 East, for a point of beginning; thence proceed westerly along the south line of Sections 28, 29 and 30 of Township 51 South, Range 41 East, to the easterly line of Township 51 South, Range 40 East; thence proceed southerly along the east line of Section 36, Township 51 South, Range 40 East, to the southeast corner of said Section 36; thence proceed westerly along the south line of Sections 36, 35, 34, 33, 32, and 31 to the west line of Township 51 South, Range 40 East, and the east line of Township 51 South, Range 39 East; thence proceed westerly along the south line of Sections 36, 35, and 34, Township 51 South, Range 39 East, to the southwest corner of said Section 34, Township 51 South, Range 39 East; thence proceed northerly along the west line of Sections 34, 27, and 22 of Township 51 South, Range 39 East, to the northwest corner of the south half of said Section 22; thence proceed easterly along the north line of the south half of Sections 22, 23, and 24 to the east line of Township 51 South, Range 39 East, and the west line of Township 51 South, Range 40 East; thence continue easterly along the north line of the south half of Sections 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, and 24 to the East line of Township 51 South, Range 40 East, and the West line of Township 51 South, Range 41 East; thence continue easterly along the north line of the south one-half of Sections 19, 20, 21, and 22 of Township 51 South, Range 41 East to the northeast corner of the said south one-half of said Section 22, said corner being the same as the northwest corner of the south one-half of Section 23, Township 51 South, Range 41 East; thence proceed easterly along the north line of the south one-half of said Section 23, to a point of intersection with the centerline of S.W. 70th Avenue; thence proceed southerly along the last described centerline and its southerly extension to a point of intersection with the northwesterly right-of-way line of Sunshine State Parkway as shown on the plat of WYN HOMESITE No. 3 AMENDED, as recorded in Plat Book 60, at Page 46, of the Public Records of Broward County, Florida; thence proceed northeasterly along said northwesterly right-of-way line to a point of intersection with the said north line of the south one-half of Section 23; thence proceed easterly along said north line of the south one-half to a point of intersection with the west line of the southeast quarter of said Section 23, as shown on the plat of RESUBDIVISION OF WELWYN PARK, FIRST ADDITION, as recorded in Plat Book 53, at Page 7, of the Public Records of Broward County, Florida; thence proceed southerly along the last described line to a point of intersection with the northerly right-of-way line of S.W. 18th Street; thence proceed easterly along the last described right-of-way line to a point of intersection with the westerly right-of-way line of S.W. 66th Avenue, as shown on said Plat of RESUBDIVISION OF WELWYN PARK, FIRST ADDITION; thence proceed northerly along the last described right-of-way to a point of intersection with the said north line of the south one-half of Section 23 as shown on said Plat of RESUBDIVISION OF WELWYN PARK, FIRST ADDITION; thence proceed easterly along said north line of the south one-half to the northeast corner of said south one-half of said Section 23, said corner being the same as the northwest corner of the south one-half of Section 24, Township 51 South, Range 41 East; thence proceed easterly along the north line of the said south one-half of Section 24, to a point of intersection with centerline of State Road No. 7 (U.S. 441), also known as S.W. 60th Avenue; thence proceed southerly along said centerline of State Road No. 7 over and across said Section 24 and Section 25, Township 51 South, Range 41 East, Broward County, Florida, to a point of intersection with the south line of said Section 25; thence proceed westerly along the said south line to the southwest corner of said Section 25, the same being the southeast corner of said Section 26; thence proceed westerly along the south line of said Sections 26 and 27, Township 51 South, Range 41 East, to the southwest corner of said Section 27, and the point of beginning. 
The legal description of the City that is set forth above shall be revised, from time to time, as provided by Ordinance, so as to conform with annexations to the territory of the City, as authorized by Section 166.031(3), Florida Statutes. Any such provisions previously made shall be deemed to be incorporated into the legal description provided above. The latest legal description of the City shall be maintained on file in the office of the City Clerk, accompanied by a map to be used for convenience of reference. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
Section 1.04. - Powers. 
The City shall have all available governmental, corporate and proprietary powers and may exercise them for municipal purposes, except when prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
Section 1.05. - Construction. 
This Charter and the powers of the City shall be construed liberally in favor of the City. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COMMISSION; MAYOR 
 
Section 2.01. - City Commission. 
The City Commission shall consist of five (5) members, one (1) of whom will be the Mayor, duly elected by the qualified voters of the City as provided by this Charter. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
Section 2.02. - Powers. 
All powers of the City, except such as are vested in the City Manager and except as otherwise provided by this Charter or the Constitution or laws of the State of Florida, are hereby vested in the City Commission. The City Commission may, by Ordinance or Resolution, prescribe the manner in which any power of the City may be exercised. The City Commission shall be the judge of the election and a qualification of its own members. The City Commission may determine its own rules of procedure and may punish its own members for misconduct. If the Mayor or any Commissioner shall fail to attend meetings for a consecutive period of three (3) months, he/she may be relieved of his/her office by a majority vote of the City Commission. The City Commission shall have the power to designate or create such offices, departments, or divisions, other than those provided for by this Charter, as may be necessary for the administration of the affairs of the City, to prescribe the duties and powers of such office, department or division, other than those provided for by this Charter, as may be necessary for the administration of the affairs of the City; to prescribe the duties and powers of the officers or employees to such office, department or division; and to fix the salary or compensation of all officers or employees. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
Section 2.03. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
It shall be the duty of the Mayor to serve as the president of the Commission and preside over all meetings of the City Commission. The Mayor shall be the recognized head of City government for all ceremonial purposes, for service of process, by the governor for military purposes, and shall be the City official designated to represent the City in all dealings with other governmental entities but shall have no administrative duties. The Mayor shall execute, with approval of the City Commission as provided by law, all Ordinances and Resolutions. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
Section 2.04. - Qualifications. 
The members of the City Commission, including the Mayor, shall be residents of the City and have the qualifications of electors in the general municipal election of the City. Only electors of the City who reside in the City at the time of qualifying and election and who have resided continuously in the City for at least one (1) year immediately preceding the first day of the qualifying period shall be eligible to qualify as a candidate and hold the office. When any Mayor or Commissioner shall cease to possess the qualifications required herein, he/she shall forthwith forfeit his/her office. Whenever the Mayor or any Commissioner shall cease to be a Mayor or Commissioner for any reason, his/her successor to fill out the unexpired term will be named in accordance with section 5.05 of this Charter. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
Section 2.05. - Appointing powers of the City Commission. 
The City Commission shall have the power to appoint the City Manager, City Attorney and commission secretary and members of all municipal boards, except civil service boards. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
Section 2.06. - Residence. 
For purposes of this Article, "Residence" shall require all of the following: 
(a)  A place of abode within the City; 
(b)  A declaration of intent of making that place of abode the person's permanent home; 
(c)  Registration to vote at the address of that place of abode; and 
(d)  A Florida driver's license (or, if the person does not possess a driver's license, an official Florida state identification) that reflects the address of that place of abode. 
The terms "Resident," "Resided" and "Residing" shall be based upon this definition. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE 
 
Section 3.01. - City Manager. 
The City Manager shall be the chief executive officer and chief administrative officer of the City and shall supervise, control and direct all other officers of the City except the commissioners, commission secretary and the office of the City Attorney, and be otherwise answerable to the City Commission and to the citizens of the City for the conduct of the City affairs. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
Section 3.02. - Qualifications, absence and removal of City Manager. 
The Commission shall appoint a City Manager who shall be the administrative head of the municipal government and shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all departments (excluding the City Attorney), and may be the head of such department as the Commission may by ordinance or resolution provide. He/She shall be chosen on the basis of his/her executive and administrative qualifications. He/She may or may not be a resident of the City or the State of Florida. No members of the Commission shall be appointed City Manager. He/She shall hold office at the will of the commission and may be removed by a majority vote of its members during his/her first six (6) months in office. After serving six (6) consecutive months in office he/she may be removed by a four-fifths ( 4/5 ) vote of the Commission. In the case of the sickness or absence of the City Manager, the City Commission shall appoint another person or employee to act for the City Manager and such appointee shall, during the absence or sickness of the City Manager, act for him/her and perform all his/her duties, and all such acts of the person appointed shall be as valid as though performed by the City Manager. The appointee serving as acting City Manager in the absence or sickness of the manager shall not be entitled to nor paid the compensation of the manager but shall receive such compensation as the Commission prescribes. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
Section 3.03. - Powers and duties of City Manager. 
The powers and duties of the City Manager shall be: 
(a)  To see that laws and Ordinances are enforced. 
(b)  To appoint, suspend and remove, except as herein provided, all directors of the departments and all subordinate officers and employees (excluding the commission secretary and City Attorney) in the departments in both the classified and unclassified service; all appointments to be upon merit and fitness alone, and in the classified service all appointments and removals shall be subject to the civil service provisions of this Charter and Code. 
(c)  To exercise control over all departments and divisions created herein or that may be hereafter created by the Commission (excluding the City Attorney and commission secretary). 
(d)  To attend all meetings of the Commission with the right to take part in the discussion but having no vote. 
(e)  To recommend to the commission for adoption such measures as he/she may deem necessary, expedient or otherwise in the City's best interests. 
(f)  To keep the commission fully advised as to the needs of the City. 
(g)  To examine, without notice, the affairs of any department or any officer or employee to be examined. 
(h)  To execute, with the approval of the City Commission as required by law, all contracts, deeds, bills of sale, and other instruments in writing to which the City is a party. 
(i)  To act as a liaison between the City Administration and the City Commission. 
(j)  To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or be required of him/her by Ordinance or Resolution of the Commission. 
(k)  To have charge of the department of finance, under his/her direction and control and administer (himself/herself or through his/her designee) the financial affairs of the City, including the keeping and supervision of all accounts, the levy, assessment and collection of revenues and special assessments, the custody and disbursement of City funds and monies, the control over expenditures, and such similar duties as the Commission may by Ordinance prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
Section 3.04. - City officers; appointment by City Manager. 
(1)  The City Manager shall appoint all department heads and other appointive officers, except as specifically provided in this Charter. The salaries of such officers shall be determined by the City Manager and ratified by the City Commission. Any such appointive officer shall serve a probationary period of one (1) year during which year he/she may be dismissed without being afforded a hearing. 
(2)  The City Manager shall make all appointments within ninety (90) days after either the creation of an office or within ninety (90) days after the time of appointment for offices already created, and if the City Manager does not make such appointment upon showing of good cause by the City Manager, the City Commission may grant a sixty-day extension for making appointments. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
Section 3.05. - Bonds of officers. 
The Commission shall determine by Resolution what officers, clerks or employees shall give bond and the amount of penalty thereof. All officers, clerks and employees of whom bond is required by the Commission shall, before entering upon their respective duties, give bond with surety to be approved by the Commission, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of their respective offices. All such bonds shall be payable to the City. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
ARTICLE IV. - LEGISLATIVE 
 
Section 4.01. - Commission Meeting Procedure. 
(a)  Meetings. The City Commission shall meet at such time and place as may be prescribed by Resolution or Ordinance. All meetings of the Commission shall be public, except as provided by Florida law. Special meetings may be held upon written request to the City Clerk by the Mayor, the City Manager, or three (3) Commissioners, and upon no less than twenty-four (24) hours' notice to each member and the public, or such shorter time as the City Manager shall deem necessary in case of an emergency. 
(b)  Rules and Minutes. The City Commission shall determine its own rules of procedure and order of business and shall keep minutes that shall be open for public inspection. 
(c)  Quorum and voting. Any three (3) members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum but a smaller number may meet from time to time. No action of the Commission shall be valid or binding unless adopted by the vote of at least three (3) Commissioners; provided, however, in the event that less than four (4) members of the Commission are eligible to vote on a particular matter due to vacancies or required abstention pursuant to Florida law, then the remaining members of the Commission may vote and approve such matter by majority vote. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
Section 4.02. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Appointments and removals. Neither the Commission nor any of its members shall in any manner dictate the appointment or removal of any City administrative officers or employees whom the City Manager or any of his/her subordinates is empowered to appoint, but the Commission may express its views and fully and freely discuss with the City Manager anything pertaining to the appointment and removal of such officers and employees. 
(b)  Interference with administration. The commission shall seek all requests, inquiries or actions of City officers and employees through the City Manager, and all responses thereto shall be made as promptly as possible. The Commission and its members shall deal with the administration solely through the City Manager and neither the Commission nor any members thereof shall give orders to, nor make requests of, any of the subordinates of the City Manager either publicly or privately. 
(c)  Holding other office. No elected City official shall hold any appointive City office or employment while in office. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
Section 4.03 - Emergency Ordinances. 
(a)  Authorization; form. To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or the public peace, the Commission may adopt, in the manner provided in this Section, one (1) or more emergency Ordinances, but such Ordinances may not: enact or amend a land use plan or rezone private property; levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend any municipal franchise; set service or user charges for any municipal services; or authorize the borrowing of money except as provided under the emergency appropriations provisions of this Charter if applicable. An emergency Ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed for Ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated in a preamble as an emergency Ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and a description of the emergency in clear and specific terms. 
(b)  Procedure. Upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the City Commission, an emergency Ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced. After its adoption, the Ordinance shall be advertised and printed as prescribed for other Ordinances. 
(c)  Effective date. Emergency Ordinances shall become effective upon adoption or at such other date as may be specified in the Ordinance. 
(d)  Repeal. Each emergency Ordinance except emergency appropriation Ordinances shall automatically be repealed as of the 91st day following its effective date, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the Ordinance under regular procedures, or, if the emergency still exists, in the manner specified in this Section. An emergency Ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing Ordinance in the same manner specified in this Section for adoption of emergency Ordinances. 
(e)  Emergency appropriations. To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or the public peace, the Commission, by Resolution, may make emergency appropriations. To the extent that there are no unappropriated revenues to meet such appropriation, the Commission may by such emergency Resolution authorize the issuance of emergency notes, which may be renewed from time to time, but the emergency notes and renewals in any fiscal year shall be paid not later than the last day of the fiscal year succeeding that in which the emergency appropriations were made. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS 
 
Section 5.01. - Qualifications of electors; absentee voting; state election laws. 
All elections shall be held in accordance with the provisions of the general election laws of the State of Florida, except as is otherwise provided by this Charter or by Ordinance. Nothing contained in this Charter as to voting is to be construed as an attempt to vary any constitutional provisions that would govern in elections prescribed by the Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
Section 5.02. - Procedure for becoming candidates. 
The name of any elector of the City shall be printed upon the ballot after he/she has paid to the City Clerk a qualifying fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and has filed with the City Clerk a written notice of candidacy, which notice shall designate which seat of the City Commission he/she desires to fill, exclusive of Seat 5 which shall be designated for the Mayor's seat, such Commission seats being designated 1, 2, 3, and 4, as appropriate, and which notice shall state that if elected he/she will qualify and serve in such office during the term for which he/she is elected. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk forthwith on the paying of said qualifying fee and filing of such notice to make and to deliver to such candidate a written certificate acknowledging the receipt of said qualifying fee and such certificate shall state the date of paying said qualifying fee and filing of such notice. The payment of said qualifying fee and the filing of such notice must be done thirty-five (35) days before the day of election and not more than fifty (50) days before, unless otherwise dictated by the requirements of general or special law. If the candidate fails to comply with the provisions of this section, his name shall not appear on the ballot. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
Section 5.03. - Candidates elected. 
At any regular or special election, the ballot shall name all candidates who have qualified for any of the designated seats of the City Commission and for the office of Mayor. The candidate receiving the highest number of votes for Mayor shall be declared elected. The candidate for each designated Commission seat receiving the highest number of votes shall be declared elected. In case of any tie vote for Mayor or Commission candidate, in which the question cannot be resolved, a run-off election shall be held. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
Section 5.04. - Election of Mayor and Commission. 
The Mayor and each City Commissioner shall be elected at-large. Each Commissioner and the Mayor shall remain in office until his or her successor is elected and assumes the duties of the position. The election for Commission Seats 1, 2, and 3 shall be held on the second Tuesday in March 2009, and every four (4) years thereafter. The election for Commission Seat 4 and the Mayor (Seat 5) shall be held on the second Tuesday in March 2011, and every four (4) years thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
Section 5.05. - Vacancies in Elective Office; Temporary appointments; Special Elections. 
If any vacancy occurs in the Commission, including the Mayor, the remaining members of the City Commissioner (including the mayor) shall by majority vote elect an eligible person to fill the same for the remainder of the term of that office provided that an election for that office is not more than six (6) months away. If an election for that office is more than six (6) months away, then a special election shall be held within one hundred eighty (180) days of the effective date of such vacancy, provided, however, if the Supervisor of Elections cannot conduct the special election within the one hundred eighty-day period, then the special election shall be held at the earliest possible time. If an appointment is called because there is six (6) months or less left in the term of that office and the Commission fails to make said appointment within thirty (30) days, then a special election shall be held within one hundred eighty (180) days of such vacancy's effective date, provided, however, if the Supervisor of Elections cannot conduct the special election within the one hundred eighty-day period, then the special election shall be held at the earliest possible time. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09; Ord. No. 10-11, § 2, 7-7-10, election of 11-2-10)  
Section 5.06. - Form of ballots. 
All ballots used in any general election held under authority of this Act, shall be without party mark or designation and without any insignia or mark of any association or organization thereon, and shall be substantially in the same form as the election ballots used in all general elections. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
Section 5.07. - Oath of office. 
All elective officers, before entering upon their duties, shall take and subscribe to the following oath of office: 
"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support, protect and defend the Constitution and Government of the United States and of the State of Florida, and of the Charter of the City of Miramar; that I am duly qualified to hold office under the Constitution of the State and the Charter of the City of Miramar and that I will well and faithfully perform the duties of _______ upon which I am now about to enter. So Help Me God." 
If any elective officer shall fail to qualify for the office to which elected within thirty (30) days after election thereto, said office shall be declared vacant and a successor appointed as by this Act provided. If any elective officer through illness or unavoidable absence cannot be present to take the oath of office as herein provided the Commission may by a majority vote extend for a reasonable period of time within which said elective officer shall take office. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
ARTICLE VI. - CHARTER AMENDMENTS 
 
Section 6.01. - Charter amendments. 
This Charter may be amended in accordance with the provisions of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
Section 6.02. - Procedure to amend. 
(a)  Initiation. This Charter may be amended in two (2) ways: 
(i)  By Ordinance. The Commission may, by Ordinance, adopted by the affirmative vote of at least three (3) members of the City Commission, propose amendments to this Charter and upon passage of the initiating Ordinance shall submit the proposed amendment to a vote of the electors at the next general election held within the City or at a special election called for such purpose. 
(ii)  By petition. The electors of the City may propose amendments to this Charter by petition signed by ten (10) percent of the registered electors as of the last preceding municipal general election. Upon certification of the sufficiency of a petition, the Commission shall submit the proposed amendment to a vote of the electors at a general election or special election to be held not less than sixty (60) days or more than one hundred twenty (120) days from the date on which the petition was certified or at a special election called for such purpose. 
(b)  Results of election. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a proposed amendment vote for its adoption, it shall be considered adopted upon certification of the election results. If conflicting amendments are adopted at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Section 7.01. - Severability. 
If any section or part of any section of this Charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this Charter or the context in which such section or part of section so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part of section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section or part of section to which such holding shall directly apply. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
Section 7.02. - Conflicts of interest; ethical standards. 
All Commissioners, officials and employees of the City shall be subject to the standards of conduct for public officers and employees set by State or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
Section 7.03. - Variation of pronouns. 
All pronouns and any variation thereof used in this Charter shall be deemed to refer to masculine, feminine, neutral, singular or plural as the identity of the person or persons shall require and are not intended to describe, interpret, define or limit the scope, extent or intent of this Charter. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
Section 7.04. - Calendar day. 
For the purposes of this Charter, a day shall mean a calendar day. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
Section 7.05. - No Discrimination. 
The City shall not adopt any measure or policy or otherwise discriminate against any person due to age, race, religion, color, national origin, physical or mental disability, creed, sexual orientation or sex. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
ARTICLE VIII. - CIVIL SERVICE 
 
Section 8.01. - Civil service board, civil service system authorized. 
The City of Miramar shall have the power to create a civil service board and civil service system. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
Section 8.02. - Composition of civil service board; election and term of members; vacancies in office; removal for cause. 
The civil service board shall be made up of seven (7) members, two (2) of whom shall be appointed by the City Manager, two (2) of whom shall be elected by a majority of the elected City Commission members; one (1) member of the board shall be elected by and from the nonprobationary law enforcement officers employed by the City; one (1) member shall be elected by and from the nonprobationary fire fighters employed by the City; and one (1) member shall be elected by and from employees other than nonprobationary law enforcement officers and the three (3) members selected by the employees shall not be required to be confirmed by the City Commission, but the City Commission shall prescribe the candidate qualifications, rules, regulations and procedure for the purpose of holding of elections of City employees for the members of the civil service board to be named by such employees. The City Commission shall further prescribe the terms of each member and the dates for the election and the appointment of the first member. 
Any vacancies among the members to be named by either the elected City Commission members, the employees, or the City Manager, shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same way as the original appointment was made. Nothing herein or hereinafter set forth shall make it unlawful for any member of the board to serve for more than one (1) term. 
Members of the board may be removed by the City Commission for cause, and the method of removal shall be prescribed by the City Commission. 
The method of electing and appointing the members of the civil service board shall be as prescribed in this section and shall be an exception to the requirements of this Charter which requires all appointments to be made by the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
ARTICLE IX. - CONTINUATION 
 
Section 9.01. - Continuance of rights, powers, privileges, property, Ordinances, Resolutions, taxes, fees, offices, departments, boards, and agencies of City. 
(a)  All Ordinances and Resolutions passed by the City shall remain in effect to the extent that they are not inconsistent with this Charter. 
(b)  All taxes and fees passed by the City shall remain in effect to the extent that they are not inconsistent with this Charter. 
(c)  All offices, departments, boards, and agencies created and established by the City shall continue to the extent that they are not inconsistent with this Charter. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09)  
Section 9.02. - Time of taking effect. 
Any proceeding, action, Resolution or Ordinance that was commenced or the adoption of which was initiated prior to the effective date of this Charter may be completed under the provisions of either the former Charter or this Charter. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 12-2-08, election of 3-10-09) 
   
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of the City of Miramar, Florida," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1964, § 1-1)  
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: Charter. The word "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Miramar, Florida, printed as Part I of this volume. City. The word "city" shall be construed as if the words "of Miramar" followed the word city, and shall extend to and include its several officers, agents and employees. City clerk. The words "city clerk" shall be construed to mean the City Clerk of the City of Miramar. City commission. Whenever the words "city commission" are used, they shall be construed to mean the City Commission of the City of Miramar. Unless there is an express reference to the mayor individually, the references to city commission shall mean the commission as a body, including the mayor. City manager. Whenever the words "city manager" or "manager" are used, they shall be construed to mean the city manager of the City of Miramar. Code. The word "Code" shall mean the Code of the City of Miramar, Florida. Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Code, the day of the act, event or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven (7) days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Florida Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 1.090(a). 
County. The word "county" shall mean the County of Broward in the State of Florida. F.S. The abbreviation "F.S." shall mean the latest edition or supplement of the Florida Statutes. Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. Mayor. Whenever the word "mayor" is used, it shall be construed to mean the Mayor of the City of Miramar. Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one (1) person or thing. Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. State. The word "state" shall be construed to mean the State of Florida. Tenant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies, the whole or a part of such buildings or land, either alone or with others. Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. (Code 1964, § 1-2; Ord. No. 91-22, § 1, 3-4-91) 
State Law reference— Definitions of terms, F.S. § 1.01.  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1964, § 1-3)  
Sec. 1-4. - History notes. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section.  
Sec. 1-5. - References and editor's notes. 
References and editor's notes following certain sections are inserted as an aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling nor meant to have any legal effect.  
Sec. 1-6. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinances adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code.  
Sec. 1-7. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the city, or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract, right, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the city; 
(3)  Any administrative ordinances of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance; 
(5)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(6)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(7)  Any ordinance levying or imposing ad valorem taxes; 
(8)  Any ordinances prescribing through streets, parking and traffic regulations, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles, or loading zones; 
(9)  Any land use or rezoning amendment to the zoning map; 
(10)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(11)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(12)  Any ordinance annexing territory or excluding territory or any ordinance extending the boundaries of the city; 
(13)  Any ordinance establishing positions, classifying positions, setting salaries of city officers and employees or any personnel regulations; 
(14)  Any temporary or special ordinances; 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. The ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office.  
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inspection herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections or subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the city commission. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be by indicating the deletion of any provisions by striking through such provision with a hyphen and underlining all additions to such sections and shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _______ of the Code of the City of Miramar, Florida, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of The City of Miramar, Florida, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered _______, which said section (or article or chapter) reads as follows:...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1964, § 1-6) 
State Law reference— Minimum procedural requirements for adoption of ordinances and resolutions, F.S. § 166.041.  
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city commission. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city commission or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _______ through _______." The inserted section numbers will indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code; and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
No person shall change or amend by addition or deletion any portion of this Code or insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the city commission. 
(Code 1964, § 1-7) 
State Law reference— Unlawful alteration of public records, F.S. §§ 831.01, 839.13.  
Sec. 1-11. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1964, § 1-4) 
Charter reference— Procedure for adoption of ordinances, § 18.  
Sec. 1-12. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city commission that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 1-5)  
Sec. 1-13. - General penalty. 
(a)  The violation of or failure to comply with any provision of this Code shall constitute an offense against the city, and where no specific penalty is provided therefor, shall subject the offender, upon conviction, to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), imprisonment not to exceed sixty (60) days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(b)  The judgment of the court imposing any fine, or fine and cost of prosecution, may contain provision for a period of imprisonment in default of payment of same. The payment of fines and costs of prosecution may also be enforced summarily against the property of the delinquent offender. 
(c)  Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance of the city shall be deemed a public nuisance and shall be subject to abatement by the city. Each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Code 1964, § 1-8; Ord. No. 03-14, § 4, 5-7-03)  
Sec. 1-14. - Attorneys' fees and court costs. 
The city shall be entitled to request and recover court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees in any litigation arising from a violation of any provision of the Code of the city and/or in any civil action collecting an indebtedness due the city. 
(Code 1964, § 1-11)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Amusement devices, Ch. 5; health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 10; business taxes, permits and business regulations, Ch. 11; pensions, Ch. 15; civil service rules and regulations, Ch. 16; taxation, Ch. 19; utilities, Ch. 21. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Policy for naming of municipal facilities and roads. 
(a)  There is hereby established a policy for the naming of municipal facilities and roads as set forth in this section. This section shall not repeal provisions contained in the city's subdivision regulations, but shall be considered as supplementary to such regulations. 
(b)  Wherever possible, it shall be the policy of the city that municipal buildings, roads, bridges, parks, recreational complexes, or other similar facilities shall be named for persons who have made significant contributions to the city. 
(c)  The mayor shall, after consulting with appropriate citizens' committees, recommend several persons to the city commission. The list may include city officials, community leaders and other appropriate persons. The mayor may recommend that the commission name municipal facilities and roads for such persons. 
(Code 1964, § 2-4) 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation, Ch. 14; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23; subdivisions, Ch. 24.  
Sec. 2-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 92-07, § 1, adopted Oct. 16, 1991, repealed former § 2-2, which pertained to funds for youth programs and derived from § 2-5 of the city's 1964 Code.  
Sec. 2-3. - Public records. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
Agency is defined as is set forth in F.S. § 119.011(2). 
City clerk shall, for purposes of this section, be construed to mean the city clerk, as well as any assistant city clerks in the employ of the city clerk's office. 
Criminal intelligence information, criminal investigative information and criminal justice agency are defined as are set forth in F.S. § 119.011(3), (4). 
Public records shall mean all books, records, documents, contracts, bonds, indentures, deeds, letters, memoranda, transcribed minutes, ordinances, resolutions, films, and sound recordings defined as public records in F.S. ch. 119, Public Records Law. 
(b)  City clerk's duties. The city clerk shall be the custodian of the public records of the city. The original of any public record constituting an agreement or other written instrument to which the city is a party, any bond indenture, bond, letter of credit, mortgage, note, or similar instrument of indebtedness or performance or having legal import, bid documents, public works documents, financial disclosure and source of income forms or any other document which by law the city is required to maintain as a permanent record shall be filed with the city clerk within seventy two (72) hours of any weekday, excluding Fridays, from which any city official or employee obtains possession of such document. All records received by the city clerk shall be designated as to the time and date of receipt; provided, however, that duplicates need not be received nor date stamped. 
(c)  Inspection by the public. The public records of the city shall be available for personal inspection by any interested person or party during the customary business hours of the city clerk's office, in accordance with the applicable provisions of F.S. ch. 119. 
(d)  Removal or concealment of public records prohibited. No person shall remove, conceal or otherwise prevent the city clerk from having lawful custody of public records. 
(Ord. No. 90-38, § 1, 4-2-90)  
Sec. 2-4. - Compensation for elected or appointed officials. 
(a)  The city commission may increase or decrease the salary, expenses or other expenses of the mayor and city commissioners by ordinance. 
(b)  The mayor, city commissioners, and members of municipal boards shall elect, at the time of preparation of the annual budget, to either accept their annual unvouchered individual, municipal expense account as salary or, alternatively, to voucher such expenses as vouchered municipal expenses. 
(c)  No elected official whose term expires during the fiscal year shall exceed the prorated amount of the expenses allocated for that office (e.g. seat) for the applicable fiscal year. 
(Code 1964, § 2-11; Ord. No. 90-47, § 1, 5-21-90)  
Sec. 2-5. - Per diem reimbursements. 
City travelers, as defined in F.S. § 166.021, shall be entitled to the per diem reimbursements set forth in F.S. § 112.061, with the exception that the amounts set forth in F.S. § 112.061(6)(b) shall be as follows: 
(1)  Breakfast ..... $6.75 
(2)  Lunch ..... 15.75 
(3)  Dinner ..... 22.50 
(Ord. No. 04-14, § 2, 4-21-04)  
Secs. 2-6—2-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND CITY COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal government generally, § 12 et seq. 
Cross reference— Elections, Ch. 8. 
 
Sec. 2-26. - Official minutes of city commission. 
All meetings of the city commission shall be recorded by a mechanical recording device, and such recordings shall constitute the official minutes of the city. Written excerpts may be typed by the city clerk's office to serve as a guide and outline of the business conducted by the city commission, but the mechanically recorded record shall constitute the official minutes of the city commission. 
(Code 1964, § 2-7)  
Sec. 2-27. - Enactment of ordinances, resolutions; recording, etc.; availability for public inspection. 
All ordinances shall not be passed until they have been read on two (2) separate days, the second reading being not sooner than the seventh day after the first reading. Both readings may be by title only. The ayes and nays shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances and resolutions and entered on the journal of the proceedings of the commission, and every ordinance and resolution shall require on final passage the affirmative vote of the majority of all members. Provision shall be made for the printing, preservation, recording and indexing of all ordinances and resolutions by the city clerk, which shall at all reasonable times be open for inspection thereof by the public. 
(Code 1964, § 2-8) 
State Law reference— Procedure for adoption of ordinances and resolutions, F.S. § 166.041.  
Sec. 2-28. - Minimum vote on ordinances, resolutions. 
No ordinance or resolution shall be adopted or order made unless at least three (3) votes of the city commission are recorded in favor thereof. 
(Code 1964, § 2-9; Ord. No. 91-22, § 2, 3-4-91)  
Sec. 2-29. - Selection of vice-mayor; removal. 
Commencing with their first meeting following the March 12, 1991, general municipal elections, and at the April meeting of the city commission every one (1) year thereafter, the commission shall select from among its members a vice-mayor for a term of one (1) year. The vice-mayor shall, in the event of the absence or disability of the mayor, sign city legislation, chair commission meetings, and undertake all other duties of the mayor provided by law. The vice-mayor's position will be at the will and pleasure of the city commission, and the person holding that position may be removed by four-fifths vote of the commission with cause. 
(Ord. No. 91-26, § 2, 3-4-91; Ord. No. 01-11, § 5, 1-17-01) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 91-26, adopted Mar. 4, 1991, repealed § 2-29; § 2 of the ordinance enacted provisions in lieu thereof. The repealed provisions pertained to the veto power of the mayor and derived from Code 1964, § 2-10, and Ord. No. 91-22, § 2, 3-4-91.  
Sec. 2-30. - Smoking in commission chambers or conference room prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite any flame or smoke any type of tobacco or other substance in the commission chambers or conference room in the city hall. 
(Code 1964, § 2-2)  
Sec. 2-31. - Recall. 
The city hereby adopts F.S. § 100.361, entitled "municipal recall," as an ordinance as follows: 
(1)  Recall petition. Any member of the governing body of the city and the mayor of the city may be removed from office by the electors of the city in the manner provided for by this section. When the official represents a district and is elected at large by the electors of the city, all electors of the city are eligible to sign the petition to recall the official and are entitled to vote in the recall election. Members may be removed from office by the following procedure: 
a.  A petition shall be prepared naming the person sought to be recalled and containing a statement of grounds for recall in not more than two hundred (200) words, limited solely to the grounds specified in paragraph (1)b. If more than one (1) member of the governing body is sought to be recalled, a separate recall petition shall be prepared for each member sought to be recalled. 
1.  The recall petition shall be signed by at least one thousand (1,000) electors or by five (5) percent of the total number of registered electors of the city or district as of the preceding city election, whichever is greater. Electors of the city or district making charges contained in the statement of grounds for recall and those signing the recall petition shall be designated as the committee. A specific person shall be designated in the petition as chairperson of the committee to act for the committee. Electors of the city or district are eligible to sign the petition. Signatures and oaths of circulators shall be executed as provided in paragraph (1)c. All signatures shall be obtained within a period of thirty (30) days, and the petition shall be filed within thirty (30) days after the date the first signature is obtained on the petition. 
b.  The grounds for removal of elected city officials shall, for the purposes of this section, be limited to the following and must be contained in the petition: 
1.  Malfeasance; 
2.  Misfeasance; 
3.  Neglect of duty; 
4.  Drunkenness; 
5.  Incompetence; 
6.  Permanent inability to perform official duties; and 
7.  Conviction of a felony involving moral turpitude. 
c.  Each elector of the city signing a petition shall sign his or her name, as registered in the office of the supervisor of elections, in ink or indelible pencil and shall state on the petition his or her place of residence and voting precinct. Each petition shall contain appropriate lines for signatures and addresses of electors and an oath, to be executed by the circulator thereof, verifying the fact that the circulator saw each person sign the counterpart of the petition, that each signature appearing thereon is the genuine signature of the person it purports to be, and that the petition was signed in the presence of the circulator on the date indicated. 
d.  The petition shall be filed with the city clerk by the person designated as chairperson of the committee, and, when a facially valid petition meeting the requirements of paragraph (1)b. is filed, the clerk shall submit such petition to the county supervisor of elections who shall, within a period of not more than thirty (30) days after the petition is filed with the supervisor, determine whether the petition contains the required valid signatures. If it is determined by the clerk that the petition does not meet the requirements of paragraph (1)b. and therefore is not facially valid, the clerk shall so notify the governing body of the city and take no further action. The petition cannot be amended after it us filed with the clerk. The supervisor shall be paid, by the persons or committee seeking verification, the sum of ten cents ($0.10) for each name checked. 
e.  If it is determined that the petition does not contain the required signatures, the clerk shall so certify to the governing body of the city and file the petition without taking further action, and the matter shall be at an end. No additional names may be added to the petition, and the petition shall not be used in any other proceeding. 
f.  If it is determined that the petition has the required signatures, then the clerk shall at once serve upon the person sought to be recalled a certified copy of the petition. Within five (5) days after service, the person sought to be recalled may file with the clerk a defensive statement of not more than two hundred (200) words. The clerk shall, within five (5) days, prepare a sufficient number of typewritten, printed, or photocopied copies of the recall petition and defensive statement, as well as the names, addresses, and oaths on the original petition, and deliver them to the person who has been designated as chairperson of the committee and take a receipt therefor. Such prepared copies shall be entitled "Recall Petition and Defense" and shall contain lines and spaces for the signature of each registered elector, place of residence, election precinct number, and date of signing, together with oaths to be executed by the circulators which conform to the provisions of paragraph (1)c. The clerk shall deliver forms sufficient to carry the signatures of thirty (30) percent of the registered electors. 
g.  Upon receipt of the recall petition and defense, the committee may circulate it to obtain the signatures of fifteen (15) percent of the electors. Any elector who signs a recall petition shall have the right to demand in writing that such elector's name be stricken from the petition. A written demand signed by the elector shall be filed with the clerk and, upon receipt of the demand, the clerk shall strike the name of the elector from the petition and place his or her initials to the side of the signature stricken. However, no signature may be stricken after the clerk has delivered the recall petition and defense to the supervisor of elections for verification. 
h.  Within sixty (60) days after delivery of the recall petition and defense to the chairperson, the chairperson shall file with the clerk the recall petition and defense which bears the signatures of electors. The clerk shall assemble all signed petitions, check to see that each petition is properly verified by the oath of the circulator, and submit such petitions to the county supervisor of elections who shall determine the number of valid signatures, purge the names withdrawn, certify within thirty (30) days whether fifteen (15) percent of the qualified electors of the city have signed the petitions, and report the findings to the governing body. The supervisor shall be paid, by the persons or committee seeking verification, the sum of ten cents ($0.10) for each name checked. 
i.  If the petitions do not contain the required signatures, the clerk shall report such fact to the governing body and file the petitions; the proceedings shall be terminated, and the petitions shall not again be used. If the signatures do amount to at least fifteen (15) percent of the qualified electors, the clerk shall serve notice of that fact upon the persons sought to be recalled and deliver to the governing body a certificate as to the percentage of qualified voters who signed. 
(2)  Recall election. If the person designated in the petition files with the clerk, within five (5) days after the last-mentioned notice, a written resignation, the clerk shall at once notify the governing body of that fact, and the resignation shall be irrevocable. The governing body shall then proceed to fill the vacancy according to the provisions of the appropriate law. In the absence of a resignation, the chief judge of the judicial circuit in the county shall fix a day for holding a recall election for the removal of those not resigning. Any such election shall be held not less than thirty (30) days or more than sixty (60) days after the expiration of the five-day period last mentioned and at the same time as any other general or special election held within the period. If no such election is to be held within that period, the judge shall call a special recall election to be held within such period. 
(3)  Ballots. The ballots at the recall election shall conform to the requirements of this subsection. With respect to each person whose removal is sought, the question shall be submitted: 
"Shall _______ be removed from the office of _______ by recall?" 
Immediately following each question there shall be printed on the ballots the two (2) propositions in the order here set forth: 
"(name of person) should be removed from office." 
"(name of person) should not be removed from office." 
Immediately to the right of each of the propositions shall be placed a square on which the electors, by making a cross mark (X), may vote either of the propositions. Voting machines or electronic or electromechanical equipment may be used. 
(4)  Filling of vacancies; special elections. 
a.  If an election is held for the recall of members elected only at large, candidates to succeed them for the unexpired terms shall be voted upon at the same election and shall be elected in the same manner as provided by the appropriate law for the election of candidates at general elections. Candidates shall not be elected to succeed any particular member. If only one (1) member is removed, the candidate receiving the highest number of votes shall be declared elected to fill the vacancy. If more than one (1) member is removed, candidates equal in number to the number of members removed shall be declared elected to fill the vacancies, and, among the successful candidates, those receiving the greatest number of votes shall be declared elected for the longest terms. Cases of ties and all other matters not specially provided for in this section shall be determined by the rules governing elections generally. 
(5)  Effect of resignations. If the member of the governing body being recalled resigns from office prior to the recall election, the remaining members shall fill the vacancy created according to the appropriate law for filling vacancies. If all of the members of the governing body are sought to be recalled and all of the members resign prior to the recall election, the recall election shall be canceled, and a special election shall be called to fill the unexpired terms of the resigning members. If all of the members of the governing body are sought to be recalled and any of the members resign prior to the recall election, the proceedings for the recall of members not resigning and the election of successors to fill the unexpired terms shall continue and have the same effect as though there had been no resignation. 
(6)  When petition may be filed. No petition to recall any member of the governing body of the city shall be filed until the member has served one-fourth of such member's term of office. No person removed by a recall or resigning after a petition has been filed against such person shall be eligible to be appointed to the governing body within a period of two (2) years after the date of such recall or resignation. The clerk shall preserve in his/her office all papers comprising or connected with a petition for recall for a period of two (2) years after they were filed. The method of removing members of the governing body of the city is in addition to such other methods now or hereafter provided by the general laws of this state. 
(7)  Offenses relating to petitions. No person shall impersonate another, purposely write a name or residence falsely in the signing of any petition for recall or forge any name thereto, or sign any paper with knowledge that such person is not a qualified elector of the city. No expenditures for campaigning for or against an officer being recalled shall be made until the date on which the recall election is to be held is publicly announced. The committee and the officer being recalled shall be subject to F.S. ch. 106. No person shall employ or pay another to accept employment or payment for circulating a recall petition. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this section, upon conviction, such person shall be punished as provided by law. 
(8)  Intent. It is the intent to the city that the recall procedures provided in this section shall be uniform for all elected officials. Therefore, all Charter and special law provisions which are contrary to the provisions of this section are hereby repealed to the extent of this conflict. 
(Ord. No. 90-45, § 1, 5-7-90)  
Secs. 2-32—2-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Civil service board, §§ 63, 64. 
Cross reference— Code of ethics for municipal officers and employees, § 2-287 et seq.; parks and recreation advisory board, § 14-26 et seq.; board of trustees of the firefighters pension plan and trust fund, § 15-96 et seq.; board of trustees of the police officers retirement plan and trust fund, § 15-186 et seq.; board of trustees of the general employees retirement plan and trust fund, § 15-286 et seq.; unsafe structures board, § 22-61 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-51. - Attendance of certain advisory board members at meetings required. 
(a)  Applicability. Attendance requirements are hereby established for board members. As used in this section, the word "board" shall refer to the advisory zoning board, the advisory planning board, the civil service board, parks and recreation advisory board, the safety council, and the Blasting Citizen Advisory Committee. 
(b)  Removal for excessive absences. Notwithstanding any other provisions contained in this Code, any board member who is absent from two (2) consecutive regular meetings of the board or who is absent from three (3) meetings within any six-month period, and who has not been excused therefrom by a majority vote of the members of the board, shall thereby automatically forfeit such position or office as a member of the board. The clerk or secretary of the board shall promptly notify the removed member and the mayor of such removal. 
(c)  Hearing, reinstatement of member removed. Any member removed in accordance with subsection (b) above may, within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the notice, request a hearing before the board to show cause why he/she should not be removed. If the board shall find that there is good cause to justify the absence of the member, he/she shall be reinstated. 
(d)  Replacement of member removed. If any such member shall fail to request a hearing or if the board shall not find good cause to justify the member's absence, a new member shall thereupon be appointed in accordance with the applicable ordinance or Charter provision. 
(Code 1964, § 2-50; Ord. No. 17-11, § 2, 2-15-17)  
Sec. 2-52. - Certain city boards; quorum requirement; action by board. 
For all city boards and committees (excluding and excepting, however, the civil service, code enforcement, and planning and zoning boards, who will be governed by their own respective quorum and voting requirements), a quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of a majority of currently appointed members. Each item or motion before the board or committee will require the affirmative vote of at least a majority of board members, constituting the quorum. 
(Ord. No. 91-5, § 1, 11-5-90)  
Sec. 2-53. - Residency requirement for municipal board members. 
Members of all municipal boards appointed by the city administration and/or city commission shall be residents of the city and shall be qualified electors in the city general municipal elections, unless otherwise provided by this Code, or the waiver of such requirements is necessary to meet board membership limitations established by law. 
(Ord. No. 91-5, § 1, 11-5-90; Ord. No. 98-41, § 1, 7-1-98)  
Sec. 2-54. - Procedures for commission appointment of members to boards, committees, authorities and agencies; procedure supplemental. 
(a)  Procedures for appointments to municipal board; procedure supplemental. The procedure for appointments to municipal boards, committees, authorities and agencies shall be as set forth in this section. This section shall be deemed supplemental, and not conflictive with any applicable qualifications or terms of office of members expressly set forth by general or local law for particular boards. 
(b)  Boards with five members. On boards, committees, authorities and agencies consisting of five (5) members, each member of the city commission shall have one (1) appointee. 
(c)  Boards with more than five members. On boards, committees, authorities and agencies consisting of more than five (5) members, the number of members which exceed five (5) will be appointed on an at-large basis by the city commission. 
(d)  Administrative recommendations. Any member of the city commission may request recommendations regarding prospective appointees from the city manager. 
(e)  Length of service. 
(1)  Members appointed by individual commissioners. Board members shall be appointed during the second meeting in May of each year. Unless otherwise expressly set forth by state or local law particular to that board, board members shall serve at the will and pleasure of the member of the commission who appointed them and at the will and pleasure of the commission as a whole, notwithstanding that their appointment may be for a specified term. No board member derives any property rights in his or her appointed position. At any time, the commission by a majority vote or the appointing member of the commission may remove any board member for any reason or no reason. Any board member vacancy arising prior to completion of a term shall be filled by appointment made by the mayor or commissioner responsible for the appointment of the vacant member for the remainder of the affected term. Upon the expiration of the term of the appointing member of the commission, or upon that commissioner's suspension, removal or resignation, the board member(s) appointed by that member of the commission shall remain on the board until a new board member is appointed. 
(2)  At-large appointments. The terms of all at-large appointees shall expire four (4) years after appointment or when the commission so desires, whichever is sooner. Board members shall be appointed during the second meeting in May of each year. All appointees and reappointees to boards shall serve at the pleasure of the commission, notwithstanding that their appointment may be for a specified term. No board member derives any property rights in his or her appointed position. Any board member vacancy arising prior to completion of a term shall be filled by the commission as a whole for the remainder of the affected term. 
(f)  Filing of qualifications with clerk. Prior to their appointment, members of municipal boards, committees, authorities or agencies will file with the city clerk's office, a copy of their Miramar residency and status as an elector of the city, consisting of a voter's registration card (or other sufficient proof which may be acceptable in the professional discretion of the city clerk). The prospective appointee will also file a current professional or business tax receipt, certification or registration if the board membership they are filling requires a particular occupation, trade or profession. Boards required by state law to file financial disclosure documents shall file them at the same time. Upon certification by the city clerk's office to the appointee's eligibility, the appointing process shall be deemed complete. The city clerk will have available current lists of city board members. 
(g)  A person appointed to a board after March 1993 is prohibited from simultaneously serving as an appointee of more than one (1) board or authority, unless it is required by law that certain board members must serve on more than one (1) specific city board. 
(h)  No member of any City board shall become a candidate for elective political office, whether federal, state, or municipal, during his or her term. Should any member of a City board seek elective political office, as detailed in subsections (1), (2), or (3) below, such action shall be deemed a tender of resignation from such board. The board member's resignation shall be effective upon whichever occurs first: 
(1)  At the time such board member receives contributions or makes expenditures, or gives his or her consent for any other person to receive contributions or make expenditures, with a view to bringing about his or her nomination or election to public office; 
(2)  At the time such board member appoints a campaign treasurer and designates a primary depository; or 
(3)  At the time such board member files qualification papers and subscribes to a candidate's oath as required by law. 
However, any individual that is required to resign from a City board under the circumstances described above may be reappointed to his or her City board position by a simple majority vote of the City Commission should he or she be unsuccessful in his or her campaign. 
(Ord. No. 91-25, § 1, 3-4-91; Ord. No. 92-32, § 1, 5-6-92; Ord. No. 92-34, § 1, 6-3-92; Ord. No. 98-41, § 2, 7-1-98; Ord. No. 98-52, § 1, 9-2-98; Ord. No. 07-10, § 3, 2-21-07; Ord. No. 07-14, § 2, 6-6-07; Ord. No. 12-11, § 2, 4-4-12; Ord. No. 19-04 , § 2, 11-5-18) 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 91-25, adopted Mar. 4, 1991, amended Art. III by adding § 2-53 thereto; inasmuch as there existed a § 2-53, the editor has included the new provisions as § 2-54.  
Sec. 2-55. - Election of officers of all city boards, committees, authorities and agencies. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, members of all city boards, committees, authorities and agencies shall elect their officers annually in April. 
(Ord. No. 01-11, § 2, 1-17-01)  
Secs. 2-56—2-64. - Reserved.  
Sec. 2-65. - Applicability of Robert's Rules of Order. 
Robert's Rules of Order shall apply to the motions, votes and general deliberations of municipal boards, committees and councils. The city commission procedures will be governed by Resolution No. 91-88, as amended, and where applicable, Robert's Rules of Order. 
(Ord. No. 91-21, § 1, 2-19-91; Res. No. 91-88, adopted 3-18-91, repealed Res. No. 305; Amendments to Res. No. 91-88: Res. No. 93-151, 7-21-93; Res. No. 95-174, 6-7-95; Res. No. 95-180, 6-21-95)  
DIVISION 2. - BLASTING CITIZEN ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 2-66. - Blasting Citizen Advisory Committee. 
(a)  Creation and Purpose . There is hereby established a Blasting Citizen Advisory Committee (the "Blasting Committee") in order to facilitate communication between the City and residents of the City of Miramar who are impacted by construction materials mining in northwest Miami-Dade County, and to provide a forum for residents to provide information and recommendations to the City Commission. 
(b)  Composition, appointment of members, terms of office. 
(1)  The Blasting Committee shall comprise of nine (9) members. 
(2)  The City Commission, by majority vote, shall appoint eight (8) members to the Blasting Committee, comprised of: 
a.  One resident of the Sunset Lakes Community. 
b.  One resident of the Sunset Falls Community. 
c.  One resident of the Riviera Isles Community. 
d.  One resident of the Huntington Community. 
e.  One resident of the Nautica Community. 
f.  One resident of the Country Club Ranches Community. 
g.  Two residents of the City who are not residents of the communities listed in sections a-f of this subsection. 
h.  One representative from a City business. 
(3)  In addition to the foregoing, the Broward County School Board ("School Board") Superintendent will select a representative to serve as an ex-officio member of the Blasting Committee. That member will not be able to vote and will only serve in an advisory capacity to the Blasting Committee. 
(4)  The City Manager shall appoint a City staff member to serve as staff liaison, and the City Attorney will serve as counsel to the Blasting Committee. 
(5)  Members shall be selected from a pool of applicants. Applications shall be submitted to the City Clerk's office. 
(6)  The terms of office of the members of the Blasting Committee shall be two years, with each member serving until his or her successor is appointed. Members may serve consecutive terms. 
(7)  Appointments to fill any vacancy on the Blasting Committee shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(c)  Officers; quorum; rules of procedures; public records; Sunshine Law. 
(1)  The Blasting Committee shall elect a chair person, vice-chairperson, and such other officers as the committee shall deem necessary. Officers of the committee shall be elected by a majority vote of the membership of the committee at its first meeting after the members' initial appointments, and annually thereafter. 
(2)  Sections 2-51, 2-52, 2-53, 2-55, and 2-65, City Code, shall be applicable to the Blasting Committee. 
(3)  All meetings, records and files of the Committee shall be open and available to the public, consistent with F.S. Ch. 119, (the Public Records Law), and F.S. Ch. 286, (the Sunshine Law). 
(d)  Duties and responsibilities. 
(1)  The Blasting Committee shall meet as often as it determines is appropriate to perform its functions. 
(2)  The Blasting Committee shall analyze issues related to the effects of construction materials mining upon City residents and shall keep the City Commission advised as to any developments related to blasting, and shall make recommendations to the City Commission relating to blasting. 
(3)  The Blasting Committee shall perform any other functions as directed by the City Commission. 
(Ord. No. 17-11, § 3, 2-15-17; Ord. No. 17-14, § 2, 4-20-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-11, § 3, adopted February 15, 2017, set out provisions intended for use as § 2-90. At the discretion of the editor, these provisions have been included as § 2-66.  
Secs. 2-67—2-78. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - THE HISTORIC MIRAMAR ADVISORY BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-79. - Historic Miramar Advisory Board. 
(a)  Creation and Purpose . There is hereby established a Historic Miramar Advisory Board, to analyze issues affecting the historic part of the City, and to make recommendations to the City Commission concerning necessary infrastructure improvements and the priority of such improvements, beautification, health and welfare issues, maintenance, future development, and/or other issues geared towards improving the quality of life of City residents. 
(b)  Composition, appointment of members, terms of office. 
(1)  The Historic Miramar Advisory shall be comprised of seven (7) members as follows: 
a.  Five residents who live within the historic part of the City. Each member of the City Commission shall appoint one such resident. 
b.  One business owner whose place of business is within the historic part of the City. This appointee will be selected by majority vote of the City Commission. 
c.  One resident who does not live within the historic part of the City. This appointee will be selected by majority vote of the City Commission. 
(2)  The board's recommendations will only pertain to issues affecting the historic part of the City, defined as University Drive to State Road 7 and Pembroke Road to Countyline Road. 
(3)  The City Manager shall appoint a City staff member to serve as staff liaison, and the City Attorney will serve as counsel to the Historic Miramar Advisory Board. 
(4)  Members shall be selected from a pool of applicants. Applications shall be submitted to the City Clerk's office. 
(5)  The terms of office of the members of the Historic Miramar Advisory Board shall be one year, with each member serving until his or her successor is appointed. Members may serve consecutive terms. 
(6)  Appointments to fill any vacancy on the Historic Miramar Advisory Board shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(c)  Officers; quorum; rules of procedures; public records; Sunshine Law. 
(1)  The Historic Miramar Advisory Board shall elect a chair person, vice-chairperson, and such other officers as the board shall deem necessary. Officers of the board shall be elected by a majority vote of the membership of the board at its first meeting after the members' initial appointments, and annually thereafter. 
(2)  Sections 2-51, 2-52, 2-53, 2-55, and 2-65, City Code, shall be applicable to the Historic Miramar Advisory Board. 
(3)  All meetings, records and files of the board shall be open and available to the public, consistent with F.S. Ch. 119, (the Public Records Law), and F.S. Ch. 286, (the Sunshine Law). 
(d)  Duties and responsibilities. 
(1)  The Historic Miramar Advisory Board shall meet as often as it determines is appropriate to perform its functions. 
(2)  The Historic Miramar Advisory Board shall analyze issues affecting the historic side of the City, defined as University Drive to State Road 7 and Pembroke Road to Countyline Road, and shall make recommendations to the City Commission regarding issues affecting this area of the City. 
(3)  The Historic Miramar Advisory Board shall perform any other functions as directed by the City Commission. 
(Ord. No. 17-13, § 2, 3-29-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-13, § 2, adopted March 29, 2017, set out provisions intended for use as § 2-91. At the discretion of the editor, these provisions have been included as § 2-79.  
Secs. 2-80—2-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ADVISORY BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-91. - Created. 
There is hereby created an Economic Development Advisory Board in the City of Miramar.  
Sec. 2-92. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and duties of the Economic Development Advisory Board are as follows: 
(1)  To provide the city with the benefit of knowledge, experience and business resources in order to further the efforts of the city in business attraction, retention and development. 
(2)  To advise the city commission and city manager as to specific issues regarding efforts to expand and diversify the commercial/industrial tax base, business recruitment, retention and expansion. 
(3)  To provide input relative to commercial redevelopment and revitalization and as to other issues that affect the business community. 
(4)  To recommend programs that will promote the city to the business community.  
Sec. 2-93. - Composition. 
The board shall be composed of seven (7) members as follows: 
(1)  Each member shall have an interest in the economic development and/or redevelopment of Miramar and shall either own, manage or operate a business within the corporate limits of the city, or be a resident of the city, notwithstanding the provisions of section 2-53 of the City Code. 
(2)  There shall be five (5) members, one (1) appointed by each city commissioner. 
(3)  There shall be two (2) members appointed by a majority vote of the city commission as a whole as follows: 
a.  One (1) member shall own, manage or operate a minority owned business. Such business shall be at least fifty-one (51) percent owned and operated by a minority (as that term is defined in F.S. § 288.703(3)), persons. 
b.  One (1) member shall be a representative of one (1) of the commerce parks within the city. 
The city manager or his designee shall be an ex officio member of the board. 
(Ord. No. 99-18, § 1, 5-19-99)  
Sec. 2-94. - Terms, appointment and organization. 
(a)  The members of the board shall elect a chairperson and vice chairperson annually in April, or as necessary to fill a vacancy. 
(b)  The board shall adopt bylaws and annual mission statement subject to approval of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 96-08, 1-17-96; Ord. No. 98-4, § 2, 11-19-97; Ord. No. 98-13, § 2, 1-21-98; Ord. No. 99-18, § 1, 5-19-99; Ord. No. 01-11, § 5, 1-17-01)  
Secs. 2-94.1—2-94.4. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4.5. - AFFORDABLE HOUSING ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 2-94.5. - Purpose, composition, procedures and duties of affordable housing advisory committee. 
(a)  Creation. Pursuant to the requirements of the State Housing Initiative Partnership Act, as may be amended from time to time, the City of Miramar hereby creates an affordable housing advisory committee. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of the affordable housing advisory committee is to recommend specific strategies, initiatives, incentives and actions by the city in order to encourage or facilitate the creation of affordable housing. 
(c)  Composition, appointment of members, terms of office. 
(1)  Through the adoption of a resolution, the city commission shall appoint eleven (11) members to the affordable housing advisory committee ("committee") as provided in this division. The committee shall be comprised of the following individuals: 
a.  One (1) citizen who is actively engaged in the residential home building industry in connection with affordable housing. 
b.  One (1) citizen who is actively engaged in the banking or mortgage banking industry in connection with affordable housing. 
c.  One (1) citizen who is a representative of those areas of labor actively engaged in home building in connection with affordable housing. 
d.  One (1) citizen who is actively engaged as an advocate for low-income persons in connection with affordable housing. 
e.  One (1) citizen who is actively engaged as a for-profit provider of affordable housing. 
f.  One (1) citizen who is actively engaged as a not-for-profit provider of affordable housing. 
g.  One (1) citizen who is actively engaged as a real estate professional in connection with affordable housing. 
h.  One (1) citizen who actively serves on the local planning agency pursuant to F.S. § 163.3174. 
i.  One (1) citizen who resides within the jurisdiction of the City of Miramar. 
j.  One (1) citizen who represents employers within the City of Miramar. 
k.  One (1) citizen who represents essential services personnel, as defined in the city's local housing assistance plan. 
(2)  The terms of office of the members of the committee shall be one (1) year, with each member serving until his or her successor is appointed. Members may serve consecutive terms. 
(3)  Appointments to fill any vacancy on the committee shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(4)  In addition to automatic removal for the failure of a member to meet the attendance requirements set forth in this chapter, the members of the committee shall serve their one (1) year terms at the pleasure of the city commission and may be removed at any time by a majority vote of the city commission. 
(d)  Officers; quorum; rules of procedures; public records; Sunshine Law. 
(1)  The committee shall elect a chairperson, a vice-chairperson and such other officers as the committee shall deem necessary. Officers of the committee shall be elected by a majority vote of the membership of the committee at its first meeting after the members' initial appointments, and, notwithstanding section 2-55, City Code, annually thereafter. A member of the committee may be elected to serve as an officer without restriction as to the number of terms served. 
(2)  The presence of six (6) or more members shall constitute a quorum of the committee. 
(3)  The committee may propose reasonable rules of procedure to govern the conduct of its business. All meetings, records and files of the Committee shall be open and available to the public, consistent with F.S. Ch. 119, (the Public Records Law), and F.S. Ch. 286, (the Sunshine Law). 
(e)  Duties and responsibilities. 
(1)  As required by F.S. § 420.9076, as may be amended from time to time, the committee shall review the established policies and procedures, ordinances, land development regulations, and adopted local government comprehensive plan of the city, and recommend specific actions, strategies or initiatives to encourage or facilitate affordable housing while protecting the ability of the property to appreciate in value. 
(2)  The committee may perform other duties at the request of the city commission, including: 
a.  The provision of mentoring services to affordable housing partners, including developers, banking institutions, employers and others to identify available incentives, assist with applications for funding requests and develop partnerships between various parties; and 
b.  The creation of best practices for the development of affordable housing in the community. 
(Ord. No. 08-18, § 2, 5-7-08)  
DIVISION 5. - QUASI-JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 97-34, § 2, adopted May 21, 1997, repealed Div. 5, §§ 2-95—2-102, which pertained to quasi-judicial proceedings. Section 3 of said ordinance enacted provisions included herein as a new Div. 5, §§ 2-95—2-105.3. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 2-95. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, adopted October 4, 2006, repealed § 2-95, which was entitled "adopted." See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 2-96. - Intent. 
The intent of this division is to establish procedures to ensure procedural due process and maintain citizen access to the local government decision-making process relating to the approval of applications requiring quasi-judicial hearings. This policy shall be applied and interpreted in a manner recognizing both the legislative and judicial aspects of the local government decision-making process relating to site-specific parcels. This policy shall only apply to the hearing held by a board with final jurisdiction over the application. 
(Ord. No. 97-34, § 3(2), 5-21-97; Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 10-4-06)  
Sec. 2-97. - Applicability. 
Except as may otherwise be provided by statute or ordinance, these quasi-judicial procedures shall apply to all applications as defined in section 2-98. 
(Ord. No. 97-34, § 3(3), 5-21-97; Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 10-4-06)  
Sec. 2-98. - Definitions. 
(a)  Application shall mean an application for any one of the following permits: 
(1)  Variances and cure plans. 
(2)  Conditional use permits. 
(3)  Site plan and community appearance board applications. 
(4)  Plat and plat waiver, abandonment of right-of-way and vacation of easement applications. 
(5)  Site specific rezoning. 
(6)  Site specific land use plan amendments. 
(7)  Development of regional impact development orders. 
(8)  Other site specific development applications or other matters determined to be quasi-judicial by the city attorney. 
(b)  Applicant shall mean the owner of record, the owner's agent, or any person with a legal or equitable interest in the property which is subject to the proceeding. 
(c)  Board shall mean the City of Miramar City Commission or other board considering the application and having final jurisdiction within the city related to such order. 
(d)  Commissioner shall mean a City of Miramar City Commissioner or member of the board hearing the application (see (c) above). 
(e)  Competent substantial evidence is evidence that a reasonable mind could accept as adequate to support a conclusion. 
(f)  Ex-parte communication shall mean any written, oral, or graphic communication with a commissioner which may directly or indirectly relate to or which could influence the disposition of an application, other than those made on the record during a quasi-judicial hearing. 
(g)  Expert shall mean a person who is qualified in a subject matter by knowledge, skill, experience, training, or education. 
(h)  Intervenor shall mean an individual or group who, under the recognized legal principals of standing, can demonstrate that they will suffer an adverse effect to a protected interest, such as health and safety, police and fire protection service systems, densities or intensities of development, transportation facilities, health care facilities, equipment or services, or environmental and natural resources. The alleged adverse interests may be shared in common with other members of the community at large, but must exceed in degree the general interest in community good shared by all persons. 
(i)  Land use plan shall mean the adopted City of Miramar Land Use Plan. 
(j)  Material fact shall mean a fact that bears a logical relationship to one (1) or more issues raised by the application or the laws and regulations pertaining to the matter requested by the application. 
(k)  Participants shall mean members of the general public, other than the applicant, including experts and representatives of units of local governments and governmental agencies, who offer testimony at a quasi-judicial hearing for the purpose of being heard on an application. 
(l)  Party shall mean the applicant, a recognized intervenor, or and the City of Miramar Staff. 
(m)  Quasi-judicial proceeding shall mean a hearing held by a board to adjudicate the private rights of an applicant by means of a hearing which comports with due process requirements. 
(n)  Relevant evidence shall mean evidence which tends to prove or disprove a fact that is material to the determination of the application. 
(o)  Site-specific means related to an individual piece of real estate which can be clearly defined by street address, legal description, or similar means at an identifiable location. 
(p)  Staff shall mean City of Miramar staff. 
(Ord. No. 97-34, § 3(4), 5-21-97; Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 10-4-06; Ord. No. 17-08, § 2, 11-14-16)  
Sec. 2-99. - Ex-parte communication. 
(a)  This section incorporates Section 286.0115(l), Florida Statutes, as amended, and shall be construed so as to be consistent therewith. 
(b)  Any commissioner may choose to discuss the merits of any matter upon which action may be taken by the board in quasi-judicial hearing with any person not otherwise prohibited by statute, charter provision, or ordinance if the commissioner or complies with the following procedures. 
(c)  Compliance with the following procedures shall remove the presumption of prejudice arising from ex-parte communication with any commissioner: 
(1)  Oral communications. The subject of the communication and the identity of the person, group, or entity with whom the communication took place shall be disclosed in writing to the city clerk prior to the public hearing and made a part of the record. At the quasi-judicial hearing, any party or participant may ask that the ex parte disclosures be read. The parties and participants may contest the accuracy of the matters disclosed. 
(2)  Written communications. Any written communication related to a quasi-judicial matter pending before the board shall be forwarded to the appropriate staff for inclusion on the official file, and shall be disclosed on the record before final action on the matter. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to review the official file periodically to determine whether written ex-parte communications have been placed in the official file. 
(3)  Investigations and site visits. Commissioners may conduct investigations and site visits and may receive expert opinions regarding quasi-judicial action pending before them. Such activities shall not be presumed prejudicial to the action if the existence of the investigations, site visit, or expert opinion is made a part of the record before final action on the matter. 
(d)  Disclosure. Disclosures must be made before or during the public meeting at which a vote is taken on such matters to afford persons a reasonable opportunity to refute or respond to the communication. 
(Ord. No. 97-34, § 3(5), 5-21-97; Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 10-4-06)  
Sec. 2-100. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-23, § 3(B), adopted Sept. 17, 2003, repealed § 2-100, which pertained to notice. See the Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 2-101. - General procedures. 
(a)  Quasi-judicial proceedings shall be conducted in the manner set forth herein. 
(b)  Each party shall have the right to call and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits, to cross examine opposing witnesses on any relevant matter (subject to the rules contained herein), and to rebut evidence. 
(c)  Staff shall have the responsibility of presenting the case on behalf of the city. The staff report on the application shall be made available to the applicant by request and to the commission no later than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the quasi-judicial hearing on the application. 
(d)  Official file. The following items concerning an application shall be maintained in the official file for the quasi-judicial matter: all written communications concerning an application received by commissioners, or city staff; the commission agenda report; any petitions or other submissions from the public; and all other documents pertaining to the application. The file shall be available for inspection during normal business hours. 
(e)  Participants. All who testify on any quasi-judicial proceeding must sign in and be sworn by the city clerk. Each person, other than members of city staff, who addresses the city commission or any other quasi-judicial board shall provide their name and address. 
(f)  Intervenors. No later than five (5) business days prior to a quasi-judicial hearing, an individual, organization, or person representing an individual or group seeking to obtain status as an intervenor in the matter shall submit a request to intervene to the city attorney, who shall determine whether the application for intervention shall be granted. Such request shall set forth facts sufficient to establish a potential adverse effect to a protected interest to a degree greater than that shared by all persons. Applications for intervention shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Eligibility for intervention shall be based on recognized legal principles of standing. Those filing a request to intervene shall be considered a party to the hearing, subject to a determination of standing by the board if challenged. The participation of a party as an intervenor does not waive the issue of lack of standing as a defense in any subsequent legal proceeding; 
(2)  The mayor or presiding officer may allow participation in the hearing by persons or organizations filing a request to intervene after the five (5) business-day deadline upon a showing of excusable neglect. If a late appearance is permitted, the applicant shall have the right to a continuance, at their option, without additional cost. Persons who do not demonstrate excusable neglect are not entitled to seek any delay in the proceedings; 
(3)  Only one (1) request need be submitted per application number for which a person seeks to intervene. This request shall suffice for all subsequent proceedings on the same application number, regardless of the governing body to hear the matter. 
(Ord. No. 97-34, § 3(7), 5-21-97; Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 10-4-06)  
Sec. 2-102. - Hearing procedures. 
The hearing shall, to the extent possible, be conducted as follows: 
(1)  The chair and/or the city attorney shall read a statement once at the beginning of the quasi-judicial hearing portion of the agenda outlining the procedure which shall be followed. 
(2)  The parties and all participants requesting to speak shall be collectively sworn based upon the requirements of F.S. § 286.0115, as amended, which are incorporated herein. 
(3)  The applicant or agent of the applicant may waive his or her right to an evidentiary hearing if he/she agrees with the staff recommendation and no one from the audience wishes to speak for or against the quasi-judicial agenda item. The board may vote on the item based upon the materials in the agenda back-up. 
(4)  If there is an evidentiary hearing, staff shall present a brief synopsis of the nature of the application, introduce any additional exhibits which are not already included in the agenda back-up, summarize the issues and state whether or not the application is in compliance with regard to the Land Development Code and other applicable regulations, and make a recommendation for approval, consideration, or denial of the application. 
(5)  Presentation by the applicant or the applicant's representative. 
(6)  Participants in support of the application shall make their presentation. 
(7)  The presentation of the case in chief for the application will then be considered closed, except for rebuttal as hereinafter provided. 
(8)  Participants in opposition to the application shall make their presentation. 
(9)  Recognized intervenors in opposition to the application shall make their presentations. 
(10)  The presentation of the case in opposition to the application will then be considered closed, except for rebuttal as hereinafter provided. 
(11)  After each person testifies (or at such other time as the mayor or other presiding officer may determine), the applicant, staff, or any commissioner may cross-examine the witness. 
(12)  Rebuttal by staff. 
(13)  Rebuttal by applicant or the applicant's representative, if requested. At this time the applicant may only rebut statements made by the participants and/or staff in opposition to the application. 
(14)  The chair may choose to allow parties and participants to respond solely to the applicant's rebuttal if the chair deems the response to be necessary to ensure fairness and due process. The responses must be limited to issues addressed in the applicant's rebuttal. The chair, in the interest of fairness and due process, may allow further responses, but the responses must be limited to issues addressed by the previous speaker. No new issues may be raised at this time. 
(15)  No further evidence will be accepted. 
(16)  Final argument by parties related solely to matters admitted into evidence. 
(17)  At the discretion of the board, the applicant may be permitted to respond to final staff recommendations. 
(18)  Board shall deliberate on the application. No further presentations or testimony shall be permitted. All decisions must be based upon competent substantial evidence. 
(19)  The chair and/or the city attorney may set reasonable time limits for presentations and cross-examination. 
(Ord. No. 97-34, § 3(8), 5-21-97; Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 10-4-06)  
Sec. 2-103. - Rules of evidence. 
(a)  The board shall not be bound by the strict rules of evidence, or limited to consideration of evidence which would be admissible in a court of law. 
(b)  The city attorney may exclude evidence or testimony which is not relevant, material, or competent, or testimony which is unduly repetitious or defamatory. 
(c)  The city attorney will determine the legal relevancy and admissibility of evidence. 
(d)  Evidence or testimony relating to an application's consistency with the City of Miramar Land Use Plan, a certified land use plan or the City of Miramar Land Development Code will be presumed to be relevant and material. 
(e)  Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining other evidence, but it shall not be sufficient by itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in a court. 
(f)  Documentary evidence may be presented in the form of a copy of the original, if available. Upon request, the applicant and staff shall be given an opportunity to compare the copy with the original. 
(g)  Only the parties, staff, and the board shall be entitled to conduct cross-examination when testimony is given or documents are made a part of the record. 
(h)  The office of the city attorney shall represent the board and advise the board as to the procedures to be followed and the propriety and admissibility of evidence presented at the proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 97-34, § 3(9), 5-21-97; Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 10-4-06)  
Sec. 2-104. - Cross-examination. 
(a)  The applicant, staff and all participants are subject to cross-examination during the hearing. 
(b)  A participant may request that the board ask questions of a witness. The board may or may not elect to ask the witness any questions requested by a participant. 
(c)  The scope of the cross-examination shall be limited to the facts alleged by the applicant, staff or participant(s) in relation to the application. Persons offering unsworn testimony may not be cross examined, but may be requested to respond to questions from the board. 
(d)  The city attorney or chair of the board may direct the party conducting the cross-examination to stop a particular line of questioning that merely harasses, intimidates, or embarrasses the individual being cross-examined. 
(e)  The city attorney or chair of the board may direct the party conducting the cross-examination to stop a particular line of questioning that is not relevant and that is beyond the scope of the facts alleged by the individual being cross-examined. 
(f)  If the party conducting the cross-examination continuously violates directions from the chair to end a line of questioning deemed irrelevant and merely designed to harass, intimidate or embarrass the individual, the chair may terminate the cross- examination. 
(Ord. No. 97-34, § 3(10), 5-21-97; Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 10-4-06)  
Sec. 2-105. - Continuances and deferrals. 
A continuance of a quasi-judicial proceeding may be requested by any party at any time prior to the conclusion of the hearing. Such request may be granted by the board in the interests of justice and fairness. A continuance may also be granted where, in the opinion of the board, any testimony or documentary evidence or information presented at the hearing justifies allowing additional research or review in order to properly determine the issue presented. The board shall continue the hearing to a time and date certain. 
(Ord. No. 97-34, § 3(11), 5-21-97; Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 10-4-06)  
Sec. 2-105.1. - Judicial notice. 
The board shall take judicial notice to all state and local laws, ordinances and regulations and may take judicial notice of such other matters as are generally recognized by the courts of the State of Florida. 
(Ord. No. 97-34, § 3(12), 5-21-97)  
Sec. 2-105.2. - Supplementing the record. 
Supplementing the record after the quasi-judicial hearing is prohibited, unless specifically authorized by an affirmative vote of the board under the following conditions: 
(1)  After a quasi-judicial hearing is continued but prior to final action being taken. 
(2)  If a question is raised by the board at the hearing to which an answer is not available at the hearing, the party to whom the question is directed may submit the requested information in writing to the board after the quasi-judicial hearing, provided the hearing has been continued or another hearing has been scheduled for a future date and no final action has been taken by the board. The information requested will be presented to the board at the time of the continued hearing. All parties and participants shall have the same right with respect to the additional information as they had for evidence presented at the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 97-34, § 3(13), 5-21-97)  
Sec. 2-105.3. - The record. 
All evidence in the form of documents, photographs, maps and other written materials admitted at the hearing shall be maintained by the City of Miramar Planning Department or shall be placed in the official file as directed by the commission. The official file shall be kept in the custody of the appropriate staff at all times during the pendency of the application. The official file shall be maintained in the city clerk's office for a period of thirty (30) days following the quasi-judicial proceeding, after which time the record shall be maintained by the community development department). The official record of the quasi-judicial hearing shall be preserved by tape recording or similar device by the office of the city clerk, and maintained with the official file for the quasi-judicial hearing as a public record of the city. Resumes of staff members who testify during a quasi-judicial proceeding will be automatically be entered into the record of the proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 97-34, § 3(14), 5-21-97; Ord. No. 07-01, § 1, 10-4-06)  
DIVISION 6. - TEEN COUNCIL ADVISORY BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-105.4. - Established. 
The teen council advisory board, created by Resolution No. 98-260, is hereby re-established. 
(Ord. No. 08-11, § 2, 2-20-08)  
Sec. 2-105.5. - Membership; application; term of office. 
The board shall consist of ten (10) members and each member of the city commission shall be responsible for appointing two (2) members. Whenever possible, the city commission shall appoint equal members of middle school and high school age students, who shall be representative of the youth of Miramar with respect to age, gender, ethnicity and residency. 
Any middle school to high school aged student living in the City of Miramar will be eligible to serve on the board. 
Applicants for appointment to the board shall submit an application form as provided by the director of community services, accompanied by written permission from a parent or legal guardian authorizing the applicant to attend the prescribed meetings and participate in the activities of the board. 
The term of office for each member shall be one (1) year. Reappointments shall be made in September of each year, and shall remain effective until the end of May of each year. Any vacancy arising prior to completion of a term shall be filled by appointment made by the mayor or city commissioner responsible for the appointment of the vacant member for the remainder of the term. 
(Ord. No. 08-11, § 3, 2-20-08; Ord. No. 12-11, § 3, 4-4-12)  
Sec. 2-105.6. - Meetings. 
The teen council shall meet a minimum of one (1) time per month. 
(Ord. No. 08-11, § 4, 2-20-08; Ord. No. 12-11, § 4, 4-4-12)  
Sec. 2-105.7. - Duties. 
That the teen council shall: 
(1)  Research, review, plan and recommend to the director of community services the establishment of social and recreational programs to be made available to the teen-aged youth of Miramar. 
(2)  Assist with the planning and implementation of general family, social and recreational programs to be provided by the Miramar Community Services Department. 
(3)  Volunteer to plan, support, attend, and encourage youth participation in the youth activities recommended by the board. 
(Ord. No. 08-11, § 5, 2-20-08)  
Sec. 2-105.8. - Exemption from the qualified elector requirements. 
The board members shall be exempted from the qualified elector requirements of subsections 2-53 and 2-54 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Miramar, Florida. 
(Ord. No. 08-11, § 6, 2-20-08)  
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS OF CITY GOVERNMENT[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. No. 91-22, adopted Mar. 4, 1991, deleted former § 2-106 and enacted new provisions in lieu thereof to read as set out herein. The deleted provisions pertained to the authority of the mayor and derived from Code 1964, § 2-21. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-106. - Departments created. 
For the purpose of systematically and efficiently administering the operations of the city, the following departments of government within the city are hereby established: 
(1)  City manager's office. 
(2)  Human resources. 
(3)  Finance and support services. 
(4)  Legal. 
(5)  City clerk. 
(6)  Police. 
(7)  Fire. 
(8)  Community and economic development. 
(9)  Public works/utilities. 
(10)  Parks and recreation. 
(11)  Procurement. 
(Ord. No. 91-22, § 4, 3-4-91; Ord. No. 12-03, § 3, 11-15-11; Ord. No. 17-08, § 3, 11-14-16)  
Sec. 2-107. - City clerk. 
The city clerk shall act as clerk of the city commission. The city clerk shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance. The city clerk shall have custody of the public records of the city. The city clerk shall be the official custodian of the seal of the city and shall affix the seal to all instruments requiring the same. 
(Laws of Fla., 1955, ch. 31007, § 46; Ord. No. 78-33, § 34, 7-10-78; Ord. No. 81-20, § 2, 5-4-81)  
DIVISION 2. - DEPARTMENT HEADS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Article IV, formerly "Officers, employees, divisions and departments," was changed by § 4 of Ord. No. 91-22, adopted Mar. 4, 1991. 
Cross reference— Compensation of officers and employees restricted, § 2-221; fire department, § 9-26 et seq.; general employees retirement plan and trust fund, § 15-261 et seq.; personnel, Ch. 16. 
Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. No. 91-22, adopted Mar. 4, 1991, deleted § 2-108 and enacted provisions in lieu thereof to read as set out herein. The deleted provisions pertained to the duties of the chief of police and derived from Laws of Fla., 1955, Ch. 31007, § 50; Ord. No. 78-33, § 35, adopted July 10, 1978; and Ord. No. 81-20, § 2, adopted May 4, 1981. 
 
Sec. 2-108. - Department heads. 
All department head positions created by the city commission, based on the budget process, shall be excluded from the civil service system and shall be subject to appointment, suspension, and removal by the city manager, who shall be empowered to execute employment contracts with such employees, except the city commission reserves to itself the power of appointment, suspension and removal of the following department heads and/or personnel: 
(1)  The city attorney. 
(2)  The commission secretary. 
(Ord. No. 91-22, § 4, 3-4-91)  
Secs. 2-109—2-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - LEGAL DEPARTMENT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. No. 91-22, adopted Mar. 4, 1991, renumbered Div. 4 as Div. 3. 
 
Sec. 2-151. - Created; director; duties of director. 
(a)  Created. A department to be known as the legal department is hereby created. 
(b)  Department head designated. The director of the legal department is hereby created and designated "city attorney." The city attorney shall be the director and supervisor of the legal department. 
(c)  Duties and responsibilities of city attorney. The duties of the city attorney shall be to: 
(1)  Advise and consult with the mayor, city commission, city manager and other heads of the departments within the city regarding legal matters and to render legal opinions on issues of municipal law as requested by the city administration or the city commission. 
(2)  Prepare the city's ordinances and resolutions, at the direction of the city commission, or city manager and to attend regular and special meetings of the city commission. 
(3)  Act as legal advisor to the departments of the city, city manager, and the city commission on matters relating to the city or municipal issues. 
(4)  Settle, subject to approval of the city manager and without further commissionauthority, claims against the city not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), payable from funds maintained for payment of claims within the city's self-insurance program. 
(5)  Perform all other legal work assigned by the city manager or the city commission. 
(6)  Employ special counsel to the city for specific needs and/or requisite areas of legal expertise with city commission approval. 
(7)  Approve as to legal form and sufficiency contracts, deeds, bills of sale and other written instruments to which the city is a party. 
(Code 1964, § 2-19; Ord. No. 90-41, § 1, 4-16-90; Ord. No. 91-22, § 4, 3-4-91; Ord. No. 98-6, § 2, 12-3-97)  
Secs. 2-152—2-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-09, § 2, adopted Jan. 9, 2002, repealed Art. V, §§ 2-171—2-178, which pertained to sale of city property. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Secs. 2-171—2-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE AND MISCELLANEOUS FEES[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Funds for youth programs restricted, § 2-2. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-201. - City indebtedness limited. 
The city shall be limited to incurring indebtedness for general obligation bonds until and unless approved by a majority vote of the electors of the city in a referendum election. The city commission shall approve by majority vote any financing mechanism other than general obligation bonds. 
(Laws of Fla., 1955, ch. 31007, § 44; Ord. No. 91-23, § 1, 3-4-91)  
Sec. 2-202. - Annual budget. 
The fiscal year for the city shall begin on the first day of October of each year and end on the last day of September of each year. By a date consistent with state law, the city manager shall prepare and submit to the city commission a budget proposal of the expenditures and revenues of all city operating and capital funds for the ensuing fiscal year. The appropriations contained in such recommendation shall not exceed the funds derived from taxation and other revenue sources. The commission shall carefully consider the budget proposal and make such revisions as it deems advisable. Not later than September 30 of each fiscal year, the commission shall adopt a budget in the form of an appropriation ordinance. Such budget shall be open for public inspection in the office of the city clerk. Upon request of the city manager, the commission may transfer any part of an unencumbered balance of an appropriation to a purpose or object for which the appropriation has proved insufficient. 
(Laws of Fla., 1955, ch. 31007, § 45; Ord. No. 72-22, § 1, 2-5-73; Ord. No. 78-33, § 33, 7-10-78; Ord. No. 81-20, § 2, 5-4-81; Ord. No. 81-34, § 1, 8-3-81; Ord. No. 91-23, § 1, 3-4-91; Ord. No. 09-05, § 2, 3-4-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 91-23, adopted Mar. 4, 1991, deleted former § 2-202, which pertained to limitations on appropriations and derived from Ord. No. 82-8, § 1, adopted Dec. 7, 1981. Section 2-203 was also renumbered as § 2-202 and amended by Ord. No. 91-23, § 1.  
Sec. 2-203. - Appropriation amendments during fiscal year. 
(a)  If during the fiscal year revenues in excess of those estimated in the budget are available for appropriation, the commission, by ordinance, may make supplemental appropriations for the year up to the amount of such excess. 
(b)  If at any time during the fiscal year it appears to the city manager that the revenues available will be insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, he shall report to the commission without delay; and the commission may, by ordinance, reduce one or more appropriations. 
(c)  No appropriation for debt service may be reduced or transferred, and no appropriation may be reduced below any amount required by law to be appropriated or by more than the amount of the unencumbered balance thereof. The supplemental and emergency appropriations and reduction or transfer or appropriations authorized by this section may be made effective immediately upon adoption. 
(Ord. No. 91-23, § 1, 3-4-91)  
Sec. 2-204. - Ad valorem real estate taxes; assessment. 
The city commission shall annually determine the amount of ad valorem real estate and tangible personal property taxes, in an amount consistent with applicable law, which shall be necessary for the continuation of the government, maintenance of the city, and for general municipal purposes. This shall constitute a determination of the amount of the levy of ad valorem real estate and tangible personal property taxes for the purposes of the city in the corresponding tax year. A copy of the budget as finally adopted shall be certified by the city clerk and filed with the officer, board, or commission whose duty it shall be to levy such taxes for the corresponding tax year. 
(Ord. No. 76-37, § 1, 8-23-76; Ord. No. 77-36, § 1, 8-1-77; Ord. No. 81-20, § 2, 5-4-81)  
Sec. 2-204.1. - Additional homestead exemption for person sixty-five and older. 
In accordance with Section 6(d), Art. VII of the State Constitution and F.S. § 196.075, the city commission hereby authorizes and allows, as to real estate located within the City of Miramar, Florida, and pursuant to applicable law, either of the following additional homestead exemptions for qualified persons: 
(a)  A fifty thousand dollar ($50,000.00) exemption for any person who has the legal or equitable title to real estate and maintains thereon the permanent residence of the owner, who has attained age sixty-five (65), and whose household income does not exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) (subject to the calculation and adjustment of household income as authorized in F.S. § 196.075(3), and section (e); or 
(b)  An exemption equal to the amount of the assessed value of the property for any person who has the legal or equitable title to real estate with a just value less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) and has maintained thereon the permanent residence of the owner for at least twenty-five (25) years, who has attained age sixty-five (65), and whose household income does not exceed the income limitation prescribed in paragraph (a) above, as calculated and adjusted in F.S. § 196.075(3), and section (e). 
(c)  As to each subject property, the specific additional homestead exemption, if granted, shall be applicable to all ad valorem tax millage rates levied by the city, and shall apply only to add valorem taxes levied by the city. 
(d)  Taxpayers claiming the additional homestead exemption set forth in subsection (a) or (b) above, must annually submit to the property appraiser, not later than March 1, a sworn statement of household income on a form prescribed by the department of revenue, and supported by any supplemental information as may be required by the department of revenue and Florida law. 
(e)  Taxpayers claiming the additional homestead exemption must first be entitled to the homestead exemption set forth in F.S. §§ 196.131 and 196.161. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 11-17-99; Ord. No. 07-12, § 2, 5-16-07; Ord. No. 14-02, § 2, 11-6-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-02, § 6, adopted Nov. 6, 2013, states: That this Ordinance shall be effective immediately upon adoption on second reading and shall apply retroactively from and after January 1, 2013.  
Sec. 2-205. - Audit of books. 
At the end of each fiscal year the books and records of the city shall be audited and the mayor and each member of the city commission shall be furnished with a copy of such audit. A copy shall also be filed with the city clerk for review by the public at the same time. The report of the auditor shall be submitted to the city within one hundred eighty (180) days after the close of the fiscal year. 
(Laws of Fla., 1955, ch. 31007, § 49; Ord. No. 72-22, § 1, 2-5-73; Ord. No. 81-20, § 2, 5-4-81; Ord. No. 08-08, § 2, 1-23-08)  
Sec. 2-206. - Payment of money. 
Moneys paid out of the city treasury on checks, warrants or similar instruments shall require that such checks, warrants or similar instruments be signed by the city manager and countersigned by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 90-46, § 2, 5-7-90; Ord. No. 91-22, § 6, 3-4-91)  
Sec. 2-207. - Capital improvement program. 
The city manager shall prepare and submit annually to the city commission a capital improvement program. The capital improvement program should include a list of all recommended capital improvement projects, time schedules and method of financing. The capital improvement program shall be required on an annual basis. 
(Ord. No. 91-23, § 1, 3-4-91)  
Secs. 2-208—2-220. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FEES[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Officers, employees, divisions and departments, § 2-106 et seq.; fees for police response to false alarms, § 3-32; boat registration fee, § 12-32. 
 
Sec. 2-221. - Compensation of officers, employees restricted. 
No officer or employee of the city shall retain any fees or cost for any service he or she may perform, nor shall he or she receive any compensation other than the salary fixed by ordinance except as hereinafter prescribed. 
(Laws of Fla., 1955, ch. 31007, § 29)  
Sec. 2-222. - Disposition of fines. 
All fines shall be a part of the revenue of the city and shall be paid to the city by the officer receiving same. 
(Laws of Fla., 1955, ch. 31007, § 29; Ord. No. 91-22, § 6, 3-4-91)  
Sec. 2-223. - Assessment of court costs for law enforcement education fund. 
(a)  A cost of two dollars ($2.00) is assessed against every person convicted for violation of a state penal or criminal statute or convicted for violation of a municipal or county ordinance. 
(b)  Two dollars ($2.00) from every bond estreature or forfeited bail bond related to such violations shall be collected and remitted to the city. 
(c)  The above amounts, when remitted to the city, shall be used for the education of local law enforcement officers. 
(Code 1964, § 1-9) 
Cross reference— Miscellaneous offenses, Ch. 13; police, Ch. 17. 
State Law reference— Authority, F.S. § 943.25(13).  
Sec. 2-224. - Service fees for copying; for copies of codes; for extensive clerical or supervisory assistance. 
The "Fees for Services Cost/Revenue Study," prepared by David M. Griffith & Associates, Ltd., dated October 1990, is hereby approved by the city and used as the basis for the amounts of fees prescribed herein which are included in the DMG report. This report is available as a public record from the city clerk's office. 
The following schedule of charges shall apply for copying of public records: 
(1)  As allowed by section 119.07, Florida Statutes, as amended, which is adopted by reference herein as if set forth herein, there shall be a charge of fifteen cents ($0.15) per one-sided page for making copies of all public records by photographic or other reproductive process (page size not more than eight and one-half (8½) inches by fourteen (14) inches). This charge shall be paid on or before tender of the public records. In the event a two-sided (duplex) copy is requested, the city shall charge twenty cents ($0.20) for each two-sided (duplex) copy. 
(2)  There shall be a charge of twenty-three cents ($0.23) per minute for clerical assistance where the nature or volume of the public record requested to be copied requires extensive clerical or supervisory assistance by city personnel. For purposes of this section, "extensive" means that it will take in excess of fifteen (15) minutes to locate, review, copy and refile the requested public records. Such fee shall be reasonable and based upon the costs incurred, as provided by section 119.07, Florida Statutes, as amended. 
(3)  There shall be a charge for land development regulations and the Code(s) of the city as follows: 
a.  Landscaping and visual amenities ordinance: Six dollars and twenty-five cents ($6.25). 
b.  Land subdivision regulations: Nine dollars and twenty-five cents ($9.25). 
c.  Comprehensive zoning ordinance: Fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
d.  Supplement to the comprehensive zoning ordinance: Two dollars ($2.00) each supplement. 
e.  City of Miramar Code book: One hundred fifty-five dollars ($155.00). 
f.  Supplements to Code book: Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) each supplement. 
(4)  There shall be a charge for certified copies of any ordinance, resolution or other public record of the city as follows: One dollar ($1.00) shall be charged for the certification of any ordinance, resolution, ordinance supplement, or any other public record requested certified by the city clerk's office. This fee shall be in addition to the copying fees prescribed by law. 
(Code 1964, § 1-10; Ord. No. 90-65, § 1, 9-17-90; Ord. No. 91-13, § 1, 1-28-91; Ord. No. 91-37, § 1, 7-3-91) 
Cross reference— Planning and development, Ch. 22.5; subdivisions, Ch. 24; vegetation, Ch. 25; zoning, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Fees for public records, F.S. § 119.07.  
DIVISION 2.1. - IMPACT FEES FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 02-10, § 2, adopted Jan. 9, 2002, repealed §§ 2-225—2-227.1, which pertained to impact fees; in general; parks and recreational impact fee; and police, fire/rescue, construction projects and capital expenditures impact fees. Said ordinance also enacted provisions designated as a new Div. 2.1, §§ 2-225—2-225.13, to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 2-225. - Authorization. 
This division is enacted pursuant to the general police power, the authority granted to cities by Section 2(b), Article VIII, of the Florida Constitution, Chapter 166, and §§ 163.3161 through 163.3244 of the Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 02-10, § 2, 1-9-02)  
Sec. 2-225.1. - Purpose and intent. 
This division is enacted for the purpose of requiring that new development pay for its fair share of public facilities through the imposition of impact fees that will be used to finance, defray, or reimburse all or a portion of the costs incurred by the city for public facilities and services that serve such development. 
(Ord. No. 02-10, § 2, 1-9-02)  
Sec. 2-225.2. - Definitions. 
When used in this division, the following words, terms, and phrases, and their derivations, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Benefit area means the geographic area within which impact fees are collected and expended for a particular type of capital improvement serving development projects within such area. 
Calculate means to determine the amount of impact fees to be imposed on a particular development project and includes an individualized determination showing a reasonable, and roughly proportional, relationship between: (1) the fee's use and the type of development project on which the fee is imposed; (2) the need for the public facility or service and the type of development project on which the fee is imposed; and (3) the amount of the fee and the cost of the portion of the public facility or service attributable to the development on which the fee is imposed. 
Capital improvement means land or facilities for the generation or distribution of electricity; for the collection and disposal of stormwater; for flood-control purposes; for purposes of transportation and transit, including without limitation, streets, street lighting and traffic-control devices and supporting improvements, roads, overpasses, bridges, and related facilities; for parks and recreational improvements; for public safety, including police and fire-rescue facilities; for public art; for public buildings of all kinds; and for any other capital project identified in the city's capital improvements plan. Capital improvement also includes design, engineering, inspection, testing, planning, legal land acquisition, and all other costs associated with construction of a public facility. 
Capital improvements plan means the five-year plan for capital improvements adopted annually by the city commission, describing the approximate location, size, time of availability and estimated cost of capital improvement projects and identifying sources of funding for capital improvement projects. 
Capital improvements project list means the list describing the approximate location, size, time of availability and estimated cost of each capital improvement to be funded from a particular impact fee account. 
Collection means the time at which the impact fee is actually paid to the city. 
Commitment means earmarking impact fees to fund or partially fund capital improvements serving new development projects. 
Dwelling unit means one (1) or more rooms in a building or a portion of a room, designed or intended to be used, or actually used, for occupancy by one (1) family for living and sleeping quarters and containing one (1) kitchen only, including a mobile home, but not hotel or motel units. 
Impact fee means a monetary exaction, adopted by the city pursuant to this division at a specified rate and imposed pursuant to this division, as a condition of or in connection with approval of a development project for the purpose of defraying all or some of the city's cost or repaying costs previously expended from other city funds for capital improvements, and as further defined herein. 
Impose means to determine that a particular development project is subject to the collection of impact fees as a condition of development approval. 
New development or development project means any project undertaken for the purpose of development, including without limitation, a project involving the issuance of a permit for construction, reconstruction, or change of use, but not a project involving the issuance of a permit to operate or to remodel, rehabilitate, or improve an existing structure, which does not change the density or intensity of use, nor the rebuilding of a structure destroyed or damaged by an act of God, nor the replacement of one (1) mobile home with another on the same pad if no dwelling unit is added. 
Nonresidential development project means all development other than residential development projects. 
Residential development project means any development undertaken to create a new dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 02-10, § 2, 1-9-02)  
Sec. 2-225.3. - Applicability. 
Unless expressly excepted or exempted, this division applies to all fees which may be imposed by the city to finance capital facilities, the need for which is created by new development, including: 
(1)  Park and recreational fees; 
(2)  Drainage fees; 
(3)  Police/public safety fees; 
(4)  Transportation improvement fees; 
(5)  Public works; 
(6)  Public art and cultural events fees; and 
(7)  Fire/rescue fees 
(Ord. No. 02-10, § 2, 1-9-02)  
Sec. 2-225.4. - Exemptions. 
This division does not apply to: 
(1)  Taxes and special assessments; 
(2)  Fees for processing development applications; 
(3)  Fees for enforcement of or inspections pursuant to regulatory ordinances; 
(4)  Fees for utility connection or utility impact fees which are authorized by City Code provisions outside of this division; 
(5)  Fees collected under development agreements, other than impact fees; 
(6)  Fees imposed pursuant to a reimbursement agreement between the city and a property owner for that portion of the cost of a public facility paid for by the property owner which exceeds the need for the public facility attributable to, reasonably related to, and roughly proportional to the development; 
(7)  Fees to mitigate impacts on the environment; 
(8)  Fees imposed, levied, or collected by other governmental agencies including subdivisions of the state and federal government; 
(9)  Stormwater utility fees which are authorized by City Code provisions outside of this division; or 
(10)  Development exempted by an agreement with the city, which was approved prior to the adoption of this division. 
(Ord. No. 02-10, § 2, 1-9-02)  
Sec. 2-225.5. - Imposition, calculation and collection of impact fees. 
(a)  The city may only impose impact fees as a condition of approval of new development projects as provided in this division. 
(b)  The base fee amount of each impact fee for residential and for non-residential development, for each type of public facility or service funded by impact fees, shall be calculated at least every three (3) years and adopted by city commission resolution. When the city manager or his or her designee determines that it is appropriate to the particular public facility or service, the fee amount may be calculated, imposed and expended by benefit area. 
(c)  After an individualized determination that each impact fee for a development project has been calculated as provided in this division, impact fees shall be imposed prior to issuance of any building permit. 
(d)  Impact fees shall be collected by the city manager, or his or her designee, at the time and as a condition for issuance of a building permit, except that the connection fees shall be collected at the time of application for connection to the utility system. 
(e)  An administrative fee, in the amount of three (3) percent of the impact fee imposed on a development project, shall be collected from that development project with, and in addition to, the impact fee for the purpose of defraying the city's cost of administering the impact fee program. 
(f)  In the event impact fees are paid prior to or concurrently with the issuance of a building permit and subsequently, the building permit is amended, the applicant shall pay the impact fee in effect at the time the amended building permit is issued with credit being given for the previous fees paid. 
(g)  In the case of change of use, redevelopment, or expansion or modification of an existing use on a site which requires the issuance of a building permit, the impact fee shall be based upon the net increase in the impact fee for the new use as compared to the most intense previous use on or after the April 6, 1987 effective date of the ordinance providing for the payment of impact fees. 
(Ord. No. 02-10, § 2, 1-9-02; Ord. No. 04-15, § 2, 4-21-04)  
Sec. 2-225.6. - Notice and hearing required for establishing or increasing impact fees. 
(a)  Prior to establishing or increasing any particular impact fee, the city commission shall hold a public hearing. 
(b)  Notice of the time and place of the public hearing, including a general explanation of the matter to be considered, shall be published as required for the adoption of a general ordinance pursuant to § 166.041, Florida Statutes. 
(c)  At least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing, the city shall make available to the public data showing the amount or the estimated amount of the impact fee and a summary of the basis for the calculation of the impact fee amount. 
(d)  City commission action to establish or increase any impact fee shall be taken only by ordinance or resolution containing findings which demonstrate the basis for calculating the fee. 
(Ord. No. 02-10, § 2, 1-9-02)  
Sec. 2-225.7. - Independent impact analysis. 
(a)  A developer may choose to use an independent impact analysis to compute the impact fee due as a result of a development. 
(b)  The developer shall be responsible for the preparation of the draft independent impact analysis and the city manager, or his or her designee, may accept, reject, or modify the draft analysis. 
(c)  The city manager, or his or her designee, shall approve the person who prepares the draft independent impact analysis on the basis of the person's professional training and experience in preparing development impact analyses. The independent impact analysis shall follow standard methodologies and format and be approved by the city manager, or his or her designee. The city manager, or his or her designee, may publish acceptable methodologies and formats for impact analyses. Prior to submission of the draft independent impact analysis, the developer shall meet with the city manager, or his or her designee, to review the requirements for preparing draft independent impact analyses. 
(Ord. No. 02-10, § 2, 1-9-02)  
Sec. 2-225.8. - Impact fee accounts. 
(a)  The city shall establish an impact fee account for each type of capital improvement for which an impact fee is imposed. Where benefit areas have been designated by the city manager, or his or her designee, there shall be a separate impact fee account for each benefit area. The impact fees collected shall be deposited in each such account according to type of improvement (and benefit area if relevant). The funds of each impact fee account shall not be commingled with other funds of the city. Any account previously established for the deposit of funds that would have been developer impact fees under this division, shall be deemed an impact fee account for the purposes of this division. 
(b)  Each impact fee account shall be interest-bearing, and the accumulated interest shall become part of the account. 
(Ord. No. 02-10, § 2, 1-9-02)  
Sec. 2-225.9. - Use of impact fee proceeds. 
Impact fees may be expended only for the type of capital improvements for which they were imposed, calculated, and collected and according to the time limits and procedures established in this division. If impact fees were calculated and collected by benefit area, then the fees may be expended only in the benefit area in which they were collected. Impact fees may be used to pay the principal, interest, and other costs of bonds, notes, and other obligations issued or undertaken by or on behalf of the city to finance such improvements. 
(Ord. No. 02-10, § 2, 1-9-02)  
Sec. 2-225.10. - Refunds. 
(a)  Upon application of the property owner, the city shall refund that portion of any impact fee which has been on deposit over six (6) years and which is unexpended and uncommitted, except as described in subsection (b) of this section. The refund shall be made to the then-current owner or owners of lots or units of the development project or projects. 
(b)  If fees in any impact fee account are unexpended or uncommitted during the sixth year, the fees are exempt from subsection (a) of this section if the city commission makes the following findings: 
(1)  A need for the capital improvement still exists; 
(2)  The fees will be used for an identified purpose within two (2) years; and 
(3)  The purpose for which the fees will be used is substantially similar to the purpose for which the fees were collected. 
(c)  The city may refund by direct payment, by offsetting the refund against other impact fees due for development projects by the owner on the same or other property, or otherwise by agreement with the owner. 
(Ord. No. 02-10, § 2, 1-9-02)  
Sec. 2-225.11. - Statute of limitations. 
Any judicial action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, or annul the reasonableness, legality, or validity of any impact fee must be filed and service of process effected within ninety (90) days following the date of imposition of the fee or the final determination of the city commission, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 02-10, § 2, 1-9-02)  
Sec. 2-225.12. - Amendment procedures. 
Prior to the city commission's adoption of the budget and revisions to the capital improvements project list, the director of finance shall report at least once every three (3) years to the city commission with: 
(1)  Recommendations for amendments to this division, if any; 
(2)  Proposals for changes to the capital improvements project list, identifying capital improvements to be funded in whole or in part by impact fees, if any; 
(3)  Proposals for changes in the boundaries of benefit areas, if any; and 
(4)  Proposals for changes to impact fee rates and schedules, if any. 
(Ord. No. 02-10, § 2, 1-9-02)  
Sec. 2-225.13. - Credits. 
(a)  A property owner who dedicates land or agrees to participate in an assessment district or otherwise contributes funds for capital improvements as defined in this division may be eligible for a credit for such contribution against the impact fee otherwise due. 
(b)  The city manager, or his or her designee, shall determine: (1) the value of the developer contribution; (2) whether the contribution meets capital improvement needs for which the particular impact fee has been imposed; and (3) whether the contribution will substitute or otherwise reduce the need for capital improvements anticipated to be provided with impact fee funds. In no event, however, shall the credit exceed the amount of the otherwise applicable impact fee. 
(c)  Any application for credit must be submitted on forms provided by the city before development project approval. The application shall contain a declaration under oath of those facts which qualify the property owner for the credit, accompanied by the relevant documentary evidence. 
(Ord. No. 02-10, § 2, 1-9-02)  
Secs. 2-226, 2-227. - Reserved.  
Sec. 2-228. - Substantial deviation from approved D.R.I. 
(a)  Requirements. All requests for changes to a previously approved development order and a substantial deviation to a development order shall be made on a form specified by the community development department director. All information deemed as necessary by the director for the review of the requested change or substantial deviation shall be submitted along with a filing fee which shall be set and amended by resolution of the city commission. 
(b)  Review to proceed pursuant to chapter 380.06 F.S. All proposed changes to a previously approved development order shall be reviewed pursuant to chapter 380.06, F.S. 
(c)  Substantial deviation review reimbursement agreement. Prior to the supplemental review of a substantial deviation, the applicant shall submit to the city an executed development review reimbursement agreement. The agreement shall provide for the review reimbursement of all expenses incurred by the city for the review of the substantial deviation and shall provide for security in a form acceptable to the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-56, § 2, 7-16-90; Ord. No. 14-16, § 16, 6-17-14) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 90-56, § 2, adopted July 16, 1990, has been included herein as § 2-228 at the discretion of the editor. Sections 3 and 4, dealing with severability and the effective date, have been omitted from codification. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building structure regulations, Ch. 22; planning and development, Ch. 22.5.  
Secs. 2-229—2-240. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-03, § 4, adopted Nov. 15, 2011, repealed §§ 2-241—2-260.3, which pertained to procurement and derived from Ord. No. 02-09, § 2, adopted Jan. 9, 2002; Ord. No. 07-10, § 3, adopted Feb. 21, 2007. The user's attention is directed to § 2-401 et seq. 
 
Secs. 2-241—2-260.3. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 
 
Sec. 2-261. - Economic development incentive program. 
(a)  Eligible business. In order to be eligible to receive payments from the city under this program an applying business must be committing to a new location anywhere within the city, represent an expansion of existing business or a business that is considering relocating outside of the city, and meet at least one (1) of the following criteria: 
(1)  Make a capital investment in a facility within the city of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). This investment must be demonstrated by an increase in the assessed value of real property or personal property for an existing facility or new facility between the first year the improvement appears on the tax roll and the previous tax year; 
(2)  Be located in the target areas established by resolution of the city commission; 
(3)  Be a target industry or business as defined by resolution of the city commission; 
(4)  To be retained, have been in the city for at least five (5) years; 
(5)  Be an international, national or regional headquarters; 
(6)  Create at least seventy-five (75) full-time equivalent permanent jobs; 
(7)  Pay an average annual employee wage level of at least one hundred (100) percent of the Broward County average; 
(8)  Be a company that, consistent with the city's economic development goals, enhances the economic diversity of the city; 
(9)  Be approved to receive incentives from the state or county; or 
(10)  Be participating in the business workplace initiative. 
(b)  The amount of the grant will be based upon such factors as whether property is purchased or leased (and the length of lease), the number of FTE jobs created, the average salary of the jobs created, the amount of taxable investment, the growth potential of the company and the length of commitment to the city. 
(c)  Length of payments and minimum commitment to city. The payment of an incentive to an eligible business may be made in a lump sum, over a period of years or both at the discretion of the city commission, and based on the availability of funds. No payment shall be made unless and until all qualifying criteria are documented and verified. Qualification for payment of the monetary incentives after the first year must occur independently at the completion of each successive year to ensure the continued adherence to the criteria established. Whether payment is made in a lump sum or over a period of years, all payments must be returned to the city if the recipient business does not remain in the city for at least five (5) years, or such other period, based on the amount of the grant, as may be required by the city commission as a condition of the acceptance of the grant. 
(d)  In addition to the qualifying criteria described above, certain additional criteria are encouraged for the participating businesses. The utilization of minority and women business enterprises (MWBE) by the participating business is strongly encouraged as a good faith effort, consistent with appropriate goals in the local marketplace. 
(e)  The identification and utilization of a city business address is required by all participating businesses. 
(f)  Application by a participating business for the economic development incentive program shall be made to the city manager or his/her designee. The city manager or his/her designee shall evaluate all applications and make a recommendation to the city commission concerning the appropriate level of monetary incentive for a participating business on a case-by-case basis, based on the above described factors and the availability of economic development funds. Approval of any and all monetary incentives for each participating business will be made by resolution of the city commission and must be reflected in a written grant agreement. 
(g)  Meeting one (1), or all, of the criteria listed in this section shall not entitle a business to the award of an incentive. Any award under the economic development incentive program shall be at the absolute discretion of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 01-13, § 1, 2-7-01)  
Sec. 2-262. - Property acquisition program. 
(a)  The Miramar Property Acquisition Program is established for the purpose of acquiring commercial and residential properties within the City for future redevelopment and revitalization, consistent with the City's adopted Economic Development Action Plan. The Acquisition Program will provide a more efficient and streamlined method for the City to achieve certain objectives of the Economic Development Action Plan and the Initiative. 
(b)  The City Manager is authorized to procure the services of professionals to assist in the identification, inspection, due diligence investigation and appraisal of properties for potential acquisition, and maintenance of the properties after acquisition or such other services as may be necessary or desirable in connection with the acquisition of properties for redevelopment or revitalization and maintenance thereof. The City Manager is authorized to enter into one or more agreements to provide the aforementioned services, provided, however, the cost of each service shall not exceed $75,000, not including any realtor and transaction fees, and each service shall be limited to the purposes set forth in this Section 2-262. All Agreements to be entered into with professionals shall be on a form either prepared by the City Attorney or reviewed and approved by the City Attorney, without being subject to any competitive process pursuant to the Procurement Code. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any code provisions to the contrary, the City Manager is authorized to enter into contracts, subject to approval by the City Attorney as to form and legality, to purchase properties that meet the following guidelines: 
(1)  All properties must be located within the boundaries of the City. 
(2)  No purchase price for an individual property may exceed an amount which is 20% above the appraised value of the property, as determined by an appraisal of the property performed not more than six months prior to the date of the purchase contract. 
(3)  Properties can be improved or vacant land, provided that the properties are acquired for redevelopment or revitalization purposes. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any code provisions to the contrary, the City Manager is authorized to enter into purchase contracts for properties that meet the following guidelines: 
(1)  All purchase contracts must be prepared on Florida Bar or Florida Board of Realtor forms with addenda, or on a form prepared by the City Attorney, if appropriate, and must be reviewed and approved by the City Attorney. 
(2)  All purchase contracts must include a due diligence period with an unqualified right of the Buyer (the City) to terminate at the end of the due diligence period. The due diligence period must allow sufficient time for the City to obtain an appraisal of the property based on the current use. 
(3)  All property purchases must be for cash only. 
(4)  The City Manager must verify that there are sufficient funds available in the City's budget account for the Initiative prior to entering into a purchase contract. 
(Ord. No. 19-12 , § 2, 2-20-19)  
Secs. 2-263—2-265. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS SPECIAL ASSESSMENT PROCEDURE[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Cross reference— Health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 10; parks and recreation, Ch. 14; solid waste, Ch. 18; utilities, Ch. 21; water, § 21-26 et seq.; sanitary sewer system, § 21-71; gas, § 21-126 et seq.; utility extension policy, § 21-191 et seq.; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23; trees, § 25-26 et seq.; zoning, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Special assessments for local improvements, F.S. ch. 170. 
 
Sec. 2-266. - Improvements authorized. 
The city commission shall have power and authority to cause local improvements to be constructed, wholly or in part, at the cost of the property owners benefitted, thereby, by levying and collecting special assessments, for the following improvements: 
(1)  Extending, enlarging or improving its sanitary sewer system, by constructing additional sanitary sewerage mains, pumping stations, laterals, storm sewers and other drains and sewers, and necessary appurtenances thereto. 
(2)  Extending its waterworks system into new territory, by the construction of additional water mains, pumps, etc., and the laying or relaying of same, together with the necessary appurtenances thereto, either inside or outside of the corporate limits or partly inside and partly outside. 
(3)  To pave, repave, grade, regrade, macadamize, remacadamize, hard surface, improve, layout, open, widen, close, curb, extend, demolish, rebuild and otherwise improve streets, alleys, boulevards, avenues, lanes, sidewalks, including any bridges, culverts, fills, grades or other appurtenances which may constitute or form a part of same, or any parks, promenades, piers, wharves, docks, seawalls, adjacent or contiguous thereto; to build, demolish, rebuild or otherwise improve any bridges, grades, fills, culverts and appurtenances; and any one (1) or more of such purposes may be combined in the same improvement. 
(4)  To drain, fill in and redrain waterfront property, swamps, marshes and overflowed lands for the purpose of protecting the health of the inhabitants of the city, rendering such lands usable and constructing bulkheads, promenades, streets, parking places and other improvements in connection therewith; to construct and maintain drainage canals, ditches and swales and to install and operate drainage pumps; to otherwise provide for, operate and maintain a surface drainage program for the city, or portions thereof, and the city's inhabitants. 
(5)  To clear and clean real property of weeds, undergrowth, rubbish, debris, brush and unsightly and unsanitary matters, and to fill insanitary excavations and depressions; to remove dilapidated and unsightly buildings which constitute a nuisance or a menace to the health or safety of the inhabitants of the city. 
(6)  To collect and dispose of garbage, trash and refuse. 
(7)  To beautify and landscape parks and roadways, including the planting and maintenance of trees, flowers and shrubs along streets, roadways, sidewalks and parkways. 
(8)  To install and maintain street lights and street lighting and the lighting of public buildings and public areas. 
(9)  To control and eliminate sandflies and mosquitoes and their breeding places. 
(Laws of Fla., 1955, ch. 31007, § 5(59)(A)—(S); Laws of Fla., ch. 67-1722, §§ 1—4; Laws of Fla., ch. 69-1311, § 2)  
Sec. 2-267. - Certificates of indebtedness or revenue certificates. 
For the purpose of obtaining the money to make such improvements mentioned under section 2-266(1), (2), the city shall have the power to issue certificates of indebtedness or revenue bonds or certificates payable solely from the income derived from the operation of such utility, or, where utilities are operated jointly or supplement each other, from the revenue derived from the operation of both utilities, or of either utility. Property specially benefited by the extension of the sewage system or the waterworks system, or both, may be specially assessed for the cost of such extension, enlargement or improvement, either wholly or in part, by the levying of special assessment liens, it being recognized as a power of the city in its proprietary capacity to levy special assessments against property specially benefited by the extension of sanitary sewerage system or waterworks systems, or both, in order to repay moneys obtained by the issuance of revenue bonds or certificates. The moneys collected from such special assessment liens shall be used to pay off and discharge any certificates of indebtedness, revenue bonds or certificates issued to obtain money with which to make such improvements. 
(Laws of Fla., 1955, ch. 31007, § 5(59)(A)—(S); Laws of Fla., ch. 67-1722, §§ 1—4; Laws of Fla., ch. 69-1311, § 2)  
Sec. 2-268. - Resolution of necessity. 
Whenever the city commission shall determine that it is wise and expedient to make any of the local improvements herein specified, which may but need not be contiguous or connected, the cost of which, or any part thereof, is to be assessed against property benefited, it shall adopt a resolution declaring a necessity for the proposed improvements, describing the nature and extent of the work, the general character of materials to be used, a general description of such improvements, the estimated cost of the improvements, the location or area in which such improvements are to be made, and the method by which the improvement is to be paid for, including the method of apportioning any costs to be paid by special assessments. Such resolution shall fix a date when the city commission shall meet, which shall not be less than twelve (12) days after the date of the first publication of the notice herein provided, for the purpose of hearing any objections or remonstrances that may be made to such improvements, including a hearing on the question of whether all of the property to be assessed will be benefited by the proposed improvement to the amount of the special assessments estimated to be levied. Notice of the hearing upon such resolution shall be published once a week in a newspaper of general circulation in the city for two (2) consecutive weeks (the first publication to be not less than twelve (12) days prior to the date fixed for hearing), which notice shall embrace substantially all the matters required to be set forth in the resolution of necessity; provided, however, that no newspaper advertisement is required if the notice is given by registered mail, return receipt requested, which mailed notice is hereby authorized. 
(Laws of Fla., 1955, ch. 31007, § 5(59)(A)—(S); Laws of Fla., ch. 67-1722, §§ 1—4; Laws of Fla., ch. 69-1311, § 2)  
Sec. 2-269. - Bids on public improvements. 
After the city commission has adopted the resolution, in cases where the improvement is not to be made by city employees, it shall advertise for bids by publication in two (2) issues in a newspaper of general circulation in the city before the date of hearing upon the question of proceeding with the improvement but such publications shall not be less than seven (7) days apart, and the last publication must not be less than two (2) days before the hearing. If the proposed cost of the improvement does not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), no newspaper advertisement shall be required and competitive bids may be solicited by notice being sent through the mail to prospective bidders or in such manner as the commission may deem feasible and less expensive. When another governmental agency such as county, state or federal is capable of performing the local improvement, a proposal must be requested from that agency and placed with the other solicited bids. If the city itself does the work, then no competitive bids are required nor advertisements are required, providing the cost of rental of equipment does not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). If at the hearing the city commission shall determine to proceed with the improvement, it shall let the contract for such improvement to the lowest and best responsible bidder, but the city commission shall have the right to change or modify the improvement if it desires at the time of adopting a resolution determining to proceed, in which event it can direct all bidders to submit new bids within five (5) days without further advertising. When a bid is accepted, the contractor shall not proceed with the work for a period of ten (10) days. 
(Laws of Fla., 1955, ch. 31007, § 5(59)(A)—(S); Laws of Fla., ch. 67-1722, §§ 1—4; Laws of Fla., ch. 69-1311, § 2; Ord. No. 72-22, § 1, 2-5-73; Ord. No. 78-33, §§ 8, 9, 7-10-78)  
Sec. 2-270. - Cost of the improvement. 
The city commission shall have the power to pay out of its general fund, or out of any special fund that may be provided for the purpose, such portion of the cost of the proposed improvement as it may deem to be the proper portion to be borne by the city. Interest accrued on any special assessment bonds issued to pay all or a part of the cost of an improvement, while such improvement is under construction, and for six (6) months thereafter, shall be deemed part of the cost of the improvement. All engineering and inspection costs, legal and advertising costs, including a proper proportion of the compensation, salaries and expenses of the engineering staff, properly chargeable to any improvement, costs of abstracts of title, the estimated or actual amount of discount, if any, upon the sale of special assessment bonds issued to pay all or part of the cost of such improvement, a contingencies fund not over ten (10) percent of the total cost of the improvement and any other expense necessary or proper in conducting the proceedings and work provided for in this section, shall be deemed a part of the cost of the improvement. When revenue bonds or certificates are issued in order to obtain money with which to make the improvement, all cost and estimated cost incurred in issuing such revenue bonds or certificates and obtaining such funds shall be deemed a part of the cost of the improvement. When local improvements are made by city employees, all legal charges, advertising cost, engineering cost, payroll, materials, equipment rental at the prevailing rates, plus not more than fifteen (15) percent of the total of payroll, material and equipment rental cost for general overhead expense, may be included in the cost of the improvement. When the improvement has been completed, the city commission shall ascertain and determine the total cost of the improvement. 
(Laws of Fla., 1955, ch. 31007, § 5(59)(A)—(S); Laws of Fla., ch. 67-1722, §§ 1—4; Laws of Fla., ch. 69-1311, § 2; Ord. No. 72-22, § 1, 2-5-73; Ord. No. 78-33, §§ 8, 9, 7-10-78)  
Sec. 2-271. - Method of making special assessments. 
Special assessments upon the property deemed to be benefited by a public improvement shall be apportioned and imposed by any one (1) of the following methods and the state legislature hereby finds and declares that each and any of the methods prescribed by items (1), (2) and (3) below, if so determined by the city commission after the hearing on the amount of benefits for which provision is hereinafter made, will result in the proper and fair apportionment of the cost of the improvement among the lots and parcels of real estate to be assessed to pay the same: 
(1)  In proportion to the assessed taxable value of the property assessed; 
(2)  In proportion to the benefits which the city commission determines will result from the improvement; 
(3)  In proportion to the foot frontage of the property bounding or abutting upon the improvement. 
When a majority of the recorded owners of the frontage of lands liable to be assessed for any special local improvement shall petition the city commission for any such improvement, the commission may order such improvement to be made. In other cases public improvement shall be made at the discretion of the city commission. 
(Laws of Fla., 1955, ch. 31007, § 5(59)(A)—(S); Laws of Fla., ch. 67-1722, §§ 1—4; Laws of Fla., ch. 69-1311, § 2; Ord. No. 72-22, § 1, 2-5-73; Ord. No. 78-33, §§ 8, 9, 7-10-78)  
Sec. 2-272. - Objections to improvements. 
At the meeting for hearing objections, or at a time and place to which the meeting may be adjourned, any person aggrieved may appear in person, by attorney or by petition, and may object to or protest against the improvement on any grounds which such person may deem desirable, including the grounds that the property will not be benefited by the proposed improvement or that the cost of the improvement will exceed the amount of benefits which all of the property to be assessed will derive from the improvement. The city commission shall consider the objections and protests, if any, and may confirm, amend, modify or rescind the resolution of necessity, and shall determine whether the improvement or any portion thereof shall be made, and how the cost thereof shall be paid. The determination of the city commission shall be final and conclusive. If the city commission determines to proceed with such improvement as originally proposed or in an amended or modified form, it shall adopt a resolution determining to proceed, as hereinafter set out. 
(Laws of Fla., 1955, ch. 31007, § 5(59)(A)—(S); Laws of Fla., ch. 67-1722, §§ 1—4; Laws of Fla., ch. 69-1311, § 2; Ord. No. 72-22, § 1, 2-5-73; Ord. No. 78-33, §§ 8, 9, 7-10-78)  
Sec. 2-273. - Claims arising out of improvements. 
The owner of any lot or land bounding and abutting upon a proposed special improvement, who claims that damage will be sustained by reason of the improvement, shall present such claim to the city commission at the time of its meeting on the question of whether it should proceed with the improvement. Such claim shall be in writing, and shall set forth the amount of damages claimed, with a general description of the property with respect to which it is claimed the damage will accrue. Any owner who fails so to do shall be deemed to have waived such damage, and shall be barred from thereafter filing a claim or receiving damages therefor. This provision shall apply to all damage which will result from the improvement if made without negligence but shall not deprive the owner of any right to recover damages arising without his fault from any negligence or other torts of the city or its agents. 
(Laws of Fla., 1955, ch. 31007, § 5(59)(A)—(S); Laws of Fla., ch. 67-1722, §§ 1—4; Laws of Fla., ch. 69-1311, § 2; Ord. No. 72-22, § 1, 2-5-73; Ord. No. 78-33, §§ 8, 9, 7-10-78)  
Sec. 2-274. - Ordinance determining to proceed. 
If, after hearing the objections and protests, if any, the city commission determines that all of the property to be assessed will be benefited and that the amount of benefits to be derived by such property will not be less than the cost of such improvement, and that it is expedient to proceed with such improvement in the original or modified form, the city commission shall adopt an ordinance determining to proceed with such improvement, which ordinance shall disclose what part of the total cost and expenses of the improvement shall be chargeable against and assessed against the property benefited by the improvement, and what part or proportion of the total costs shall be paid by city from its general fund or any special fund on hand for such purpose. The ordinance may direct that the whole or any part of the costs and expenses thereof be assessed against the property abutting upon the improvement; or may provide that all property benefited by the improvement may be assessed for such improvement in the manner set out in the notice of hearing. 
(Laws of Fla., 1955, ch. 31007, § 5(59)(A)—(S); Laws of Fla., ch. 67-1722, §§ 1—4; Laws of Fla., ch. 69-1311, § 2; Ord. No. 72-22, § 1, 2-5-73; Ord. No. 78-33, §§ 8, 9, 7-10-78)  
Sec. 2-275. - Assessment roll and notice. 
Upon the completion of any improvement under this article, the city commission shall cause to be prepared a roll or list to be called the assessment list, showing the improvement number, the numbers of the assessment liens, a description of each lot or parcel of land proposed to be assessed for such improvement, the amount proposed to be assessed for such improvement, and the amount proposed to be assessed against each lot or parcel of land, and may show the name of each owner as shown on the city tax roll or records. If the assessments are to be apportioned in proportion to the benefits to be derived by each lot or parcel of land, the list shall contain a certificate executed by the persons employed by the city to ascertain the amounts of such benefits, which certificate shall declare that such persons have ascertained such amounts fairly and uniformly. Such list shall be a public record constituting notice to the public of the lien against the land so assessed, and no other record or notice thereof shall be necessary to any person for that purpose. No errors, omissions, or mistakes in regard to description of property shall be held to invalidate any assessment appearing upon such assessment list, where the description given is sufficient to identify the property. After the completion of the assessment list, the same shall be delivered to the city clerk, who shall thereupon give notice by publication one (1) time in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and by first class mail which may, but need not, be by certified mail to the last known address of each owner of land to be assessed. The address to be used for this purpose shall be that address last appearing on the real property assessment rolls. Such notice shall show that the assessment list has been delivered to the city clerk and is open for inspection at that office, and that at a time and place therein mentioned, not less than fifteen (15) days from the first publication, the city commission will meet to hear and determine any objections or defenses that may be filed to such assessment or the amount thereof, and including whether the amount of each assessment exceeds the amount of benefit to be derived by the lot or parcel of land to be assessed or exceeds the fair proportionate share of the total cost of the entire improvement which should be borne by such lot or parcel of land. The notice shall state the number of the improvement, the general character of the work which has been performed, the name by which such improvement is generally known and the location in which such improvement has been constructed. 
(Laws of Fla., 1955, ch. 31007, § 5(59)(A)—(S); Laws of Fla., ch. 67-1722, §§ 1—4; Laws of Fla., ch. 69-1311, § 2; Ord. No. 72-22, § 1, 2-5-73; Ord. No. 78-33, §§ 8, 9, 7-10-78)  
Sec. 2-276. - Hearing; confirmation of assessment list. 
At the time fixed in the notice provided in section 2-275 or at an adjourned meeting, the city commission shall hear objections to the amount of such assessment which may be made by the owners of real property assessed for such improvement, or by parties having an interest therein. The city commission shall determine and hear all objections and protests to the proposed assessments under such rules and regulations as it may adopt. The city commission shall have a right to change or adjust any assessment appearing upon such assessment list, at such meeting, or at any adjourned meeting thereof, but no new property shall be assessed without both hearings required and no assessment shall be increased without an additional hearing on the amount thereof. The city commission may call and hold such additional hearings as may be necessary or helpful in this connection. When such assessment list has been finally corrected and adjusted, the city commission shall adopt a resolution approving and confirming the assessment list and therein shall approve and confirm all assessments as finally fixed and adjusted at such hearing, and such assessments shall, from date of confirmation by such resolution, constitute a lien on the respective lots or parcels of land, or other real property upon which they are levied, superior to all other liens, except those for city and county taxes. All persons who fail to object to the proposed assessments in the manner herein provided, shall be deemed to have consented to and approved the same. All persons who appeared at such hearing and whose objections were overruled or denied shall be deemed to be bound by the action of the city commission after thirty (30) days from the adoption of such resolution approving and confirming the assessment list, unless suit challenging such assessment be filed. Substantial compliance with the procedure outlined shall be all that is necessary to render such assessment liens valid and incontestable, it being the expressed intention of the state legislature that the requirements are directory rather than mandatory. The payment of an assessment, in whole or in part, shall constitute a waiver of all defects, constitutional, jurisdictional or otherwise, in the proceedings. 
(Laws of Fla., 1955, ch. 31007, § 5(59)(A)—(S); Laws of Fla., ch. 67-1722, §§ 1—4; Laws of Fla., ch. 69-1311, § 2; Ord. No. 72-22, § 1, 2-5-73; Ord. No. 78-33, §§ 8, 9, 7-10-78)  
Sec. 2-277. - Assessments against United States or political subdivisions. 
No special assessments shall be made under this article against the property of the United States or the state or any political subdivision or taxing district of the state owning real estate within the city. 
(Laws of Fla., 1955, ch. 31007, § 5(59)(A)—(S); Laws of Fla., ch. 67-1722, §§ 1—4; Laws of Fla., ch. 69-1311, § 2)  
Sec. 2-278. - Setting aside special assessments. 
If any special assessment made under this article to defray the whole or part of the expense of any local improvement shall be either in whole or in part annulled, vacated or set aside by the judgment of any court or the city commission shall be satisfied that any assessment is so irregular or defective that the same cannot be enforced and collected, or if the city commission shall have omitted to make such assessment when it might have done so, it is hereby authorized to supply the money intended to be derived from such assessment from any lawfully available source or to take all steps to cause a new assessment for the whole or any part of any improvement or against any property benefited by any improvement, following as near as may be under the circumstances the provisions of this article. In case such second assessment shall be annulled, the city commission may obtain and make other assessments until a valid assessment shall be made. No omission, informality or irregularity in the proceedings preliminary to the making of any special assessment shall affect the validity of the same, where the assessment list has been confirmed by the city commission and the assessment list and the record thereof kept by the city clerk shall be competent and sufficient evidence that the assessment was duly levied and the assessment list duly made and adopted, and that all other proceedings necessary to the adoption of the assessment list were duly had, taken and performed as required by this article, and no variance from the directions herein contained as to the form and manner of any of the proceedings shall be held material, unless it be clearly shown that the party objecting was materially injured thereby. In case any special assessment shall, in any suit where its validity shall be questioned, be adjudged invalid, the city commission may in its discretion notify the city collector to cease the collection, and may proceed anew by proceedings either as in case of an original special assessment for the same purpose or by taking up the previous proceedings at any point, and may make and levy a new assessment in the place and stead of the assessment which shall have been adjudged invalid, and the city clerk, before delivering such new assessment for collection, shall ascertain and note thereon payments which have been made on such invalid assessment for the same purpose, which notation shall cancel the assessments as to the parcels and lots on which such payments were made to the extent of the payments. Such new assessments shall be collected in the same manner as original special assessments. 
(Laws of Fla., 1955, ch. 31007, § 5(59)(A)—(S); Laws of Fla., ch. 67-1722, §§ 1—4; Laws of Fla., ch. 69-1311, § 2; Ord. No. 72-22, § 1, 2-5-73; Ord. No. 78-33, §§ 8, 9, 7-10-78)  
Sec. 2-279. - Suits, actions, writs or special proceedings. 
For the period of thirty (30) days after the date of the confirmation of any special assessment, any person aggrieved shall have the right to contest the legality thereof by suit, action, writ or special proceedings, after which time no suit, action, writ or special proceedings in any manner questioning the legality of the special assessment shall lie for any cause whatsoever. 
(Laws of Fla., 1955, ch. 31007, § 5(59)(A)—(S); Laws of Fla., ch. 67-1722, §§ 1—4; Laws of Fla., ch. 69-1311, § 2)  
Sec. 2-280. - Method of collection. 
(a)  Any assessment may be paid within sixty (60) days after the confirmation thereof, without interest. Thereafter all assessments shall be payable in equal annual installments, with interest at a rate provided in the ordinance confirming the assessments not exceeding eight (8) percent per annum from the expiration of sixty (60) days, in each of the succeeding number of years which the city commission shall determine by ordinance, not exceeding twenty (20). The city commission may provide that any assessment may be paid at any time before due, together with interest accrued thereon to the date of payment, if such prior payment shall be permitted by the proceedings authorizing any special assessment bonds or other obligations for the payment of which such special assessments have been pledged. 
(b)  All such special assessments shall be collected by the city at the same time as the general city taxes are collected but if and whenever no city taxes are being collected, the assessments shall be collected by the tax collector of the county at the same time as general taxes are being collected. The city clerk shall certify to the county tax collector if the city is not in that year collecting it, in each year a list of all such special assessments and a description of the properties and names of the owners of the properties against which such special assessments have been levied and the amounts due thereon in such year, and interest thereon, and any deficiencies for prior years. 
(c)  All assessments shall constitute a lien upon the property so assessed from the date of adoption of the ordinance ordering the improvement of the same nature and to the same extent as the lien for general city taxes falling due in the same year in which such assessments or installments thereof fall due, and any assessment or installment not paid when due shall be collectible with such interest and with a reasonable attorney's fee and costs, but without penalties, by the city or by the county in the manner hereinafter set forth; provided that any such collection proceedings shall embrace all installments of principal remaining unpaid with accrued interest thereon, which installments shall, by virtue of the institution of such proceedings, immediately become due and payable. Nevertheless, if, prior to the entry of a final judgment in such proceedings, payments be made of the installments which are shown to be due and all costs including interest and attorney's fee, such payment shall have the effect of restoring the remaining installments to their original maturities and the proceedings shall be dismissed as to those lands. It shall be the duty of the city commission to enforce the prompt collection of assessments by the means herein provided, and such duty may be enforced at the suit of any holder of bonds issued under this act in a court of competent jurisdiction by mandamus or other appropriate proceedings or action. 
(d)  Not later than thirty (30) days after the annual installments are due and payable, it shall be the duty of the city commission to certify the delinquent assessments or installments by description of the lands and the amount due. Thereafter, the city commission within sixty (60) days shall institute legal proceedings for the collection thereof. Such proceedings shall be commenced by filing a complaint in the court of general jurisdiction pursuant to the provisions of this act against all of the lands described in such certified list. Upon the filing of the complaint, the clerk of the court shall mail a notice of the commencement of such proceeding and the return day to the record owner of the property as it appears on the tax rolls in the office of the tax appraiser and, if different, of the county for the year in which such proceeding is commenced. In addition, the city commission shall cause to have published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, a notice describing the lands upon which assessments are delinquent, such notice being directed in general terms to all persons having any interest in such lands. It shall not be necessary in the notice to set forth the names of such parties. The notice shall require all such parties to appear and show cause before the court on or before a day certain specified in the notice, which day shall be not less than fifteen (15) days, nor more than thirty (30) days after the publication of such notice. 
(e)  Upon the return day in the notice, every person having any interest in the lands, shall appear and show cause why the fee simple title to the lands should not be vested in the city, and the only sufficient cause shall be that the assessments have been paid. Failure of the parties to appear shall entitle the city commission to have a final judgment entered in its favor declaring the fee simple title to the lands to be vested in the city. Lands so acquired by the city may be sold in the same manner as other lands owned by the city according to law, the proceeds of which shall be placed in the special assessment fund to be used only for the payment of principal of or interest or premium on special assessment bonds. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any other method of collection outlined in this section, the City may sell, transfer or assign any present or future special assessment liens under this Article VII. All sales, transfers or assignments made by the City hereunder shall be without recourse against the City and shall be approved by Resolution of the City Commission. 
(Laws of Fla., 1955, ch. 31007, § 5(59)(A)—(S); Laws of Fla., ch. 67-1722, §§ 1—4; Laws of Fla., ch. 69-1311, § 2; Ord. No. 72-22, § 1, 2-5-73; Ord. No. 78-33, §§ 8, 9, 7-10-78; Ord. No. 94-42, §2-280(f), 9-7-94)  
Sec. 2-281. - Special assessment fund. 
The city commission shall, by ordinance, create a special assessment fund, out of which fund it shall pay the cost of one (1) or more improvements and shall also pay principal of and interest and redemption premiums, if any, on any special assessment bonds which it may issue in anticipation of the collection of assessments for paying all or a portion of the cost of the improvement. The city shall establish two (2) or more accounts in the fund, one (1) of which shall be dedicated to the payment of principal and interest on outstanding special assessment bonds and the other to the payment of the cost of the improvement. The city may agree in the proceedings authorizing any special assessment bonds to deposit additional sums of money into the fund, either from the general fund of the city or from excise taxes, revenues of water, sewer or other revenue producing facilities of the city or any other source. No money derived from ad valorem taxation shall be used to pay principal of or interest or redemption premiums on any special assessment bonds herein authorized. Money in a special assessment fund created for one (1) improvement or a group of improvements shall not be commingled with money derived from or to be used in connection with any other improvement or group of improvements, but shall be held in trust for the holders of the special assessment bonds outstanding from time to time payable from such fund except to the extent used as specifically herein otherwise provided. Monies in the special assessment fund may be transferred from account to account within such fund but no money shall be transferred out of the account dedicated to the payment of principal of and interest on special assessment bonds, except for any excess above the amount necessary to pay all principal of and interest to maturity on all special assessment bonds payable therefrom. Money in the account dedicated to the payment of the cost of the improvement shall be applied to the payment of such costs, and all money in the special assessment fund derived from ad valorem taxation shall be so applied before any money derived from other sources. Whenever the cost of the improvement shall have been fully paid or provision for the payment thereof duly made, any remaining money held in the account for the payment of such cost not derived from ad valorem taxation shall be deposited in an account from which principal of and interest on the special assessment bonds are payable and any money derived from ad valorem taxation shall be withdrawn from the special assessment fund and deposited in the general fund of the city or otherwise applied as provided by law. Money in the fund may be invested in direct obligations of or obligations unconditionally guaranteed by the United States of America subject to such provisions as the proceeding authorizing the special assessment bonds may provide. 
(Laws of Fla., 1955, ch. 31007, § 5(59)(A)—(S); Laws of Fla., ch. 67-1722, §§ 1—4; Laws of Fla., ch. 69-1311, § 2; Ord. No. 72-22, § 1, 2-5-73; Ord. No. 78-33, §§ 8, 9, 7-10-78)  
Sec. 2-282. - Special assessment bonds. 
After the adoption of an ordinance determining to proceed with an improvement, the city may issue negotiable interest bearing special assessment bonds in a principal amount not exceeding the estimated cost of the improvement. The bonds shall bear interest at rates not exceeding seven and one-half (7½) percent per annum, payable semiannually or annually, and shall mature serially or otherwise over a period extending no longer than one (1) year following the date upon which the last installments of the special assessments are to become due. The bonds shall be authorized by ordinance, shall be of such form and denomination and shall be payable as to principal and interest at such times and places and shall be sold by public bid and not at private sale, authorized and issued in such manner as the city commission may by ordinance prescribe, but no such bonds shall be sold at less than ninety (90) percent of the face value thereof. The bonds shall be secured by and payable from the irrevocable pledge and dedication of the money derived from the levy and collection of which they are issued, and may additionally be secured by pledge and dedication of any other money not derived from ad valorem taxation which the city may agree to deposit in the special assessment fund. It shall not be necessary to file any financing or continuation statements to preserve and protect the rights and priorities of the holders of such bonds. Any premium received on the sale of the bonds may be applied as other bond proceeds or if not so applied shall be placed in an account in the special assessment fund from which principal of and interest on the bonds are payable. The city may make such covenants with the holders of the bonds as it may deem helpful to the marketability thereof, including covenants to impose and reimpose all assessments and reassessments necessary to assure prompt payment of the bonds and interest thereon, to pay all or a portion of the cost of an improvement from any funds not derived from ad valorem taxation, and to impose and collect any or all excise taxes in amounts sufficient to assure payment of all maturing principal and interest on the bonds and to establish and maintain a suitable reserve therefor. The bonds shall be callable for redemption from such source, in such manner, on the payment of such premium, if any, and at such times, if any, as the city commission may direct in the ordinance authorizing their issuance. The bonds shall be executed in such manner and be subject to such registration and conversion privileges as the authorizing ordinance may provide. 
(Laws of Fla., 1955, ch. 31007, § 5(59)(A)—(S); Laws of Fla., ch. 67-1722, §§ 1—4; Laws of Fla., ch. 69-1311, § 2; Ord. No. 72-22, § 1, 2-5-73; Ord. No. 78-33, §§ 8, 9, 7-10-78)  
Sec. 2-283. - Delivery or sale of bonds. 
The city may in its discretion require the construction contract to provide that all or part of the payments due the contractor thereunder shall be made through delivery to the contractor of special assessment bonds at the par value thereof plus accrued interest thereon to the date of delivery. The city may also require the contractor to purchase the bonds not so needed to satisfy payments due the contractor under the contract and to pay therefor par and accrued interest to the date of delivery so that money will be available to be expended in the payment of other costs of the improvement not covered by such contract. 
(Laws of Fla., 1955, ch. 31007, § 5(59)(A)—(S); Laws of Fla., ch. 67-1722, §§ 1—4; Laws of Fla., ch. 69-1311, § 2)  
Sec. 2-284. - Errors and grievances. 
No special assessment levied under this article shall be declared void, nor shall any such assessment or part thereof be set aside in consequence of any error or irregularity permitted or appearing in any of the proceedings under this article, but any party feeling aggrieved by any such special assessment or proceeding may bring a civil action to cause such grievance to be adjudicated if such action is commenced prior to the expiration of the period specified in this section. The burden of proof to show that such special assessment or part thereof is invalid, inequitable or unjust shall rest upon the party who brings such suit. 
(Laws of Fla., 1955, ch. 31007, § 5(59)(A)—(S); Laws of Fla., ch. 67-1722, §§ 1—4; Laws of Fla., ch. 69-1311, § 2)  
Sec. 2-285. - Contest period. 
Whenever any ordinance authorizing the issuance of special assessment bonds under the provisions of this article shall have been adopted, such ordinance shall be published once in the newspaper in which the original notice of hearing was published. For a period of thirty (30) days thereafter any person whose property may be subject to assessment shall have the right to institute litigation for the purpose of questioning or attacking the legality of such bonds, the proceedings pursuant to which the assessments are to be or have been levied, and the proceedings pursuant to which such bonds are to be issued. After the expiration of such thirty-day period, all proceedings theretofore had by the city commission, the bonds to be issued pursuant thereto, and the power and ;b0; obligation of the city to impose, collect and apply special assessments and money from other sources from which such bonds are to be paid, shall become incontestable, and no suit attacking or questioning the legality thereof may be instituted in this state, and no court shall have authority to inquire into such matters, except in validation proceedings under F.S. ch. 75. 
(Laws of Fla., 1955, ch. 31007, § 5(59)(A)—(S); Laws of Fla., ch. 67-1722, §§ 1—4; Laws of Fla., ch. 69-1311, § 2; Ord. No. 72-22, § 1, 2-5-73; Ord. No. 78-33, §§ 8, 9, 7-10-78)  
Sec. 2-286. - Supplemental hearing. 
If at any time after the holding of any hearing required to be held by this law, circumstances are such as to make it necessary or desirable to make any change in the determinations reached at such hearing, the city commission may call a supplemental hearing, of which notice shall be given in the manner required for the giving of notice of the original hearing, and the determinations and order made at the original hearing as modified or supplemented by the determinations and order made at the supplemental hearing shall have the same effect as though made in their entirety at the original hearing. 
(Laws of Fla., 1955, ch. 31007, § 5(59)(A)—(S); Laws of Fla., ch. 67-1722, §§ 1—4; Laws of Fla., ch. 69-1311, § 2; Ord. No. 72-22, § 1, 2-5-73; Ord. No. 78-33, §§ 8, 9, 7-10-78)  
ARTICLE VIII. - CODE OF ETHICS FOR MUNICIPAL OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note—
 
Sec. 2-287. - Requirement to follow state and county ethics laws. 
All city officials shall abide by the applicable provisions of Florida Statutes, chapter 112, part III, as amended, and section 1-19, Broward County Code of Ordinances, as same may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 16-08, § 3, 6-1-16)  
Sec. 2-288. - Prohibition on participation in certain matters. 
(a)  In instances where a member of the city commission, pursuant to Florida Statutes, section 112.3143 or 286.012, abstains from voting because there is or appears to be a possible conflict of interest or, in a quasi-judicial matter, has a bias or prejudice, the elected official shall not participate in any discussion regarding that matter and shall leave the dais. 
(Ord. No. 16-08, § 4, 6-1-16)  
Secs. 2-289—2-309. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - LOBBYING 
 
Sec. 2-310. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the present tense shall include future tense, words in the plural number shall include the singular number and words in the singular number shall include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
Agency means the City of Miramar including all elected and appointed officials, employees and persons acting on behalf of the agency. 
Covered individual means (i) any member of the city commission of the city; (ii) any member of a final decision-making body under the jurisdiction of the city commission; (iii) any individual directly appointed to a city employment position by the city commission; (iv) any individual serving on a contractual basis as the city's chief legal counsel (i.e.: city attorney) or chief administrative officer (i.e.: city manager), when such individual is acting in his or her official capacity; (v) any member of a selection, evaluation, or procurement committee of the city that ranks or makes recommendations to any final decision-making authority regarding a city procurement; (vi) any employee, official, or member of a committee of the city that has authority to make a final decision regarding a public procurement; and (vii) the head of any department, division, or office of the city government who makes final recommendations to a final decision-making authority of the city regarding items that will be decided by the final decision-making authority of the city. 
Elected official means any member of the city commission of the city. 
Lobbying or lobbying activities means a communication, by any means, from a lobbyist to a Covered Individual regarding any item that will foreseeably be decided by a final decision-making authority, which communication seeks to influence, convince, or persuade the Covered Individual to support or oppose the item. "Lobbying" does not include communications: 
(1)  Made on the record at a duly-noticed public meeting or hearing; or 
(2)  From an attorney to an attorney representing Broward County or any municipality within Broward County regarding a pending or imminent judicial or adversarial administrative proceeding against Broward County or against any municipality within Broward County. 
Lobbyist means a person who is retained, with or without compensation, for the purpose of lobbying, or a person who is employed by another person or entity, on a full-time or part-time basis, principally to lobby on behalf of that other person or entity. "Lobbyist" does not include a person who is: 
(1)  An elected official, employee, or appointee of Broward County or of any municipality within Broward County communicating in his or her official capacity. 
(2)  An individual who communicates on his or her own behalf, or on behalf of a person or entity employing the individual on a full-time or part-time basis, unless the individual is principally employed by that person or entity to lobby. 
(3)  Any employee, officer, or board member of a homeowners' association, condominium association, or neighborhood association when addressing, in his or her capacity as an employee, officer, or board member of such association, an issue impacting the association or its members; or 
(4)  Any employee, an officer, or a board member of a nonprofit public interest entity (e.g., Sierra Club, NAACP, ACLU) when addressing an issue impacting a constituent of that entity. 
Person includes individuals, firms, associations, joint ventures, general and limited partnerships, estates, trusts, business trusts, syndicates, fiduciaries, corporations and all other groups or combinations. 
(Ord. No. 92-40, § 1, 8-3-92; Ord. No. 12-08, § 2, 1-10-12)  
Sec. 2-311. - Registration of lobbyist. 
Commencing fifteen (15) days after the effective date of this article and continuing thereafter, all lobbyists shall, before engaging in any lobbying activities, register with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 92-40, § 2, 8-3-92)  
Sec. 2-312. - Registration forms. 
Every person required to register as a lobbyist shall do so on forms prepared by the city clerk and shall state under oath his or her name, business address, the name and business address of each person which has employed such registrant to lobby and the specific issue on which he or she has been employed to lobby. Separate registrations shall be required for each specific issue and for each employer. 
(Ord. No. 92-40, § 3, 8-3-92)  
Sec. 2-313. - Filing and disclosure of annual expenditures. 
Commencing on January 1, 1993, and on January 1 of each year thereafter, all lobbyists registered pursuant to this article shall submit to the city clerk a signed statement under oath listing all lobbying expenditures for the preceding calendar year. A statement shall be filed even if there have been no expenditures during the reporting period. Annual statements shall be required until such time as the lobbyist files a notice of withdrawal of lobbying activities with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 92-40, § 4, 8-3-92)  
Sec. 2-314. - Penalties for violation; cumulative in nature. 
(a)  Whenever a violation of this article exists, the city commission may publicly reprimand, censure, and/or prohibit such lobbyist from lobbying before the agency for a period of up to but not to exceed two (2) years. 
(b)  The penalties provided herein are cumulative in nature. Nothing contained in this article shall prevent the agency from pursuing any other remedies available to the agency under the agency's code and/or state law for the enforcement of its ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 92-40, § 5, 8-3-92)  
Sec. 2-315. - Public records. 
All registration forms and annual disclosure statements required by this article shall be public records subject to inspection and examination as provided for in F.S. section 119.07. 
(Ord. No. 92-40, § 6, 8-3-92)  
Sec. 2-316. - Lobbyist registration fee. 
An annual lobbyist registration fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each lobbyist shall be paid to the city clerk at the time the lobbyist files a registration form. This fee is necessary to cover the administrative expenditures required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 92-40, § 7, 8-3-92)  
Secs. 2-317—2-320. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - INTERIM SERVICE FEE REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 2-321. - Title; application. 
This article, known as the City of Miramar Interim Services Fee Ordinance," hereby establishes an interim services fee. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 1, 10-2-96)  
Sec. 2-322. - Findings. 
(a)  The preamble "Whereas" clauses are adopted as the findings of the city commission and are hereby ratified and confirmed and made specific findings of the city commission as a part of this article. 
(b)  The city commission finds that the imposition of the interim services fee upon new development for the cost to the city of providing additional city services to newly developed and improved property during the interim period between the time the new development is completed and the time said improvement is placed on the tax roll represents a fair method to apportion the cost of city services to the recipients of those services. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 2, 10-2-96)  
Sec. 2-323. - Purpose; intent. 
(a)  It is the intent of the city commission to establish an interim services fee in order that new development receiving additional city services be required to pay only its proportionate and fair share of the cost of such services without reference to the valuation of the property receiving or benefitting from said services, and said fee shall not in any manner, directly or indirectly, be an ad valorem tax; and 
(b)  It is the further intent of the city commission that the interim services fee imposed for additional city services pursuant to this article shall be proportionate to the cost of the services benefitting new development for the period of time commencing with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy ending at the time such improvements are placed on the tax roll. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 3, 10-2-96)  
Sec. 2-324. - Fee established for services to certain properties. 
(a)  There is hereby established an interim services fee which shall apply to new development of those real properties located within the city for which a certificate of occupancy is required and which shall cover the period from the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy until and including the ensuing December 31st, the date normally preceding the day the new development requiring the certificate of occupancy is assessed by the Broward County Property appraiser and placed on the tax roll. 
(b)  The fee shall apply to construction of any new residential units or additions to non-residential buildings which increase square footage by more than fifty (50) percent. 
(c)  The interim services fee shall be based solely upon the fair proportion of the cost of services which provide benefits to the new development as set forth in the Schedule of Fees attached hereto as Schedule A and made a part of this article. 
(d)  Fee adjustment. In the event that the feepayer disagrees with the amount of the interim services fee to be charged pursuant to the schedule of fees: 
(1)  The feepayer, at his option, may submit evidence to the city manager or his designee indicating that the interim services fee to be paid according to the schedule of fees is not a fair proportion of the cost of services which provide benefits to the feepayer's new development. The city manager or his designee shall adjust the interim services fee if substantial evidence is submitted that clearly demonstrates that an adjustment is necessary under the general methodology upon which the interim services fee is based. The burden shall be upon the feepayer to provide all relevant date, analysis, and report(s) which would assist the city manager or his designee in making a determination. The analysis and report(s) must be based upon generally accepted practices and methodologies. 
(2)  The city manager's authority to make an adjustment is limited to a reduction of up to ten (10) percent. Any adjustment greater than ten (10) percent requires city commission approval. 
(3)  All decisions by the city manager or his designee or the city commission shall be based on the evidence presented by the feepayer, the staff file, and other relevant evidence. Said evidence must be relevant to the methodologies and the formula set forth in the schedule of fees. 
(4)  The city manager or his designee's decision to adjust, or refuse to adjust, the interim services fee pursuant to an independent fee calculation shall be final subject to appeal to the city commission. The decision shall be made in writing and shall be furnished by U.S. mail to the feepayer. 
(5)  The city commission may, by resolution, revise Schedule A containing the interim service fees to be charged pursuant to this ordinance. Said resolution shall only be adopted after a public hearing is held, which public hearing has been the subject of notice in a newspaper of general circulation at least ten (10) days prior to the adoption of the revised schedule. Upon adoption of the resolution pursuant to this provision, Schedule A containing the schedule of fees shall thereby be deemed amended by the city commission and shall govern the charges set forth in the interim service fees ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 4, 10-2-96; Ord. No. 98-2, § 2, 11-5-97)  
Sec. 2-325. - Fee; when paid. 
(a)  The interim services fee shall be paid upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, and the certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until such time as the interim services fee has been paid in full. 
(b)  The payment of the interim services fee shall be in addition to any other fees, charges or assessments due for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  The obligation for payment of the interim services fee shall run with the land. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 5, 10-2-96)  
Sec. 2-326. - Fee revisions. 
The City of Miramar may from time to time amend the interim services fee to increase or decrease the interim services fee as it applies to new development so as to reflect changes in the proportionate costs to the city of providing city services to new development. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 6, 10-2-96)  
Sec. 2-327. - Collection, deposit and use. 
(a)  The building official shall be charged with the collection of the interim services fee, which shall be collected as a condition prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The fee shall be determined in accordance with the schedule of fees as set forth in the interim services fee study dated August 5, 1996. 
(b)  Interim services fees. All fees collected shall be deposited in a separate fund and shall be used to provide city services to those developments from which the fee is collected. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 7, 10-2-96)  
Secs. 2-328, 2-329. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - COMMUNITY STANDARDS AND CODE ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 2-330. - Purpose and intent. 
This article shall establish the code enforcement process to be utilized by the city. The rules and procedures set forth herein are intended to promote and protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city, and to achieve increased compliance by city residents to the Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 3, 5-7-03)  
Sec. 2-331. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include future; words in the plural number include the singular number and vice-a-versa. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
City means Miramar, Florida. 
City commission means the City Commission of the City of Miramar, Florida. 
Civil citation means a civil violation citation issued to a violator that requires an appearance before the county court rather than the special master. 
Code means collectively the City of Miramar, Florida, Code of Ordinances and any statute, code, rule, ordinance or regulation incorporated into the Code by reference, including the Florida Building Code or any other technical code or state statute that the city has jurisdiction to enforce. 
Code enforcement officer means any authorized agent or employee of the city whose duty it is to assure compliance with the Code. Employees or agents of the city who may be designated as code enforcement officers may include, but are not limited to, code inspectors, law enforcement officers or fire safety inspectors. 
Continuing violation means a violation which remains uncorrected beyond the time period for correction contained in either the civil violation notice or the final order of the special master, whichever is applicable. 
Manager means the city manager. 
Notice of violation means a civil violation notice issued to a violator in accordance with the provisions of this article. A notice of violation is not a civil citation or a summons to appear. 
Repeat violation means a violation of a provision of the Code by a person whom the special master, or other tribunal, has previously found to have violated or who has admitted violating the same provision of the Code within five (5) years prior to the current violation, notwithstanding the violations occur at different locations. 
Special master means an individual designated and determined to be qualified by the city commission to perform all powers and duties authorized under F.S. Ch. 162, as amended from time to time. 
Summons to appear means a hearing notice issued to an alleged violator, in accordance with the provisions of this article, advising the alleged violator of a hearing before the special master concerning a violation. 
Uncorrectable violation means a violation that is irreparable or irreversible in nature and that cannot be remedied after the violation has been committed because the violation constitutes a single prohibited act rather than an ongoing condition or circumstance. 
Violator means that person or entity responsible for a violation of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 3, 5-7-03)  
Sec. 2-332. - Special master system created; qualifications; terms; removal; jurisdiction. 
(a)  [Created.] There is hereby created a special master code enforcement system for the City of Miramar, Florida, that shall consist of individuals appointed by the city commission. 
(b)  Qualifications. Special masters shall be members of the Florida Bar, in good standing, and shall be selected on the basis of experience or interest in the fields of code enforcement. Special masters shall possess outstanding reputations for civic pride, integrity, responsibility and business or professional ability. 
(c)  Term of office. The city manager or his or her designee shall appoint as many special masters as are deemed necessary subject to approval by the city commission. Appointments shall be made for a term of one (1) year. Any special master may be reappointed at the discretion of the city manager, subject to ratification by the city commission. There shall be no limit on the number of reappointments that may be given to any individual special master; provided, however, that a determination as to removal or reappointment must be made for each special master at the end of each one-year term. Appointments to fill any vacancy shall be for the remainder of the un-expired term. 
(d)  Compensation. Special masters shall not be city employees but shall be compensated at a rate to be determined by the city manager subject to approval by the city commission. 
(e)  Removal. Special masters may be removed from office by the city commission with or without cause. 
(f)  Jurisdiction. The special master shall have jurisdiction of only those cases assigned by the city manager or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 3, 5-7-03)  
Sec. 2-333. - Powers of the special masters. 
Special masters shall have the power to: 
(1)  Hear and decide violations of the City Code; 
(2)  Adopt rules for the conduct of hearings; 
(3)  Subpoena violators and witnesses for hearings; subpoenas shall be served by the city police department or by the city staff; 
(4)  Subpoena evidence to hearings; 
(5)  Take testimony under oath; 
(6)  Assess and order the payment of civil penalties as provided herein; and 
(7)  Issue orders having the force of law to command whatever steps are necessary to bring a violation into compliance. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 3, 5-7-03)  
Sec. 2-334. - Authority to initiate enforcement proceedings. 
Code enforcement officers shall have the authority to initiate code enforcement proceedings as provided in section 2-335 of this article. The special master shall not have such authority. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 3, 5-7-03)  
Sec. 2-335. - Enforcement procedures. 
(a)  Notice of violation. A code enforcement officer who finds a violation of the Code may issue a notice of violation to the violator stating that the violator has committed a violation of the Code and shall specify a reasonable time period within which the violator must correct the violation. This determination shall be based upon consideration of fairness, practicality, ease of correction, ability to correct, severity of violation, nature, extent and probability of danger or damage to the public and other relevant factors relating to the reasonableness of the time period prescribed. 
(b)  Notification of city manager or designee. If, upon personal investigation, a code enforcement officer finds that the violator has not corrected the violation within the time period specified in the notice of violation, the code enforcement officer shall notify the city manager or his or her designee and request a hearing. 
(c)  Summons to appear. Upon receipt of a named violator's timely request for an administrative hearing or a request from the code enforcement officer as provided for in this section, the city manager or his or her designee shall set the matter down for hearing on the next regularly scheduled hearing date or as soon thereafter as practicable, and shall send a summons to appear to the named violator in the form and manner set forth in section 2-338 of this article. 
(d)  Serious or uncorrectable violations. If the code enforcement officer has reason to believe a violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the code enforcement officer may issue a notice of violation requiring immediate correction of the violation. If the violation is an uncorrectable violation, the code enforcement officer may issue a notice of violation. The code enforcement officer shall make a reasonable effort to notify the violator and immediately notify the city manager or his or her designee and request a hearing. 
(e)  Repeat violations. If a code enforcement officer finds a repeat violation, the code enforcement officer shall issue a notice of violation to the violator, but is not required to give the violator a reasonable time to correct the violation. The code enforcement officer, upon notifying the violator of a repeat violation, shall notify the city manager or his or her designee and request a hearing. 
(f)  Transfer of property. If the owner of property which is subject to an enforcement proceeding pursuant to this article transfers ownership of such property between the time the initial pleading was served and the time of the hearing, such owner shall: 
(1)  Disclose, in writing, the existence and the nature of the proceeding to the prospective transferee; 
(2)  Deliver to the prospective transferee a copy of the pleadings, notices and other materials relating to the code enforcement proceeding received by the transferor; 
(3)  Disclose, in writing, to the prospective transferee that the new owner will be responsible for compliance with the applicable code and with orders issued in the code enforcement proceeding; and 
(4)  File a notice with the city manager or his or her designee of the transfer of the property, with the identity and address of the new owner and copies of the disclosures made to the new owner, within five (5) days after the date of the transfer. 
A failure to make the disclosures described in paragraphs (1), (2) and (3) before the transfer creates a rebuttable presumption of fraud. If the property is transferred before the hearing, the proceeding shall not be dismissed, but the new owner shall be provided a reasonable period of time to correct the violation before the hearing is held. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 3, 5-7-03)  
Sec. 2-336. - Contents and service of notice of violation. 
(a)  A notice of violation shall include: 
(1)  The date and time of issuance; 
(2)  The name of the code enforcement officer issuing the notice of violation; 
(3)  The name and address of the violator and, if violator is not the owner of the property, the name and address of the owner as well; 
(4)  A brief description of the nature of the violation, including the location, date and time of the violation; 
(5)  The section of the Code that has been violated; 
(6)  The time within which the violation must be corrected; 
(7)  The amount of the civil penalty for which the violator may be liable; 
(8)  The instructions and date for paying the civil penalty or for filing a request for an administrative hearing before a special master to appeal the civil penalty; 
(9)  A statement that each day of continued violation after the time period for correction has run shall be deemed a continuing violation and may subject the violator to an additional penalty in the same amount without the need for additional notices; 
(10)  A statement that the filing of a request for an administrative hearing will toll the accrual of continuing violation penalties where applicable; 
(11)  A statement that failure to request an administrative hearing within twenty (20) days after service of the notice of violation or to attend such a hearing when scheduled shall constitute an admission of the violation and that, in such case, judgment may be entered against the violator for the amount of the applicable civil penalty; and 
(12)  A statement that the violator may be liable for the reasonable administrative hearing costs should he or she be found guilty. 
(b)  Service of the notice of violation to the violator shall be effected either by: 
(1)  Certified mail, return receipt requested, provided that if such notice of violation is sent under this paragraph to the owner of the property in question at the address listed in the tax collector's office for tax notices, and at any other address provided to the city by such owner and is returned as unclaimed or refused, notice may be provided by posting as described in subparagraphs (c)(2) and by first class mail directed to the addresses furnished to the city with a properly executed proof of mailing or affidavit confirming the first class mailing; or 
(2)  Hand delivery by the a law enforcement officer, code enforcement officer or other person designated by the city by: 
a.  Leaving the notice of violation at the violator's usual place of residence with any person residing therein who is above fifteen (15) years of age and informing such person of the contents of the notice; or 
b.  In the case of commercial premises, leaving the notice of violation with the manager or other person in charge. 
(c)  In addition to providing service of the notice of violation as set forth above, at the option and discretion of the city manager or his or her designee, the notice of violation may also be served by publication or posting as follows: 
(1)  The notice of violation shall be published once during each week for four (4) consecutive weeks (four (4) publications being sufficient) in a newspaper of general circulation in Broward County, as specified in F.S. Ch. 50; or 
(2)  In lieu of publication as described in paragraph (c)(1), such notice of violation may be posted at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing, or prior to the expiration of any deadline contained in the notice of violation, in at least two (2) locations, one (1) of which shall be the property upon which the violation is alleged to exist and the other of which shall be at City Hall. Proof of posting shall be by affidavit of the person posting the notice of violation, which affidavit shall include a copy of the notice of violation posted and the date and places of its posting. 
(3)  Notice of violation issued by publication or posting may run concurrently with, or may follow, an attempt or attempts to provide notice by hand delivery or by mail as required under subsection (b). 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 3, 5-7-03)  
Sec. 2-337. - Rights of violators; payment of fine; right to administrative hearing; failure to pay and correct or to appeal. 
(a)  A violator who has been served with a notice of violation shall elect either to: 
(1)  Correct the violation within the time specified on the notice of violation and, if applicable, pay the civil penalty in the manner and within the time indicated on such notice; or 
(2)  Request an administrative hearing before a special master to appeal the decision of the code enforcement officer that resulted in the issuance of the notice of violation. 
(b)  An appeal of the notice of violation shall be accomplished by filing a request in writing to the address indicated on the notice of violation, not later than twenty (20) calendar days after the service of the notice of violation. 
(c)  If the named violator, after issuance of the notice of violation, fails to correct the violation and pay any applicable civil penalty within the time specified, or to timely request an administrative hearing before a special master, the special master shall be informed of such failure by report from the code enforcement officer. Such report shall be by affidavit of the code enforcement officer. Failure of the named violator to appeal the decision of the code enforcement officer within the prescribed time period shall constitute a waiver of the violator's right to administrative hearing before the special master as to the violation. A waiver of the right to an administrative hearing as to the violation shall be treated as an admission of the violation, and penalties may be assessed accordingly. 
(d)  If the named violator, after issuance of the notice of violation, corrects the violation after the time specified and desires to pay the civil penalty rather than have an administrative hearing before a special master, the violator may do so at the city's discretion. The amount of the civil penalty shall be as indicated on the notice of violation and payment of such penalty in lieu of a hearing shall be treated as an admission of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 3, 5-7-03)  
Sec. 2-338. - Scheduling and conduct of hearing. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a named violator's timely request for an administrative hearing or a request from the code enforcement officer as provided in section 2-335 of this article, the city manager or his or her designee shall set the matter down for hearing on the next regularly scheduled hearing date or as soon thereafter as practicable. 
(b)  The city manager or his or her designee shall serve a summons to appear in the same manner of service as outlined in section 2-336 of this article for a notice of violation. The summons to appear shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Name of the code enforcement officer who issued the notice of violation; 
(2)  Factual description of alleged violation; 
(3)  Date of alleged violation; 
(4)  Section of the code allegedly violated; 
(5)  Place, date and time of the hearing; 
(6)  Right of violator to be represented by an attorney; 
(7)  Right of violator to present evidence, witnesses and cross-examine witnesses; 
(8)  That failure of violator to attend the hearing may result in civil penalty and administrative hearing costs being assessed; 
(9)  That requests for continuances will not be considered if not received by the city manager or his or her designee at least five (5) calendar days prior to the date set for the hearing; and 
(10)  That if the violation is corrected and then recurs or if the violation is not corrected by the time specified for correction by the code enforcement officer, the case may be presented to the special master even if the violation has been corrected prior to the hearing. 
(c)  The city manager or his or her designee shall call hearings on an as needed basis or upon the request of the code enforcement officer. No hearing shall be set sooner than ten (10) calendar days from the date of service of the summons to appear. 
(d)  A hearing date shall not be postponed or continued unless a request for continuance, showing good cause for such continuance, is received in writing by the city manager or his or her designee at least five (5) calendar days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(e)  All hearings of the special master shall be open to the public. All testimony shall be under oath. Assuming proper notice, a hearing may proceed in the absence of the named violator. 
(f)  The proceedings at the hearing shall be recorded and may be transcribed at the expense of the party requesting the transcript. 
(g)  The city manager shall provide clerical and administrative personnel as may be reasonably required by the special master for the proper performance of its duties. 
(h)  Each case before the special master shall be presented by the city manager or his or her designee. 
(i)  The hearing need not be conducted in accordance with the formal rules relating to evidence and witnesses, but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if the special master finds it competent and reliable, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule to the contrary. 
(j)  Each party shall have the right to call and examine relevant witnesses, to introduce relevant exhibits, to cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues even though that matter was not covered in the direct examination, to impeach any witness regardless of which party first called that witness to testify and to offer rebuttal of the evidence. 
(k)  The special master shall make findings of fact and conclusions of law based on evidence of record. 
(l)  If the named violator is found to have committed the alleged violation, he or she may be held liable for the reasonable administrative costs of the hearing, at the discretion of the special master. 
(m)  In the case of a repeat violation, if the repeat violation has been corrected, the city retains the right to schedule a hearing before the special master to determine costs and impose the payment of reasonable enforcement fees upon the repeat violator. The repeat violator may choose to waive his or her rights to this hearing and pay the applicable costs or fees. 
(n)  The fact-finding determination of the special master shall be limited to whether the violation alleged did occur and, if so, whether the person named in the notice of violation may be held responsible for that violation. If the special master finds the named violator not responsible for the violation alleged in the notice of violation, the named violator shall not be liable for the payment of any civil penalty or costs, absent reversal of the special master's findings pursuant to section 2-341 of this article. 
(o)  The decision of the special master affirming the decision of the code enforcement officer, shall include the following elements: 
(1)  Possibility of civil penalty; 
(2)  Administrative costs of hearing, if applicable; and 
(3)  Date by which the violation must be corrected to prevent continuing violation penalties. If the violator does not correct the violation by the date specified in the order, a subsequent hearing shall be held to address the continued violation and to determine the appropriate civil penalty. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 3, 5-7-03)  
Sec. 2-339. - Civil penalties and related terms construed. 
(a)  Penalties for violations of the provisions to be enforced through this article may be in the amounts prescribed in section 2-343 of this article and as set forth in this section. 
(b)  For each day of a continuing violation, an additional penalty in the same amount as that prescribed for in the original violation shall be added. 
(c)  After an administrative hearing and a finding by the special master of a violation of the Code, the special master shall determine a reasonable time period within which correction of the violation must be made, based upon the considerations set forth in section 2-338 of this article. Upon notification by the code enforcement officer that correction of the violation was not made within the period ordered, or upon finding that a repeat violation has been committed, a subsequent administrative hearing shall be held to address the continuing or repeat violation and for the special master to determine and impose by order the appropriate civil penalties. 
(d)  If the special master finds a violation to be irreparable or irreversible in nature, the special master may order the violator to pay a fine not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per violation. 
(e)  If the special master finds that a violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare, or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible in nature, the special master shall notify the city manager or his or her designee, who may order all repairs in order to bring the property into compliance. The city may assess the violator with the cost of the repairs. 
(f)  Unless an extension is granted by the special master, civil penalties assessed pursuant to this article are due and payable to the city on or before the last day of the period allowed for the filing of an appeal from the special master's penalty order or, if a proper appeal is made, when the appeal has been finally decided adversely to the named violator. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 3, 5-7-03)  
Sec. 2-340. - Recovery of unpaid civil penalties and cost of repairs; unpaid penalty and cost of repairs to constitute a lien; foreclosure. 
(a)  The city may institute proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel payment of civil penalties or cost of repairs authorized herein. 
(b)  A certified copy of an order imposing a civil penalty may be recorded in the public records and thereafter shall constitute a lien against the property on which the violation exists and upon any other real or personal property owned by the violator. Upon petition to the circuit court, such order may be enforced in the same manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of this state, including execution and levy against the violator's personal property, but such order shall not be deemed to be a court judgment except for enforcement purposes. A civil penalty imposed pursuant to this article shall continue to accrue until the violator complies or until judgment is rendered in a suit to foreclose on a lien filed pursuant to this article whichever occurs first. After three (3) months from the date of filings of any such lien, which remains unpaid, the city may foreclose or otherwise execute on the lien. Alternatively, the city may initiate legal proceedings to recover a money judgment for the amount of the code enforcement lien plus accrued interest. 
(c)  A certified copy of a notice of assessment of cost of repairs may be recorded in the public records and thereafter constitute a lien on the property on which the repairs were performed. Upon petition to the circuit court, such notice of assessment may be enforced in the same manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of this state, including levy against the violator's personal property, but such order shall not be deemed to be a court judgment except for enforcement purposes. After three (3) months from the date of filings of any such notice of assessment, which remains unpaid, the city may foreclose or otherwise execute on the lien. Alternatively, the city may initiate legal proceedings to recover a money judgment for the amount of the lien plus accrued interest. 
(d)  No lien provided under this article shall continue for a period longer than twenty (20) years after the certified copy of an order imposing a fine or notice of assessment has been recorded, unless within that time an action to foreclose on a lien is commenced in a court of competent jurisdiction. In an action to foreclose on a lien, the prevailing party may recover interest and all costs, including a reasonable attorney's fees, incurred in the foreclosure. The continuation of the lien effected by the commencement of the action shall not be good against creditors or subsequent purchasers for valuable consideration without notice, unless a notice of lis pendens is recorded. 
(e)  A certified copy of an order finding violation or an order imposing a civil penalty or notice of assessment of cost of repairs recorded in the public records shall constitute notice of the violation and any civil penalty or costs imposed therein to any subsequent purchasers, successors in interest or assigns if the violation concerns real property. The findings therein shall be binding upon the violator, and if the violation concerns real property, any subsequent purchasers, successors in interest or assigns. 
(f)  If an order is recorded in the public records and it is complied with by the date specified, the special master shall issue an order acknowledging compliance that shall be recorded in the public records. A hearing shall not be required to issue such an order acknowledging compliance. 
(g)  A lien arising from a civil penalty or notice of assessment runs in favor of the city, and the city may charge the violator for all costs incurred in recording, researching the public records and satisfying a valid lien. Upon payment of the civil penalty or notice of assessment by the violator or the successor(s), assign(s) or heir(s) of the violator, the city clerk is authorized to execute and record in the Public Records of Broward County the appropriate release of lien document. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 3, 5-7-03)  
Sec. 2-341. - Appeal of order of special master. 
(a)  An aggrieved party, including the city, may appeal a final order of the special master to the circuit court. Such an appeal shall not be a hearing de novo but shall be limited to appellate review of the record created before special master. An appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) calendar days of the issuance of the order sought to be overturned. Failure to make such appeal within the prescribed thirty-day period shall render the findings of the special master conclusive, binding and final. 
(b)  Unless the findings of the special master are overturned in a proceeding held pursuant to this section, findings of the special master shall be admissible in any proceeding to collect unpaid civil penalties or notices of assessment. 
(c)  No aggrieved party other than the city may apply to the court for relief unless such party has first exhausted the remedies provided for in this article and has taken all available steps provided in this article. It is the intention of the city that all steps provided by this article shall be taken before any application is made to the court for relief. It is the intention of the city that, notwithstanding anything in this article to the contrary, the city shall retain all rights and remedies otherwise available to it to secure compliance with or prevent violations of the Code. For purposes of an appeal, the city clerk shall make available, for public inspection and copying, the record upon which each final order of the special master is based. The city clerk shall charge a reasonable cost commensurate with the cost for the preparation of the official record on appeal and transmittal thereof to the circuit court and for making certified copies of any record or portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 3, 5-7-03)  
Sec. 2-342. - Additional enforcement powers. 
In addition to the powers and authority given to the special master for the city pursuant to this article and the code, the city may, in its discretion, exercise any powers given to municipalities or special masters by Florida law including, but not limited to, F.S. Ch. 162, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 3, 5-7-03)  
Sec. 2-343. - Schedule of civil penalties; other penalties. 
(a)  The following table outlines certain Code violations, and the corresponding dollar amount of the civil penalties for such violations, when those violations result in the issuance of a civil citation. These penalties shall be in addition to any and all other legal remedies that may be available to the city to enforce its Code. Each description of violation in the table is for informational purposes only and is not meant to limit or define the nature of the violation. 
Violation 

Category 	First 

Offense 	Second 

Offense 	Third 

Offense 	Fourth 

Offense 
Alcoholic beverages 	$50.00 	$100.00 	$200.00 	$250.00—$500.00 
Animal nuisance 	50.00 	100.00 	200.00 	250.00—500.00 
Building code 	50.00 	100.00 	200.00 	250.00—500.00 
Business tax receipt 	50.00 	100.00 	200.00 	250.00—500.00 
County ordinances which the city has concurrent jurisdiction to enforce 	50.00 	100.00 	200.00 	250.00—500.00 
Illegal Dumping 	250.00 	300.00 	400.00 	500.00 
Fire code 	50.00 	100.00 	200.00 	250.00—500.00 
Garage sale 	50.00 	100.00 	200.00 	250.00—500.00 
Health hazard 	50.00 	100.00 	200.00 	250.00—500.00 
Junked, wrecked or abandoned property 	50.00 	100.00 	200.00 	250.00—500.00 
Landscaping 	50.00 	100.00 	200.00 	250.00—500.00 
Litter/debris 	50.00 	100.00 	200.00 	250.00—500.00 
Newsracks 	50.00 	100.00 	200.00 	250.00—500.00 
Peddler/solicitor 	50.00 	100.00 	200.00 	250.00—500.00 
Private alarm systems 	50.00 	100.00 	200.00 	250.00—500.00 
Property maintenance 	50.00 	100.00 	200.00 	250.00—500.00 
Recycling 	50.00 	100.00 	200.00 	250.00—500.00 
Sanitary nuisance 	50.00 	100.00 	200.00 	250.00—500.00 
Safety requirements or safety barriers 	50.00 	100.00 	200.00 	250.00—500.00 
Solid waste/ Recycling 	250.00 	300.00 	400.00 	500.00 
Signs/advertising 	50.00 	100.00 	200.00 	250.00—500.00 
Special parking 	50.00 	100.00 	200.00 	250.00—500.00 
Streets/sidewalks 	50.00 	100.00 	200.00 	250.00—500.00 
Subdivision regulations 	50.00 	100.00 	200.00 	250.00—500.00 
Swimming pool 	50.00 	100.00 	200.00 	250.00—500.00 
Traffic and vehicles 	50.00 	100.00 	200.00 	250.00—500.00 
Tampering with city property 	200.00 	250.00 	300.00 	350.00—500.00 
Land Development Code 	50.00 	100.00 	200.00 	250.00—500.00 
 
(b)  For violations of any section of this Code for which a specific penalty is not prescribed in this article, and that result in action other than the issuance of a civil citation, a penalty shall be imposed that shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day for a first violation and that shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for a repeat violation or, if applicable, and to the extent permitted by law, a penalty may be imposed as provided in section 2-339 of this article or section 1-13 of the Code. For the purposes of continuing violations, each day shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 3, 5-7-03; Ord. No. 07-10, § 3, 2-21-07)  
Sec. 2-344. - Authority. 
(a)  This article is adopted pursuant to F.S. Ch. 162, as may be amended from time to time, as a supplemental method of enforcing the City Code, and is enacted to protect the public health, welfare and safety of the residents of the City of Miramar, Florida. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the city from enforcing its Code by any other means including, but not limited to, a notice to appear in the county court, a civil citation, an arrest, an action before the special master, a civil action for injunctive relief, a stop work order or a demolition. 
(c)  The enforcement procedures outlined in this article are cumulative to all others and shall not be deemed to be prerequisites to filing suit for the enforcement of any section of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 3, 5-7-03)  
Sec. 2-345. - References to code enforcement board in Code. 
All references in the Code to a "code enforcement board", including sections that provide for enforcement of Code provisions by such "code enforcement board," shall be deemed to refer to the special master, and provide for enforcement of such Code provisions by the special master when applicable, as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 3, 5-7-03)  
Secs. 2-346—2-400. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - PROCUREMENT[15] 
Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-03, § 5, adopted Nov. 15, 2011, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 2-101—2-161. At the editor's discretion, to prevent duplication of section numbers, these provisions have been included as §§ 2-401—2-461. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY  
Subdivision A. - Purposes, Construction, and Application 
 
Sec. 2-401. - Purposes, rules of construction. 
(a)  Interpretation. This Code shall be construed and applied to promote its underlying purposes and policies. 
(b)  Purposes and policies. The underlying purposes and policies of this Code are: 
(1)  To simplify, clarify, and modernize the law governing procurement by the city; 
(2)  To permit the continued development of procurement policies and practices; 
(3)  To make as consistent as possible the procurement laws among the various jurisdictions; 
(4)  To provide for increased public confidence in the procedures followed in public procurement; 
(5)  To ensure the fair and equitable treatment of all persons who deal with the procurement system of the city; 
(6)  To provide increased economy in city procurement activities and to maximize to the fullest extent practicable the purchasing value of public funds of the city; 
(7)  To foster effective broad-based competition within the free enterprise system; 
(8)  To provide safeguards for the maintenance of a procurement system of quality and integrity; and 
(9)  To obtain in a cost-effective and responsive manner the materials, services, and construction required by city agencies in order for those agencies to better serve this city's businesses and residents. 
(c)  Singular-plural and gender rules. In this Code, unless the context requires otherwise: 
(1)  Words in the singular number include the plural, and those in the plural include the singular; and 
(2)  Words of a particular gender include any gender and the neuter, and when the sense so indicates, words of the neuter gender may refer to any gender. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-101), 11-15-11)  
Sec. 2-402. - Requirement of good faith. 
This Code requires all parties involved in the negotiation, performance, or administration of city contracts to act in good faith. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-102), 11-15-11)  
Sec. 2-403. - Application of this code. 
(a)  General application. This Code applies only to contracts solicited or entered into after the effective date of this Code, unless the parties agree to its application to a contract solicited or entered into prior to the effective date. 
(b)  Application to city procurement. This Code shall apply to every expenditure of public funds by the city, irrespective of their source, including federal assistance monies, except as otherwise specified in section 2-458 (compliance with federal requirements), under any contract, except that this Code shall not apply to either grants or contracts between the state, its political subdivisions and the city or other governments, except as provided in Division 9 (intergovernmental relations). It shall also apply to revenue generating contracts and the disposal of city supplies. Nothing in this Code or in policies promulgated hereunder shall prevent any governmental body or political subdivision from complying with the terms and conditions of any grant, gift, bequest, or cooperative agreement. 
(c)  Compliance required. It shall be unlawful for any city officer or employee to purchase any commodities or services or make any contract within the purview of this division unless there has been compliance with the requirements of this division. Any purchase made or contract executed contrary to the provisions hereof shall be null and void, and the city shall not be bound thereby. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-103), 11-15-11)  
Subdivision B. - Interpretations 
 
Sec. 2-404. - Interpretations. 
Written interpretations required by this Code shall be retained in the appropriate official contract file maintained by the chief procurement officer. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-104), 11-15-11)  
Subdivision C. - Definitions of Terms Used in this Code 
 
Sec. 2-405. - Definitions. 
The words defined in this division shall have the meanings set forth below unless: the context in which they are used clearly requires a different meaning; or a different definition is prescribed for a particular division or provision. 
Best interest of the city means a commodity or service for which there is competition and/or more than one venue for purchase, but due to the specific circumstances involved, staff recommends purchasing from one particular source. 
Business means any corporation, partnership, individual, sole proprietorship, joint stock company, joint venture, or any other private legal entity. 
Change order means a written order signed by the chief procurement officer, directing the contractor to make changes which the changes clause of the contract authorizes the chief procurement officer to order without the consent of the contractor. 
Chief procurement officer means the person holding the position created in section 2-408 (creation of the office of the chief procurement officer), as the head of the central procurement office of the city. 
City standard means a commodity or service that the city has established as the only type, brand, or manufacturer to purchase for ongoing compatibility, interchangeability, or for ease of maintenance. A city standard may also be available from only one source or distributor, or may have competition available, but the justification for purchase is ongoing standardization. 
Construction means the process of building, altering, repairing, improving, or demolishing any public infrastructure facility, including any public structure, public building, or other public improvements of any kind to real property. It does not include the routine operation, routine repair, or routine maintenance of any existing public infrastructure facility, including structures, buildings, or real property. 
Contract means all types of city agreements, regardless of what they may be called, for the procurement or disposal of supplies, services or construction. 
Contract modification means any written alteration in specifications, delivery point, rate of delivery, period of performance, price, quantity, or other provisions of any contract accomplished by mutual action of the parties tb [to] the contract. 
Contractor means any person having a contract with a governmental body. 
Data means recorded information, regardless of form or characteristic. 
Designee means a duly authorized representative of a person holding a superior position. 
Electronic means electrical, digital, magnetic, optical, electromagnetic, or any other similar technology. 
Emergency means an unforeseen or unanticipated urgent threat to life, health, safety and the welfare of the community or public properties. 
Emergency purchase means an unforeseen or unanticipated urgent and immediate need for goods or services where the protection of life, health, safety and the welfare of the community or the preservation of public properties would not be possible using any of the other procurement methods described in this division. 
Employee means an individual drawing a salary from a governmental body, whether elected or not, and any non-compensated individual performing personal services for any governmental body. 
Governmental body means any department, commission, council, board, bureau, committee, institution, legislative body, agency, government corporation, or other establishment or official of the executive, legislative, or judicial branch of the city. 
Grant means the furnishing by the city of assistance, whether financial or otherwise, to any person to support a program authorized by law. It does not include an award whose primary purpose is to procure an end product, whether in the form of supplies, services or construction; a contract resulting from such an award is not a grant but a procurement contract. 
Local business means a contractor who has a business location within Miramar, Florida and a current occupational license and business tax receipt issued by the city, or owned by a resident of the city, wherever located. The contractor shall have the burden of demonstrating that it meets this definition. 
May denotes the permissive. 
Person means any business, individual, union, committee, club, other organization, or group of individuals. 
Procurement means buying, purchasing, renting, leasing, or otherwise acquiring any supplies, services or construction. It also includes all functions that pertain to the obtaining of any supply, service or construction, including description of requirements, selection and solicitation of sources, preparation and award of a contract, and all phases of contract administration. 
Procurement officer means any person duly authorized to develop, recommend approval and administer contracts and make written interpretations with respect thereto. The term also includes an authorized representative acting within the limits of authority as defined by this Code. 
Public notice means the distribution or dissemination of information to interested parties using methods that are reasonably available. Such methods will often include publication in newspapers of general circulation, electronic or paper mailing lists, and web site(s) designated by the city and maintained for that purpose. 
Policy means a governmental body's statement, having general or particular applicability and future effect, designed to implement, interpret, or prescribe law or policy, or describing organization, procedure, or practice requirements, which has been promulgated in accordance with the Miramar City Code. 
Services means the furnishing of labor, time or effort by a contractor, not involving the delivery of a specific end product other than reports which are merely incidental to the required performance. This term shall not include employment agreements or collective bargaining agreements. 
Shall denotes the imperative. 
Signature means a manual or electronic identifier, or the electronic result of an authentication technique attached to or logically associated with a record that is intended by the person using it to have the same force and effect as a manual signature. Such signatures shall conform to Chapter 668, Florida Statutes, Electronic Commerce. 
Small purchases means a purchase of or contract for commodities or services that is estimated by the chief procurement officer to cost seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) or less. 
Sole source means a commodity or service for which there is no known competition or one that is only available from one source - be it the manufacturer, their designated distributor, or the service supplier. 
Standards (standardization) committee means an internal city committee, appointed by the chief procurement officer, consisting of cross-functional representation including procurement, users, and other internal stakeholders impacted by the decisions of the committee. 
Supplies means all property, including but not limited to equipment, materials, printing, insurance, and leases of real property, excluding land or a permanent interest in land. 
Using department means any department of the city which utilizes any supplies, services or construction procured under this Code. 
Written or in writing means the product of any method of forming characters on paper, other materials, or viewable screens, which can be read, retrieved, and reproduced, including information that is electronically transmitted and stored. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-105), 11-15-11; Ord. No. 18-12 , § 2, 8-22-18)  
Subdivision D. - Public Access 
 
Sec. 2-406. - Public access to procurement information. 
Procurement information shall be a public record to the extent provided in Chapter 119, Florida Statutes, and shall be available to the public as provided in Chapter 119. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-106), 11-15-11)  
Sec. 2-407. - Authorization for the use of electronic transmissions. 
For the purposes of this division only, the use of electronic media, including acceptance of electronic signatures, is authorized consistent with the state's applicable statutory, regulatory or other guidance for use of such media, so long as such guidance provides for: 
(1)  Appropriate security to prevent unauthorized access to the bidding, approval, and award processes; 
(2)  Accurate retrieval or conversion of electronic forms of such information into a medium which permits inspection and copying; 
(3)  Is not applicable to the execution of contracts by the city manager; and 
(4)  Does not conflict with any provision of the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-107), 11-15-11)  
DIVISION 2. - PROCUREMENT ORGANIZATION  
Subdivision A. - Chief Procurement Officer 
 
Sec. 2-408. - Creation of the office of the chief procurement officer. 
There is hereby created an office of the procurement department, headed by the chief procurement officer. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-108), 11-15-11)  
Sec. 2-409. - Appointment and qualifications. 
The city manager shall appoint the chief procurement officer. The chief procurement officer shall have relevant, recent experience in public procurement and in the procurement of supplies, services or construction, and shall be a person with demonstrated executive and organizational ability. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-109), 11-15-11)  
Sec. 2-410. - Tenure, removal, and compensation. 
(a)  Tenure and removal. The chief procurement officer shall be a full-time public official of the city and may be removed from office by the city manager pursuant to city human resource policies. 
(b)  Compensation. The chief procurement officer shall be compensated as determined by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-110), 11-15-11)  
Sec. 2-411. - Authority of the chief procurement officer. 
(a)  Principal contracting officer of the city. The chief procurement officer shall serve as the central procurement officer of the city and be head and have general supervision over the procurement department. The city manager may delegate to the chief procurement officer any authority, or portion of that authority, granted to the city manager in this division. The city manager may also delegate "small purchase" authority to any other city official or employee. This delegation is limited to the use of purchase cards ("PCards") as defined by city policy. 
(b)  Power to adopt operational procedures. Consistent with the provisions of this Code, the chief procurement officer may adopt operational procedures governing the internal functions of the procurement department. 
(c)  Duties. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, the chief procurement officer shall: 
(1)  Procure or supervise the procurement of all supplies, services and construction needed by the city; 
(2)  Exercise general supervision and control over all inventories of supplies belonging to the city; 
(3)  Sell, trade, or otherwise dispose of surplus supplies belonging to the city; 
(4)  Establish and maintain programs for the inspection, testing, and acceptance of supplies, services and construction; and 
(5)  Ensure compliance with this Code and implementing policy by reviewing and monitoring procurements conducted by any designee, department or official delegated authority by the city manager. 
(d)  Policies. The chief procurement officer is authorized to adopt policies with the city manager's approval, consistent with the Code, governing the procurement, management, control, and disposal of any and all supplies, services and construction procured by the city, unless exempted pursuant to section 2-413. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-111), 11-15-11)  
Sec. 2-412. - Award authority. 
(a)  City commission approval. 
(1)  An acquisition of, or a contract for, commodities or services where the expenditure by the City is estimated to be seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) or greater from the same person or entity during the course of a fiscal year shall require the approval of the city commission, regardless of whether the competitive bidding or competitive proposal procedures were followed. However, emergency purchases as described in section 2-425 shall not require advance city commission approval when an unforeseen or unanticipated urgent threat to life, health, safety or the welfare of the community or public properties where immediate action is required and a quorum of the city commission for an Emergency special meeting cannot be obtained before the deadline for action. In such Emergency situations, the city manager may approve the purchase or contract, subject to ratification by the city commission. 
(2)  Acquisitions of, or contracts for, commodities or services from the same person or entity exceeding the aggregate sum of one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00) shall not be permitted from the same person or entity during the course of any fiscal year unless such purchases are first authorized by the city commission. This provision shall not apply to purchases of utilities or to ongoing contracts. 
(b)  City manager delegation of authority. The City Manager has the discretion to authorize any member of his senior executive staff to approve and execute contracts for the purchase of commodities or services in an amount of seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) or less. 
(c)  Contract renewals. When a contract is entered into by the city pursuant to city commission approval and provides for one or more renewals, only the city commission is authorized to approve such renewals. 
(d)  When a contract is entered into by the city pursuant to city commission approval and provides for one or more automatic renewals unless one party notifies the other of its intent not to renew, only the city commission is authorized to decide not to renew the contract. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-112), 11-15-11; Ord. No. 18-12 , § 3, 8-22-18)  
Subdivision B. - Organization of Public Procurement 
 
Sec. 2-413. - Procurement authority exemptions. 
Unless otherwise ordered by policy, the following supplies, services and construction may be procured through the procurement department, without competition, subject to the requirements of this Code. 
(1)  Emergency purchases. When there is an unforeseen or unanticipated urgent threat to life, health, safety or welfare of the community or public properties that require the immediate purchase of commodities or services, the city manager is empowered to waive competitive bidding or competitive proposals and authorize the chief procurement officer to secure by open market procedure, to the extent possible, any commodities or services, notwithstanding the estimated cost of the commodities or services, subject to ratification by the city commission. 
(2)  Professional services. Contracts for professional services involving peculiar skill, ability, experience or expertise, which are in their nature unique and not subject to competitive bidding or competitive proposals, are exempt from this section of the Code; however, state laws, such as the Consultants' Competitive Negotiation Act ("CCNA"), to the extent applicable, shall be followed. The chief procurement officer must issue a written determination that the conditions specified herein exist for any purchase made under this subsection. If the chief procurement officer determines that the specified conditions do not exist and that competition is appropriate, any of the methods of source selection in section 2-419 may be used. 
(3)  City standard commodities. A city standard is the adoption of a single product or group of products to be used by different departments, all parts of the city or the city joined with other government jurisdictions. The city may develop a city standard commodity by use of a standards committee. 
(4)  Sole source. A sole source is a situation where commodities or services are available from only one responsible contractor. A contract may be awarded without competition when the chief procurement officer, after conducting a good faith review of available sources, determines in writing, pursuant to a written request from a department director providing reasons why the contract is not suitable for competitive quotations, bids or proposals, that the commodities or services are available from only one source. At the chief procurement officer's option, the research of the available sources may be delegated to the requesting department, provided that the requesting department uses due diligence to conduct the research. 
(5)  Disaster preparedness. Contracts for and purchases of commodities or services that are made in contemplation and preparation for the occurrence of a natural or manmade disaster or civil unrest, where time or availability rather than price is the controlling factor, are exempt from this section of the Code. 
The chief procurement officer shall report biweekly to the city manager and city commission any purchases made pursuant to the disaster preparedness exemption. Such report shall include vendor name, address, item description, cost and purpose of purchase. 
(6)  Utilization of other governmental agencies' contracts. Commodities or services that are the subject of contracts with the state, its political subdivisions or other governmental entities in the State of Florida, or with the United States government, are exempt from this section; provided, however, that this subsection shall apply only if (i) the commodities or services are the subject of a price schedule negotiated by the State of Florida, or (ii) the commodities or services are the subject of a contract with another governmental entity in the State of Florida that is based strictly on competitive bids or competitive proposals and not on any preference. Such utilization of other government agencies' contracts shall only be valid during the term of that contract. 
(7)  Cooperative purchasing. Cooperative purchasing plans are exempt from the competitive bidding/proposal requirements of the Code. The Florida Interlocal Cooperation Act of 1969 authorizes a "public agency", including Florida cities, to make the most efficient use of their powers by enabling them to cooperate with other localities "of this state or of any state of the United States" on a basis of mutual advantage and thereby provide services and facilities. This authorization includes the manner in which purchases shall be made and contracts entered into. 
The city, at its discretion, may participate in cooperative purchasing plans with other public agencies within this state and any other state providing that the source selection methods are substantially equal to the source selection methods in the City Code. The cooperative agreement must comply with the spirit of the Florida Interlocal Cooperation Act of 1969. 
(8)  Best interest of city. Purchases of and contracts for commodities or services are exempt from this section of the Code when the city commission declares by a four-fifths ( 4/5 ) affirmative vote that the process of competitive bidding and competitive proposals is not in the best interest of the city. The city commission shall make specific factual findings that support its determination, and such contracts shall not be placed on the city commission consent agenda. 
(9)  Other exceptions. With the approval of the city manager, the following supplies and services may be procured without competition, subject to the requirements of this Code: 
a.  Servicing or warranty work of equipment by an authorized dealer or representative when work by another party would void a warrantee or guarantee; 
b.  Renewal of software licenses; 
c.  Used equipment and machinery; 
d.  Advertising in newspapers, periodicals and related publications, television, radio and billboards; 
e.  Commodities available only from the federal government, the State of Florida or Florida local governments; 
f.  Fees, including medical fees and physician fees; 
g.  Freight, storage charges, and demurrage; 
h.  Licenses; 
i.  Membership in professional, trade and other similar associations; 
j.  Postage; 
k.  Published books, manuals, maps, periodicals, films, technical pamphlets, and copyrighted educational aids for use in libraries and for other informational and instructional purposes in instances in which other applicable law does not provide a restrictive means for the acquisition of them; 
l.  Real property; 
m.  Services of visiting speakers, lecturers, and performing artists; 
n.  Utility services, the rates for which are subject to regulation by a state or federal regulatory agency; 
o.  Works of art for museum and public display; and 
p.  Goods purchased for resale to the general public in a retail sale location operated and owned by the city. 
q.  Services of professionals to assist in the identification, inspection, due diligence investigation and appraisal of properties for potential acquisition, and maintenance of the properties after acquisition or such other services as may be necessary or desirable in connection with the Property Acquisition Program, provided for in Section 2-262. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-113), 11-15-11; Ord. No. 19-12 , § 6, 2-20-19)  
Subdivision C. - City Procurement Policies 
 
Sec. 2-414. - City procurement policies. 
(a)  Policies. Policies shall be promulgated in accordance with the applicable provisions of the City Code. 
(b)  Chief procurement officer shall not delegate power to promulgate policies. The chief procurement officer shall not delegate the power to promulgate policies. 
(c)  Policies shall not change existing contract rights. No policy shall change any commitment, right, or obligation of the city or of a contractor under a contract in existence on the effective date of such policy. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-114), 11-15-11)  
Subdivision D. - Coordination, Training, and Education 
 
Sec. 2-415. - Collection of data concerning public procurement. 
The chief procurement officer shall cooperate with the city budget office and the finance department in the preparation of statistical data concerning the procurement, usage, and disposition of all supplies, services and construction, and employ such trained personnel as may be necessary to carry out this function. All using departments shall furnish such reports as the chief procurement officer may require concerning usage, needs, and stocks on hand, and the chief procurement officer shall have authority to prescribe forms to be used by the using departments in requisitioning, ordering, and reporting of supplies, services and construction. The chief procurement officer shall provide bi-annual reports of all information collected pursuant to this section to the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-115), 11-15-11)  
Sec. 2-416. - Procurement advisory council; other advisory groups. 
(a)  Procurement advisory council. The chief procurement officer may establish a procurement advisory council and allocate such funds as may be available and the chief procurement officer shall deem appropriate. If created, such council, upon adequate public notice, shall meet at least one time a year for the discussion of problems and recommendations for improvement of the procurement process. When requested by the chief procurement officer, the procurement advisory council may conduct studies, research, analyses, and make reports and recommendations with respect to subjects or matters within the jurisdiction of the chief procurement officer. The procurement advisory council may consist of qualified representatives of city staff and members of other local governments and such other persons as the chief procurement officer may deem desirable. 
(b)  Other advisory groups. The chief procurement officer may appoint advisory groups to assist with respect to specifications or procurement in specific areas, procurement training and with respect to any other matters within the authority of the chief procurement officer. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-116), 11-15-11)  
Sec. 2-417. - Procurement institute. 
(a)  Creation. The chief procurement officer may establish and maintain a procurement institute, either alone or in cooperation with the state, federal government, municipalities or other units of local government, or other persons. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-117), 11-15-11)  
DIVISION 3. - SOURCE SELECTION AND CONTRACT FORMATION  
Subdivision A. - Definitions 
 
Sec. 2-418. - Definitions of terms used in this division. 
(a)  Best value procurement means the highest overall value to the city based on objective factors that include but are not limited to price, quality, design and workmanship. 
(b)  Cost-reimbursement contract means a contract under which a contractor is reimbursed for costs which are allowable and allocable in accordance with the contract terms and the provisions of this Code, and a fee, if any. 
(c)  Established catalog price means the price included in a catalog, price list, schedule, or other form that: 
(1)  Is regularly maintained by a manufacturer or contractor; 
(2)  Is either published or otherwise available for inspection by customers; and 
(3)  States prices at which sales are currently or were last made to a significant number of any categories of buyers or buyers constituting the general buying public for the supplies or services involved. 
(d)  Invitation for bids ("IFB") means all documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting bids. 
(e)  Purchase description means the words used in a solicitation to describe the supplies, services or construction to be purchased, and includes specifications attached to or made a part of the solicitation. 
(f)  Request for proposals ("RFP") means all documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting best value proposals. 
(g)  Responsible bidder or offeror means a person who has the capability in all respects to fully perform all contract requirements, and the integrity and reliability which will assure good faith performance. 
(h)  Responsive bidder or offeror means a person who has submitted a bid which conforms in all material respects to the invitation for bids. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-118), 11-15-11)  
Subdivision B. - Methods of Source Selection 
 
Sec. 2-419. - Methods of source selection. 
Unless otherwise authorized by law, all city contracts shall be awarded by one of the following methods: 
(1)  Section 2-421 (competitive sealed bidding); 
(2)  Section 2-422 (competitive sealed proposals); 
(3)  Section 2-423 (small purchases); 
(4)  Section 2-424 (sole source procurement); 
(5)  Section 2-425 (emergency procurements); 
(6)  Section 2-426 (special procurements); 
(7)  Section 5-209 (architectural and engineering services). 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-119), 11-15-11)  
Sec. 2-420. - Bid thresholds. 
The bid thresholds for city procurements are: 
$0.00—$2,500.00 	No competition required 
$2,500.01—$10,000.00 	A minimum of 3 oral or written quotations required 
$10,000.01—$75,000.00 	A minimum of 3 written quotations required 
$75,000.01 + 	Formal advertised bids or proposals required 
 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-120), 11-15-11; Ord. No. 18-12 , § 4, 8-22-18)  
Sec. 2-421. - Competitive sealed bidding. 
(a)  Conditions for use. Contracts shall be awarded by competitive sealed bidding except as otherwise provided in section 2-419 (methods of source selection). 
(b)  Invitation for bids. An IFB shall be issued and shall include a purchase description and all contractual terms and conditions applicable to the procurement. 
(c)  Public notice. Adequate public notice of the invitation for bids shall be given a reasonable time prior to the date set forth therein for the opening of bids. 
(d)  Advertisement for bids required. Notice of the competitive bid shall be advertised at least one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, calling for sealed bids for the work to be done under the proposed contract, at least ten (10) days before the bids are due to be received or longer if required by state law. 
(e)  Cone of silence. Unless waived by the city commission, all contracts for the provision of goods and services other than professional services contracts in excess of seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) shall be subject to a "cone of silence". 
(1)  Definition. 
Cone of silence is hereby defined to mean a prohibition on: (i) any communication regarding a particular RFP, request for qualifications ("RFQ"), request for letters of interest ("RLOI"), or IFB between a potential contractor, service provider, bidder, proposer, offeror, lobbyist, or consultant and the city's personnel including but not limited to the city manager or any member of the city's professional staff; and (ii) any communication regarding a particular RFP, RFQ, RLOI, or IFB between a potential contractor, service provider, bidder, proposer, offeror, lobbyist, or consultant and any member of the selection committee therefore. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the cone of silence shall not apply to: (i) communications with the city attorney and his or her staff; (ii) communications between a potential contractor, service provider, bidder, proposer, offeror, consultant or lobbyist and employees of the procurement department; (iii) duly noticed site visits to determine the competency of bidders, proposers, or offerors regarding a particular solicitation during the time period between the opening of bids, proposals, or offers, and the time the city manager or his designee makes his or her written recommendation; or (iv) any emergency purchase of goods or services pursuant to section 2-425. 
(2)  Procedure. A cone of silence shall be imposed upon each RFP, RFQ, RLOI or IFB at the time of short listing by the selection team for responses for the RFP, RLI, RFQ; and for procurements when a short listing is not created, such as a bid, then at the bid opening or at the time responses are received. At the time of imposition of the cone of silence, the chief procurement officer shall provide public notice of the cone of silence by posting notice at City Hall. The chief procurement officer shall issue a written notice thereof to affected departments, file a copy of such notice with the city clerk and the mayor and each city commissioner. Any advertisement and public solicitation for goods and services shall contain a statement disclosing the requirements of this subsection. The provisions of the cone of silence set forth in this section as it pertains to the prohibition of any communications shall be included in each RFP, RFQ, RLOI, or IFB solicitation. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the imposition of a cone of silence on a particular RFP, RFQ, RLOI, or IFB shall not preclude staff from obtaining industry comment or performing market research therefore, provided all communications between a potential contractor, service provider, bidder, proposer, offeror, lobbyist, or consultant and any member of the city's professional staff including, but not limited to, the city manager and his or her staff are in writing or such communications are made at a duly noticed public meeting. The potential contractor, service provider, bidder, proposer, offeror, lobbyist, or consultant shall file a copy of any written communication with the office of the city clerk. The office of the city clerk shall make copies available to any person upon request. 
The cone of silence shall terminate at the time the city manager or his designee makes his or her recommendation to the city commission at a duly scheduled meeting of the city commission; provided, however, that if the city commission refers the city manager's recommendation back to the city manager or staff for further review, the cone of silence shall be re imposed until such time as the city manager makes a subsequent recommendation. 
(3)  Exceptions. The foregoing provisions shall not apply to oral communications at pre-bid or pre-proposal conferences, oral presentations before selection committees, contract negotiations, public presentations made to the city commission during any duly noticed public meeting, or communications in writing at any time with any city employee, official or member of the city commission that is not related to or in reference to the RFP, RFQ, RLOI, or IFB process. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit any lobbyist, bidder, proposer, offeror or other person or entity from publicly addressing the city commissioners during any duly noticed public meeting regarding action on any contract. 
(4)  Penalties. Violation of this section by a particular bidder, proposer, or offeror shall render any RFP, RFQ, RLOI or IFB award to said bidder, proposer, or offeror voidable. Any person who violates a provision of this article shall be prohibited from serving on a Miramar City competitive selection committee. In addition to any other penalty provided by law, violation of any provision of this article by a Miramar City Employee shall subject said employee to disciplinary action. Additionally, any person who has personal knowledge of a violation of this article shall report such violation to the city manager and the city attorney. 
(f)  Award. The contract shall be awarded with reasonable promptness by written notice to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder whose bid meets the requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids. Best value contracts shall be awarded to the bidder who provides the highest overall value to the city based on objective factors that include but are not limited to price, quality, design, and workmanship. In the event all bids for a construction project exceed available funds as certified by the appropriate fiscal officer, and the low responsive and responsible bid does not exceed such funds by more than five (5) percent, the chief procurement officer is authorized in situations where time or economic considerations preclude re-solicitation of work of a reduced scope to negotiate an adjustment of the bid price, including changes in the bid requirements, with the low responsive and responsible bidder, in order to bring the bid within the amount of available funds. 
(g)  Availability of funds. Except in cases of emergency, the chief procurement officer, city manager or designee shall not issue any order for delivery on a contract or any open-market order unless and until the director of the finance department, the budget manager, or their designees certify that there are unencumbered funds available in the using department's budget in excess of all unpaid obligations to defray the cost of such commodities or services. 
(h)  Multi-step sealed bidding. When it is considered impractical to initially prepare a purchase description to support an award based on price, an invitation for bids may be issued requesting the submission of unpriced offers to be followed by an invitation for bids limited to those bidders whose offers have been qualified under the criteria set forth in the first solicitation. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-121), 11-15-11)  
Sec. 2-422. - Competitive sealed proposals. 
(a)  Conditions for use. 
(1)  A contract may be entered into by competitive sealed proposals when the chief procurement officer or a designee above the level of procurement analyst determines in writing that the use of competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not advantageous to the city. 
(2)  Policies may provide that it is either not practicable or not advantageous to the city to procure specified types of supplies, services or construction by competitive sealed bidding. 
(3)  Contracts for the design-build, design-build-operate-maintain, or design-build-finance-operate-maintain project delivery methods specified in Division 5 shall be entered into by competitive sealed proposals, except as otherwise provided in subsections (3), (4), (5), and (6) of section 2-419 (methods of source selection). 
(b)  Request for proposals. Proposals shall be solicited through an RFP. 
(c)  Public notice and cone of silence. Adequate public notice of the RRP shall be given in the same manner as provided in section 2-421. 
(d)  Award. Award shall be made to the responsible offeror whose proposal conforms to the solicitation and is determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the city taking into consideration price and the evaluation factors set forth in the RFP. No other factors or criteria shall be used in the evaluation. The contract file shall contain the basis on which the award is made. Written notice of the award of a contract to the successful offeror shall be promptly given to all offerors. 
(e)  The chief procurement officer may appoint an evaluation committee to assist the chief procurement officer in evaluating offers and making award recommendations. The number of members shall be at the discretion of the chief procurement officer. The evaluation committee shall be chaired by a member of the procurement department professional staff. The chief procurement officer may choose members from the client department, other city employees, or any other expert as necessary, providing that the client department may not have a majority of members on the committee. The chief procurement officer may also appoint non-voting advisory members and experts as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-122), 11-15-11)  
Sec. 2-423. - Small purchases. 
A purchase of or contract for commodities or services that is estimated by the chief procurement officer to cost seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) or less may be purchased either in the open market, without newspaper advertisement and without observing the procedures prescribed in the competitive bid or proposal section of this division, or by the procedures set out in the competitive bid or proposal section of this division as deemed appropriate by the chief procurement officer, except as otherwise provided by law. 
Purchases up to two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) or a lower dollar threshold set by the city manager do not require competition. However, city staff should strive to obtain goods and services in as economic manner as possible, and is encouraged to procure such goods and services from a local vendor when economically viable. City staff is prohibited from dividing purchases to avoid the dollar threshold for competition. 
All purchases of greater than the estimated cost of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) or a lower dollar threshold set by the city manager shall require three (3) quotations. For purchases over the estimated cost of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), said quotations shall be in written form. When using the open market procedure, the chief procurement officer may solicit, or oversee the solicitation of, quotations by: 
(1)  Direct mail requests to prospective contractors; 
(2)  Telephone; 
(3)  Public notice; 
(4)  Facsimile; and 
(5)  Internet. 
The chief procurement officer shall keep a record of all open market orders and the bids submitted in competition thereon and such records shall be open to public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-123), 11-15-11; Ord. No. 18-12 , § 6, 8-22-18)  
Sec. 2-424. - Sole source procurement. 
A contract may be awarded for a supply, service or construction item without competition when the chief procurement officer or a designee above the level of procurement analyst determines in writing that there is only one source for the required supply, service or construction item. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-124), 11-15-11)  
Sec. 2-425. - Emergency purchases. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the chief procurement officer or a designee may make or authorize others to make emergency purchases when there exists an unforeseen or unanticipated urgent threat to life, health, safety or welfare of the community or public properties, provided that such emergency purchases shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. A written determination of the basis for the emergency and for the selection of the particular contractor shall be included in the contract file. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-125), 11-15-11)  
Sec. 2-426. - Special procurements. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the chief procurement officer may, with prior public notice, initiate procurement above the small purchase amount specified in section 2-423 where the chief procurement officer determines that an unusual or unique situation exists that makes the application of all requirements of competitive sealed bidding or competitive sealed proposals contrary to the public interest. Any special procurement under this section shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. A written determination of the basis for the procurement and for the selection of the particular contractor shall be included by the chief procurement officer in the contract file, and a report shall be made publicly available at least annually describing all such interpretations made subsequent to the prior report. 
Special procurements methods authorized herein but not limited to include: 
(1)  Request for letters of interest. A written solicitation for offers with the title, date and hour of the submission deadline designated. An RLOI shall include but is not limited to general information and submission deadline. The city shall engage in competitive negotiations with responsible offerors determined to be reasonably susceptible of being selected for award for the purpose of clarification to assure full understanding of and conformance to the solicitation requirements. Offerors shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion. 
(2)  Request for qualifications. A written solicitation for competitive sealed offers with the title, date and hour of the public opening designated. An RFQ shall include but is not limited to general information, functional or general specifications, statement of work, and instructions for offer and evaluation criteria. All RFQs shall state the relative importance of the evaluation criteria. The city may engage in competitive negotiations with responsible offerors determined to be reasonably susceptible of being selected for award for the purpose of clarification to assure full understanding of and conformance to the solicitation requirements. Offerors shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and revision of offers and such revisions may be permitted after submissions and prior to award for the purpose of obtaining the best and final offer. 
(3)  Reverse auction. An online auction in which sellers bid against each other to win a buyer's business. It is typically used to purchase commodities from multiple pre-qualified providers. 
(4)  Other special procurements. The utilization of any procurement method not otherwise described in this Code shall require prior approval by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-126), 11-15-11)  
Sec. 2-427. - Requisitions. 
All requests for goods, services and construction to be procured shall be in writing and in the form of a written or electronic purchase requisition. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-127), 11-15-11)  
DIVISION 4. - SPECIFICATIONS  
Subdivision A. - Definitions 
 
Sec. 2-428. - Definitions of terms used in this division. 
Specification means any description of the physical or functional characteristics, or of the nature of a supply, service or construction item. It may include a description of any requirement for inspecting, testing, or preparing a supply, service or construction item for delivery. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-128), 11-15-11)  
Sec. 2-429. - Maximum practicable competition. 
All specifications shall seek to promote overall economy for the purposes intended, encourage competition in satisfying the city's needs, and shall not be unduly restrictive. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-129), 11-15-11)  
Sec. 2-430. - Specifications prepared by other than city personnel. 
The requirements of this division regarding the purposes and non-restrictiveness of specifications shall apply to all specifications prepared other than by city personnel, including but not limited to those prepared by architects, engineers and designers. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-130), 11-15-11)  
DIVISION 5. - PROCUREMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITIES AND SERVICES  
Subdivision A. - Definitions 
 
Sec. 2-431. - Definitions. 
Architectural and engineering services means those professional services within the scope of architecture, professional engineering, landscape architecture, or registered surveying and mapping, as defined by Florida Statutes. 
Design-bid-build means a project delivery method in which the city sequentially awards separate contracts, the first for architectural and engineering services to design the project, and the second for construction of the project according to the design. 
Design-build means a project delivery method in which the city enters into a enters into a single contract for design and construction of an infrastructure facility. 
Design-build-finance-operate-maintain means a project delivery method in which the city enters into a single contract for design, construction, finance, maintenance and operation of an infrastructure facility over a contractually defined period. No city funds are appropriated to pay for any part of the services provided by the contractor during the contract period. 
Design-build-operate-maintain means a project delivery method in which the city enters into a single contract for design, construction, maintenance, and operation of an infrastructure facility over a contractually defined period. All or a portion of the funds required to pay for the services provided by the contractor during the contract period are either appropriated by the city prior to award of the contract or secured by the city through user charges. 
Design requirements means the written description of the infrastructure facility or services to be procured under this division, including: 
(1)  Required features, functions, characteristics, qualities and properties that are required by the city; 
(2)  The anticipated schedule, including start, duration, and completion; and 
(3)  Estimated budgets (as applicable to the specific procurement) for design, construction, operation and maintenance. 
The design requirements may, but need not, include drawings and other documents illustrating the scale and relationship of the features, functions, and characteristics of the project. 
Infrastructure facility means a building, structure, or networks of buildings, structures, pipes, controls, and equipment that provide transportation, utilities, public education, or public safety services. Included are government office buildings; public schools; courthouses; police holding facilities; water treatment plants, distribution systems and pumping stations; wastewater treatment plants, collection systems, and pumping stations; solid waste disposal plants, incinerators, landfills, and related facilities; public roads and streets; highways; public parking facilities; and public transportation systems. 
Job order contract means a firm-fixed price indefinite delivery, indefinite quantity contract for the minor construction, repair, rehabilitation or alteration of a public improvement. 
Operations and maintenance means a project delivery method whereby the city enters into a single contract for the routine operation, routine repair and routine maintenance of an infrastructure facility. 
Proposal development documents means drawings and other design related documents that are sufficient to fix and describe the size and character of an infrastructure facility as to architectural, structural, mechanical and electrical systems, materials, and such other elements as may be appropriate to the applicable project delivery method. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-131), 11-15-11)  
Subdivision B. - Contracting for Infrastructure Facilities and Services 
 
Sec. 2-432. - Authority. 
In addition to the authorities listed in section 2-432 (authority), the following shall apply: 
(1)  Section 255.20, Florida Statutes, as amended. 
(2)  Section 255.0525, Florida Statutes, as amended. 
(3)  Section 255.071, Florida Statutes, as amended. 
(4)  Section 287.055, Florida Statutes, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-132), 11-15-11)  
Sec. 2-433. - Project delivery methods authorized. 
(a)  The following project delivery methods are authorized for procurements relating to infrastructure facilities and services in the city: 
(1)  Design-bid-build; 
(2)  Construction management at-risk; 
(3)  Design-build; 
(4)  Design-build-operate-maintain; 
(5)  Design-build-finance-operate-maintain; 
(6)  Job order contract; 
(7)  Operations and maintenance; and 
(8)  Small purchases. 
(b)  Participation in a report or study that is subsequently used in the preparation of design requirements for a project shall not disqualify a firm from participating as a member of a proposing team in a design-build, design-build-operate-maintain, or design-build-finance-operate-maintain procurement unless such participation would provide the firm with a substantial competitive advantage. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-133), 11-15-11)  
Subdivision C. - Bonds, Insurance, Guarantees 
 
Sec. 2-434. - Bid security. 
(a)  Requirement for bid security. Bid security shall be required for all competitive sealed bidding for construction contracts in design-bid-build procurement services when the price is estimated by the chief procurement officer to exceed two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00). Bid security shall be a bond provided by a surety company authorized to do business in this state, or the equivalent in cash, or otherwise supplied in a form satisfactory to the city. Nothing herein prevents the requirement of such bonds on such contracts under two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) when circumstances warrant. 
(b)  Amount of security. Bid security shall be in an amount equal to at least five (5) percent of the amount of the bid. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-134), 11-15-11)  
Sec. 2-435. - Contract performance and payment bonds. 
(a)  When required—Amounts. When a construction, design-build, design-build-operate-maintain, or design-build-finance-operate-maintain contract is awarded in excess of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00), the following bonds or security shall be delivered to the city and shall become binding on the parties upon the execution of the contract: 
(1)  A performance bond satisfactory to the city, executed by a surety company authorized to do business in this state or otherwise secured in a manner satisfactory to the city, in an amount equal to one hundred (100) percent of the portion of the contract price that does not include the cost of operation, maintenance and finance; and 
(2)  A payment bond satisfactory to the city, executed by a surety company authorized to do business in this state or otherwise secured in a manner satisfactory to the city for the protection of all persons supplying labor and material to the contractor or its subcontractors for the performance of the construction work provided for in the contract. The bond shall be in an amount equal to one hundred (100) percent of the portion of the contract price that does not include the cost of operation, maintenance and finance. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-135), 11-15-11)  
DIVISION 6. - MODIFICATION AND TERMINATION OF CONTRACTS FOR SUPPLIES AND SERVICES 
 
Sec. 2-436. - Contract clauses and their administration. 
(a)  Contract clauses. The chief procurement officer or the city attorney may promulgate policies permitting or requiring the inclusion of clauses providing for adjustments in prices, time of performance, or other contract provisions as appropriate covering the following subjects: 
(1)  The unilateral right of the city to order in writing: 
a.  Changes in the work within the scope of the contract; and 
b.  Temporary stopping of the work or delaying performance; and 
(2)  Variations occurring between estimated quantities of work in a contract and actual quantities. 
(b)  Modification of clauses. The chief procurement officer or the city attorney may vary the clauses promulgated by the chief procurement officer or the city attorney under subsection (a) of this section for inclusion in any particular city contract provided that any variations are supported by a written determination that states the circumstances justifying such variation and provided that notice of any such material variation be stated in the IFB or RFP. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-136), 11-15-11)  
DIVISION 7. - SUPPLY MANAGEMENT  
Subdivision A. - Definitions 
 
Sec. 2-437. - Definitions of terms used in this division. 
Excess supplies means any supplies other than expendable supplies having a remaining useful life but which are no longer required by the using department in possession of the supplies. 
Expendable supplies means all tangible supplies other than nonexpendable supplies. 
Nonexpendable supplies means all tangible supplies having an original acquisition cost of over one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per unit and a probable useful life of more than one year. 
Supplies means, for purposes of this division, supplies owned by the city. 
Surplus supplies means any supplies other than expendable supplies no longer having any use to the city. This includes obsolete supplies, scrap materials, and nonexpendable supplies that have completed their useful life cycle. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-137), 11-15-11)  
Subdivision B. - Policies Required 
 
Sec. 2-438. - Supply management policies required. 
The chief procurement officer shall promulgate policies governing: 
(1)  The management of supplies during their entire life cycle; 
(2)  The sale, lease, or disposal of surplus supplies by public auction, competitive sealed bidding, or other appropriate method designated by the city, provided that no employee of the owning or disposing department shall be entitled to purchase any such supplies; and 
(3)  Transfer of excess supplies. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-138), 11-15-11)  
Subdivision C. - Proceeds 
 
Sec. 2-439. - Allocation of proceeds from sale or disposal of surplus supplies. 
Unless otherwise provided by law, the chief procurement officer shall be empowered to allocate proceeds from the sale, lease or disposal of surplus supplies. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-139), 11-15-11)  
DIVISION 8. - LEGAL AND CONTRACTUAL REMEDIES  
[Subdivision A. - Procurement Appeals Board] 
 
Sec. 2-440. - Creation of the procurement appeals board. 
(a)  There is hereby established in the executive branch of the city a procurement appeals board to be composed of the chief procurement officer, the director of the finance department, the city manager or designee, and the director or designee of the department or office for which the contract is to be awarded. The chief procurement officer, or the director or designee of the department or office for which the contract is to be awarded, shall serve as the chairperson of the committee. The city attorney or designee shall be counsel to the committee. 
(b)  The chairperson may adopt operational procedures and issue such orders, not inconsistent with this Code, as may be necessary in the execution of the board's functions. The chairperson's authority may be delegated to the board's members and employees, but only members of the board may issue decisions on appeals. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-140), 11-15-11)  
Sec. 2-441. - Rules of procedure. 
The procurement appeals board shall adopt rules of procedure which, to the fullest extent possible, will provide for the expeditious resolution of controversies. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-141), 11-15-11)  
Sec. 2-442. - Decisions of the procurement appeals board. 
Acting by one or more of its members, the procurement appeals board shall issue a decision in writing or take other appropriate action on each appeal submitted. A copy of any decision shall be provided to all parties and the chief procurement officer. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-142), 11-15-11)  
Sec. 2-443. - Jurisdiction of the procurement appeals board. 
Any party aggrieved by the solicitation process or the notice of intent to award a contract must appeal to the procurement appeals board and comply with the city's administrative procedures before the party may file an appeal in the circuit court. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-143), 11-15-11)  
Sec. 2-444. - Authority to resolve protests of solicitations or awards. 
(a)  After a notice of intent to award a contract is posted, any actual or prospective bidder who is aggrieved in connection with the pending award of the contract or any element of the process leading to the award of the contract may protest to the chief procurement officer. A protest must be filed within five (5) business days after posting or any right to protest is forfeited. The protest must be in writing, must identify the name and address of the protester, and must include a factual summary of, and the basis for, the protest. Filing shall be considered complete when the protest and accompanying fee is received by the chief procurement officer. 
(b)  The procurement appeals board shall have the authority to review, settle and resolve the protest. The board shall be comprised of the chief procurement officer, the director of the finance department, the city manager or designee, and the director or designee of the department or office for which the contract is to be awarded. However, no more than one person may serve on both the procurement appeals board and the evaluation committee for the particular award that is the subject of the protest. The board's review shall be informal. The chief procurement officer or the director or designee of the department or office for which the contract is to be awarded shall serve as the chairperson of the board. 
(c)  If the procurement appeals board determines that the pending award of a contract or any element of the process leading to the award involved a significant violation of law or applicable rule or policy, all steps necessary and proper to correct the violation shall be taken. If the board determines that the protest is without merit, the chief procurement officer shall promptly issue a decision in writing stating the reason for the decision and furnish a copy to the protester and any other interested party, and the process leading to the award shall proceed forthwith. 
(d)  In the event of a timely protest, the chief procurement officer shall stay the award of the contract unless after consulting with the city attorney and the using agency, the chief procurement officer determines that the award of the contract without delay is necessary to protect substantial interests of the city. 
(e)  The chairperson of the board shall require a nonrefundable filing fee from a protester to compensate the city for the expenses of administering the protest. The fee shall be in the form of cash or a cashier's check, and in accordance with the schedule provided below. 
Contract Award Amount 	Filing Fee 
$10,000.00—$50,000.00 	$500.00 
$50,001.00—$250,000.00 	$1,000.00 
$250,001.00 and greater 	1% of the pending award or $5,000.00, whichever is greater 
 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-144), 11-15-11)  
Sec. 2-445. - Authority to debar or suspend. 
(a)  Authority. After reasonable notice to the person involved and reasonable opportunity for that person to be heard, the chief procurement officer, after consultation with the using department, city manager and the city attorney, shall have authority to debar a person for cause from consideration for award of contracts. The debarment shall not exceed three (3) years. The chief procurement officer, after consultation with the using department, city manager and the city attorney shall have authority to suspend a person from consideration for award of contracts if there is probable cause for debarment. The suspension shall not exceed three (3) months. 
(b)  Decision. The chief procurement officer shall issue a written decision to debar or suspend. The decision shall: 
(1)  State the reasons for the action taken; and 
(2)  Inform the debarred or suspended person involved of its rights to administrative review as provided in this division. 
(c)  Finality of decision. A decision under this section shall be final and conclusive, unless fraudulent, or 
(1)  The debarred or suspended person commences an action in court; or 
(2)  The debarred or suspended person appeals administratively to the procurement appeals board in accordance with section 2-445. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-145), 11-15-11)  
Subdivision B. - Solicitations or Awards in Violation of Law 
 
Sec. 2-446. - Applicability of this part. 
The provisions of this part apply where it is determined administratively, or upon administrative or judicial review, that a solicitation or award of a contract is in violation of law. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-146), 11-15-11)  
Sec. 2-447. - Remedies prior to an award. 
If prior to award it is determined that a solicitation or proposed award of a contract is in violation of law, then the solicitation or proposed award, at the sole discretion of the city, shall be: 
(1)  Cancelled; or 
(2)  Revised to comply with the law. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-147), 11-15-11)  
Sec. 2-448. - Remedies after an award. 
If after an award it is determined that a solicitation or award of a contract is in violation of law, then: 
(1)  If the person awarded the contract has not acted fraudulently or in bad faith: 
a.  The contract may be ratified and affirmed, provided it is determined that doing so is in the best interest of the city; or 
b.  The contract may be terminated and the person awarded the contract shall be compensated for the actual expenses reasonably incurred under the contract, plus a reasonable profit, prior to the termination. 
(2)  If the person awarded the contract has acted fraudulently or in bad faith: 
a.  The contract may be declared null and void; or 
b.  The contract may be ratified and affirmed if such action is in the best interest of the city, without prejudice to the city's rights to such damages as may be appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-148), 11-15-11)  
DIVISION 9. - INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS  
Subdivision A. - Definitions 
 
Sec. 2-449. - Definitions of terms used in this division. 
(a)  Cooperative purchasing means procurement conducted by or on behalf of one or more public procurement units, as defined in this Code. 
(b)  External procurement activity means any buying organization not located in this state which, if located in this state, would qualify as a public procurement unit. Agencies of the United States and of any other state of the United States of America are external procurement activities. 
(c)  Local public procurement unit means any county, city, town, and any other subdivision of the state or public agency of any such subdivision, public authority, educational, health, or other institution, and to the extent provided by law, any other entity which expends public funds for the procurement of supplies, services and construction, and any nonprofit corporation operating a charitable hospital. 
(d)  Public procurement unit means any one of the following: 
(1)  A local public procurement unit; 
(2)  An external procurement activity; 
(3)  A state public procurement unit, or 
(4)  Any not-for-profit entity comprised of more than one unit or activity listed in subparagraphs (a), (b) or (c). 
(e)  Public procurement unit means the City of Miramar Procurement Department or any political jurisdiction of this state or any other state. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-149), 11-15-11)  
Subdivision B. - Cooperative Purchasing 
 
Sec. 2-450. - Cooperative purchasing authorized. 
(a)  The city may participate in, sponsor, conduct, or administer a cooperative purchasing agreement for the procurement of any supplies, services or construction with one or more public procurement units in accordance with an agreement entered into between the participants. Such cooperative purchasing may include, but is not limited to, joint or multi-party contracts between public procurement units and open-ended public procurement unit contracts that are made available to other public procurement units. 
(b)  All cooperative purchasing conducted under this division shall be through contracts awarded through full and open competition, including use of source selection methods substantially equivalent to those specified in Division 3 (source selection and contract formation) of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-150), 11-15-11)  
Sec. 2-451. - Sale, acquisition, or use of supplies by a public procurement unit. 
Any public procurement unit may sell to, acquire from, or use any supplies belonging to another public procurement unit independent of the requirements of Division 3 (source selection and contract formation) and Division 7 (supply management) of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-151), 11-15-11)  
Sec. 2-452. - Cooperative use of supplies or services. 
Any public procurement unit may enter into an agreement, independent of the requirements of Divisions 3 (source selection and contract formation) and 7 (supply management) of this Code, with any other public procurement unit for the cooperative use of supplies or services under the terms agreed upon between the parties. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-152), 11-15-11)  
Sec. 2-453. - Public procurement units in compliance with code requirements. 
Where the public procurement unit administering a cooperative purchase complies with the requirements of this Code, any public procurement unit participating in such a purchase shall be deemed to have complied with this Code. Public procurement units may not enter into a cooperative purchasing agreement for the purpose of circumventing this Code. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-153), 11-15-11)  
DIVISION 10. - ASSISTANCE TO SMALL AND DISADVANTAGED BUSINESSES; ENVIRONMENTALLY CONSCIOUS PROGRAMS; FEDERAL ASSISTANCE OR CONTRACT PROCUREMENT REQUIREMENTS  
Subdivision A. - Definitions 
 
Sec. 2-454. - Definitions of terms used in this division. 
(a)  Disadvantaged business shall either: 
(1)  Qualify as a "Small Business Enterprise" ("SBE") that has an occupational license, is located in, and doing business in Broward County, or 
(2)  Qualify as a "County Business Enterprise" ("CBE") that has an occupational license, is located in, and doing business in Broward County; and 
(3)  Be fifty-one (51) percent owned, managed and controlled by: African-American, Hispanic-American, Asian-American, Native-American, American Woman or Service-Disabled Veteran (minimum ten (10) percent disability) who are citizens of the United States and permanent residents of Florida; and 
(4)  Be engaged in commercial transactions; and 
(5)  Operate a business in Florida; and 
(6)  Be certified by the Broward County Office of Economic and Small Business Development, and provide proof of such certification to the city as part of any solicitation response. 
(b)  Local business shall: 
(1)  Be domiciled within the City of Miramar city limits. 
(2)  Comply with all City of Miramar licensing requirements and be current on all city taxes. 
(3)  If in business for less than one year, provide evidence of a previous business ownership within the City of Miramar within the past three (3) years. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-154), 11-15-11)  
Subdivision B. - Assistance to Small and Disadvantaged Businesses 
 
Sec. 2-455. - Statement of policy and its implementation. 
(a)  Except where federal, state or county law mandates to the contrary, or as otherwise provided in paragraph (b) below, the city, pursuant to its purchasing authority, shall grant a preference in the amount of five (5) percent of any bid or five (5) points of any proposal score to a disadvantaged business. Such preference shall apply to bids or proposals for commodities, services and construction. The chief procurement officer may develop policies to implement subcontractor goals for disadvantaged business participation in any or all contracts. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to professional services procured pursuant to the State of Florida CCNA. This section shall not apply to "cooperative" purchasing plans and proposals that the city participates in with other governmental agencies. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-155), 11-15-11)  
Subdivision C. - Other Socioeconomic Procurement Programs 
 
Sec. 2-456. - Statement of policy and its implementation. 
(a)  Preference for local bidders. Except where federal, state or county law mandates to the contrary, or as otherwise provided herein, the city, pursuant to its purchasing authority, shall grant a preference in the amount of five (5) percent of any bid or five (5) points of any proposal score to a local business. Such preference shall apply to quotations, bids or proposals for commodities and services. The chief procurement officer shall develop policies to implement subcontractor goals for local business participation in any or all contracts. 
(b)  Preference for businesses employing Miramar residents. A vendor located outside of the City of Miramar city limits is considered equivalent to a Miramar vendor and accorded the same preference if it employs a minimum of ten (10) full time equivalent ("FTE") Miramar residents or Miramar residents constitute twenty (20) percent FTE of the company's local workforce (Broward and Miami-Dade Counties), whichever is larger. 
(c)  Application of preferences. Preferences shall be additive and computed as a whole on the bid or proposal. For example, the city, pursuant to its purchasing authority, shall grant a preference in the amount of ten (10) percent of any bid or ten (10) points of any proposal score to a local disadvantaged business. Such preference shall apply to bids or proposals for commodities and services. 
(d)  Preference to businesses with drug-free workplace programs. 
(1)  The city adopts by reference F.S. § 287.087, regarding bidding preferences for businesses with drug-free workplace programs. 
(2)  Whenever two (2) or more bids which are equal with respect to price, quality and service are received by the city for the procurement of commodities or services, a bid received from a business that certifies that it has implemented a drug-free workplace program shall be given a preference, provided that the drug-free workplace program complies with F.S. § 287.087, and any other applicable state law. An announcement of this preference may be included in the bid documents. 
(e)  Environmentally conscious programs. It is the policy of the City of Miramar to use its best efforts to commit to environmental, economic, and social stewardship through green practices for city facilities, buildings, supplies and services in order to: 
(1)  Yield cost savings to city taxpayers through reduced operating costs; 
(2)  Provide a healthy work environment for city employees and visitors to city facilities and buildings; 
(3)  Contribute to the realization of the board's stated goal of protecting, conserving, and enhancing the region's environmental resources, and 
(4)  Help establish a community standard of green practices for the City of Miramar. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-156), 11-15-11)  
Sec. 2-457. - Report to city commission. 
The chief procurement officer shall report annually to the city commission on the participation of local and disadvantaged businesses in city contracts. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-157), 11-15-11)  
Subdivision D. - Federal Assistance or Contract Procurement Requirements 
 
Sec. 2-458. - Compliance with federal requirements. 
Where a procurement involves the expenditure of federal assistance or contract funds, the chief procurement officer shall comply with such federal law and authorized policies which are mandatorily applicable and which are not presently reflected in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-158), 11-15-11)  
DIVISION 11. - ETHICS IN PUBLIC CONTRACTING 
 
Sec. 2-459. - Non-discrimination. 
A contractor shall not discriminate against any person in its operations, activities or delivery of services. contractor shall affirmatively comply with all applicable provisions of federal, state and local equal employment laws and shall not engage in or commit any discriminatory practice against any person based on race, age, religion, color, gender, sexual orientation, national origin, marital status, physical or mental disability, political affiliation or any other factor which cannot be lawfully used as a basis for service delivery. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-159), 11-15-11)  
Sec. 2-460. - Non-collusion. 
A bidder shall not collude, conspire, connive or agree, directly or indirectly, with any other bidder, firm, or person to submit a collusive or sham bid in connection with the work for which the bid has been submitted; or to refrain from bidding in connection with such work; or have in any manner, directly or indirectly, sought by person to fix the price or prices in the bid or of any other bidder, or to fix any overhead, profit, or cost elements of the bid price or the bid price of any other bidder, or to secure through any collusion, conspiracy, connivance, or unlawful agreement any advantage against any other bidder or any person interested in the proposed work. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-160), 11-15-11)  
Sec. 2-461. - Code of ethics. 
(a)  All city appointed officials and employees involves in the procurement process shall comply with Miramar Code Division 111-Code of Ethics for Municipal Officers and Employees. 
(b)  The procurement department staff shall comply with the Code of Ethics of NIGP, Inc., The Institute for Public Procurement. 
(c)  The city adopts the values and guiding principles, developed by NIGP, Inc., The Institute for Public Procurement, as the standard for public procurement and supports the efforts to develop public procurement practices. 
(Ord. No. 12-03, § 5(2-161), 11-15-11)  
Chapter 3 - ALARM SYSTEMS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; business taxes, permits and business regulations, Ch. 11; police, Ch. 17; buildings and building structure regulations, Ch. 22. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 3-1—3-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PRIVATE SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 3-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm signal shall mean the audible sound or a transmission of a signal or a message as the result of the activation of an alarm system or an audible alarm. 
Alarm system shall mean any mechanical, electronic or electrical device which is designed or used for the detection of an unauthorized entry into a building, structure, facility or enclosed area, or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act within a building, structure, facility or enclosed area or both, and which emits a sound or transmits a signal or message when activated. Alarm systems include but are not limited to: Telephone alarm devices, audible alarms, proprietor alarms and "silent" alarms not audible, visible or perceptible outside a building, structure, facility or enclosed area that register at a remote location. Excluded from the definition of "alarm systems" are auxiliary devices installed by telephone companies to protect telephone systems from damage or disruption of service. 
Audible alarm shall mean a device designed for the detection of unauthorized entry on premises which generates an audible sound when it is activated. 
Contractor shall mean a company or individual who has a certificate of competency from the county designating the company or individual as a specialty electrician in burglar and fire alarms. 
False alarm shall mean any alarm signal, audible or otherwise, responded to by the police department, which is not in response to actual or threatened danger to persons or damage to property. "False alarm" shall also mean the activation of an alarm signal through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or maintenance or negligence of the person owning, leasing or having control over an alarm system or his/her employees or agents. 
Notice shall mean written notice, given either by certified mail, return receipt requested or by personal service upon the addressee. 
Police chief shall mean the police chief of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 2A-21) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 3-27. - Identity of alarm user posted; application and permit fees. 
(a)  Every person who installs, owns, leases, possesses or operates any burglar alarm system within the City shall notify the police department code compliance division of the existence of said alarm system prior to the system being activated. It shall be the sole responsibility of the company which is installing any burglar alarm system to provide the system owner with a copy of the most current City Alarm Ordinance and an "Application for Permit for Alarm System" form, which shall be completed and forwarded to the police department code compliance division prior to the system being activated, along with a permit fee to be set and amended by resolution of the city commission. The property owner shall be responsible for the nonpayment of this permit fee. The permit fee shall be twice the standard fee which shall be set and amended by resolution of the city commission if a police response to a false alarm was made prior to permit application. The application shall include the following: 
(1)  The name(s), address, business and home telephone number of the owner,lessee, operator, manager or person in possession of the premises wherein the alarm system is installed. 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of a minimum of two (2) persons who can be notified by the enforcement official, in the event of the activation of the alarm system, who shall be capable of responding to the premises within thirty (30) minutes and who is authorized to enter the premises to ascertain the status thereof. 
(3)  The date of the activation of the alarm system. 
(4)  When any of the information required in subsection (1) or (2) has been changed, it shall be reported to the enforcement official by the owner within fifteen (15) days of such change. 
(b)  In the event a permittee has one (1) or more burglar alarm systems protecting two (2) or more separate structures having different addresses, a separate permit fee shall be paid for each structure. 
(Code 1964, § 2A-22; Ord. No. 91-42, § 1, 8-21-91; Ord. No. 94-19, §1, 1-5-94; Ord. No. 14-16, § 2, 6-17-14)  
Sec. 3-28. - Prohibition of certain telephone alarm devices. 
Except for telephone alarm devices utilized by governmental units or agencies or with the express written consent of the police chief, it is unlawful for any person to install, maintain, own, possess, operate or use any telephone alarm device regulated or programmed to make connection with any telephone installed in any facility of any law enforcement office. Telephone alarm devices are permitted when not connected directly to a law enforcement office, but they are subject to all other provisions of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 2A-23)  
Sec. 3-29. - Removal of unlawful systems. 
The police chief, when he has probable cause to believe that there has been a violation of Section 3-28, shall order the owner, operator or lessee to disconnect and cease operation of the system within 72 hours of receipt of the order. Notice shall be by personal service. If personal service cannot be made, notice shall be by registered mail, return receipt requested. 
(Code 1964, § 2A-24; Ord. No. 14-16, § 3, 6-17-14)  
Sec. 3-30. - Deactivation of audible alarms within 30 minutes. 
It is unlawful to maintain on any premises any alarm system or audible alarm that does not deactivate within 30 minutes of its activation. In the event that the persons authorized to enter the premises and deactivate such alarm system or audible alarm cannot be contacted at the posted telephone numbers or, if contacted, fail to appear within 30 minutes of such contact or if such alarm system or audible alarm does not deactivate within such thirty-minute time period, the chief of police or his/her designated assistant may order the owner, operator, lessee or police officer on the scene to disconnect such alarm system or audible alarm. 
(Code 1964, § 2A-25; Ord. No. 14-16, § 4, 6-17-14)  
Sec. 3-31. - Intentional activation of alarms prohibited if crime not being perpetrated. 
It is unlawful for any person to intentionally activate any alarm system or audible alarm except in the event of an actual or attempted felony, misdemeanor, fire or medical emergency or the periodic testing of the alarm equipment after giving advance notice to the police department of the city that such test will take place and the specified time and date thereof. 
(Code 1964, § 2A-26)  
Sec. 3-32. - Police response to false alarms. 
For a police response to any false alarm as the result of the activation of any alarm system or audible alarm, the following fees and procedures shall apply: 
(1)  A fee for a police response to false alarms shall be set and amended by resolution of the city commission. 
(2)  The police department will maintain records of false alarm calls and will furnish the finance department with a monthly list of premises with three police responses to false alarms as specified in Section 3-32(1). 
(3)  The finance department will be responsible for billing and collecting fees assessed under Section 3-32(1). If assessed fees are not paid within 45 days after billing, the finance department shall inform the police department to take action as provided in Section 3-33. 
(Code 1964, § 2A-27; Ord. No. 94-19, § 2, 1-5-94; Ord. No. 14-16, § 5, 6-17-14) 
Cross reference— Fees, § 2-221 et seq.  
Sec. 3-33. - Failure to pay fee. 
In the event the person owning, leasing or having control over an alarm system or audible alarm fails to pay any amount due under this chapter, the police department shall, upon serving notice upon such person, order the disconnection of the alarm system or the audible alarm, as the case may be. In the event such person shall fail to disconnect such alarm system or audible alarm upon such order, the police department shall order the property owner, in writing, to disconnect such alarm system or audible alarm. It shall be unlawful to either fail to disconnect such alarm system or audible alarm or to reconnect the same until the required fee is paid, provided that no disconnection of any alarm system or audible alarm shall be ordered where such alarm system or audible alarm is situated within any premises required by law to have such alarm system or audible alarm in operation. 
(Ord. No. 14-16, § 6, 6-17-14)  
Sec. 3-34. - Civil liability. 
The city, the city police department, the police chief of the city and all officers, employees and agents of the city shall not be liable, either civilly or criminally, for failure to respond to a false alarm. 
(Code 1964, § 2A-28)  
Sec. 3-35. - Entry of premises. 
The police chief of the city, all officers, employees and agents of the city police department and the contractor are hereby authorized to enter any premises in the city at any time of the day or night for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 2A-29)  
Sec. 3-36. - Penalties. 
Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-13 of this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 2A-30)  
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 10; business taxes, permits and business regulations, Ch. 11; police, Ch. 17; buildings and building structure regulations, Ch. 22; subdivisions, Ch. 24; zoning, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverage law, F.S. ch. 561 et seq.; regulation of hours of sale, location of business and sanitary regulations by municipalities, F.S. § 562.45(2); sale of malt beverages for off-premises consumption not subject to municipal zoning, F.S. § 563.02(1)(a). 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Hours of sale. 
(a)  Generally. No vendor of alcoholic beverages shall sell or offer for sale or deliver or serve or permit to be consumed upon the premises of such vendor any beers, wines or alcoholic beverages of any kind regardless of alcoholic content during the hours specified herein. The following hours apply seven (7) days a week: 
(1)  Sales or services for on-premises consumption: Shall not be allowed between the hours of 2:00 a.m. And 8:00 a.m. Unless the premises holds a valid extended hours license issued by the city, in which event it may sell alcoholic beverages until 4:00 a.m. 
(2)  Off-premises sale/consumption: No sales for consumption off the premises from any kind of business or establishment shall be allowed between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(b)  Violations. Failure of any vendor, establishment, or business to comply with the provisions of this section shall be subject to the general penalty provision of section 1-13 of this Code, or may be prosecuted by the supplemental code enforcement procedures set forth in section 2-77.1 et seq. of this Code at the option of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 3-2; Ord. No. 92-11, § 1, 11-20-91; Ord. No. 92-18, § 1, 12-18-91; Ord. No. 98-40, § 1, 6-17-98; Ord. No. 03-17, § 2, 8-20-03) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate hours, F.S. §§ 562.14(1), 562.45(2).  
Sec. 4-2. - Extended hours license. 
(a)  The ability to sell, offer for sale, deliver or permit to be consumed upon the premises any alcoholic beverage between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 4:00 a.m. on any day of the week is hereby declared to be and is a privilege subject to termination by the city commission, and no person may reasonably rely on a continuation of that privilege. 
(b)  Any person or vendor or any place of business duly and regularly licensed by this state to sell and dispense alcoholic beverages, wine or beer therein, may apply for an extended hours license. Such license shall be issued within 30 days of the city's determination that a complete application has been filed. The non-refundable fee for the issuance of said license shall be set and amended by resolution of the city commission. Such extended hours license shall permit and extend the hours during which such licensee may sell alcoholic beverages until 4:00 a.m. on any day. Such licenses shall only be granted to those establishments that are wholly enclosed, soundproofed, and air-conditioned, and any windows, doors or other openings kept closed, except for normal and emergency ingress and egress, in order that noise and music emanating therefrom will not disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(c)  If, at any time, the city manager or his/her designee determines that any extended hours license holder is operating in a manner harmful to the public health, safety or welfare, he/she may place on the following city commission quasi-judicial agenda an item to determine whether the extended hours license should be revoked based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  During the extended sale hours, the extended hours license holder shall have taken all reasonable precautions to discourage unlawful activity, including vandalism, persons and property crimes, disturbances, loitering of patrons, narcotics use, noise, vehicular use by intoxicated patrons, and illegal activity of any kind by employees, patrons or others associated with the establishment. 
(2)  During the extended sale hours, there shall have been no negative affect on neighboring properties, especially with respect to excessive noise, accumulation of trash, and glare from exterior lighting or from headlights (which can be cured by the use of hedges or other barriers). 
(3)  During the extended sale hours, the extended hours license holder shall have taken all reasonable efforts to prevent nuisances both inside and outside the establishment. 
(d)  Such agenda item shall be publicly advertised in a newspaper of local circulation; written notice of the hearing shall be sent to the license holder at least fourteen (14) days in advance of the hearing and shall contain the date, time and place of the agenda item. 
(e)  After consideration of the matter, and allowing the license holder to be heard, the city commission may revoke the extended hours license, deny the revocation or allow the licensee to continue subject to any reasonable conditions deemed necessary to mitigate or eliminate the adverse effects of such extended hours. These conditions may include, without being limited to, provision by the licensee, at his/her expense, of security or police personnel, buffering from/for nearby communities and/or provision of additional parking. 
(f)  Should the extended hours license be revoked, no reapplication shall be considered for that location within a twelve-month period. 
(g)  Appeal of any commission decision shall be to a court of competent jurisdiction within thirty (30) days of rendition of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 03-17, § 2, 8-20-03; Ord. No. 14-16, § 17, 6-17-14)  
Sec. 4-3. - Public consumption prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume, and for any person to carry in any open or uncovered cup, glass, can, bottle or other container, any alcoholic beverage within any street, sidewalk, alley, or public right-of-way within the city. 
(b)  (1)  Any person, organization or corporation who or which wishes to be excluded from the prohibition of subsection (a) for a period of time not to exceed seven (7) days may apply to the community development director for a temporary alcohol consumption permit, except that the community development director or designee may approve an exception from the prohibition of subsection (a) for consumption or carrying of alcoholic beverages in connection with a city-sponsored or co-sponsored event. The community development director shall evaluate the temporary alcohol consumption permit application and make a determination. The criteria to determine approval of said permit are as follows: 
a.  The purpose for which the temporary alcohol consumption permit is requested. 
b.  The dates, times and locations of the proposed activity. 
c.  Provisions for security and crowd control. 
d.  Proximity of the location of the proposed activity to residential areas. 
(2)  The temporary alcohol consumption permit may be issued if the above criteria tends to show a minimal impact of such temporary public consumption on any neighboring properties, and that there will be no disturbance to the health, safety, welfare, peace and comfort of the citizens of the city. In issuing a temporary alcohol consumption permit that provides for public consumption of alcoholic beverages, the community services director may approve any conditions as are deemed necessary to prevent any such disturbances, and to ensure that the activity will be compatible with surrounding properties. 
(Ord. No. 03-17, § 2, 8-20-03; Ord. No. 13-09, § 2, 5-15-13) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, § 14-6.  
Sec. 4-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-05, § 2, adopted November 29, 2006, repealed § 4-4, which pertained to nudity on premises where alcoholic beverages are offered for sale. New provisions pertained to adult entertainment can be found at § 11-130 et seq. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
Chapter 5 - AMUSEMENT DEVICES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 10; noise, § 10-111 et seq.; business taxes, permits and business regulations, Ch. 11; business tax, § 11-26 et seq.; circuses, carnivals, etc., § 11-61 et seq.; buildings and building structure regulations, Ch. 22; zoning, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Amusement facility, F.S. ch. 546. 
 
Sec. 5-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Amusement device shall mean a contrivance or combination of contrivances designed or intended to entertain or amuse people and which is of such nature that accidental personal injuries may be incurred in its assembly, disassembly or use. 
Approved shall mean that pre-permit requests, permit fees, insurance certificates, worker's compensation and sanitation facilities shall be approved by the building official and/or city commission. 
Carnival shall mean an enterprise principally devoted to offering amusement or entertainment to the public in, upon or by means of amusement devices or temporary structures in any number or combination, whether or not associated with other structures or forms of public attractions. 
Fair shall mean an enterprise principally devoted to the exhibition of the products of agriculture or industry and at or in connection with which amusement devices and temporary structures are provided. 
Manager shall mean a person having possession, custody or managerial control of an amusement device at a carnival, fair or amusement park, whether as owner, lessee, agent or otherwise. 
(Code 1964, § 3A-3) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 5-2. - Purpose, application of chapter. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter is to guard against personal injuries in the assembly, disassembly and use of amusement devices at carnivals, fairs and amusement parks to persons employed at or attending the same. 
(b)  It is the intent of this chapter, and it is hereby required, that such devices and structures shall be so designed, constructed, assembled or disassembled, maintained and operated as to prevent such injuries. 
(c)  This chapter applies to amusement devices installed at carnivals, fairs and amusement parks, to the managers of such devices and structures and to the persons employed in connection with the same and to their employers. 
(Code 1964, § 3A-1)  
Sec. 5-3. - General responsibility for compliance. 
Every manager of an amusement device shall comply with all provisions of this chapter and every employer and employee shall comply with all provisions which concern or affect his/her conduct. 
(Code 1964, § 3A-4) 
Cross reference— Business taxes, § 11-26 et seq.; circuses, carnivals and other exhibitions, § 11-61 et seq.  
Sec. 5-4. - Devices and structures not in compliance. 
An amusement device which is not in compliance with the provisions and intent of this chapter shall not be used or occupied. 
(Code 1964, § 3A-5)  
Sec. 5-5. - Load tests. 
(a)  Test required. No passenger-carrying amusement devices of the following types shall be used or put into normal operation until they have withstood a load test without failure in any material respect: 
(1)  Devices having suspended passenger seats or spaces. 
(2)  Devices normally operated at speeds or with movements creating centrifugal forces. 
(3)  Devices so elevated that structural failure is likely to cause passengers to be injured by falling. 
(4)  Devices as to which the building official has ordered such a test upon finding it necessary to assure safety. 
A load test shall be required at least once each year and at the time of the first assembly in the city. This test shall be made in the presence of the inspector. 
(b)  Nature of test. Each passenger seat or space shall be weighted with at least three hundred (300) pounds of dead weight, except that in a device intended only for small children each seat or space shall be weighted with at least one hundred fifty (150) pounds. While so loaded, the device shall be so operated at maximum normal speed for a period of twenty (20) minutes to test the full operation of all control devices, speed-limiting devices, brakes and other equipment provided for safety. Upon completion of the test, units shall be disassembled for inspection. As an alternate procedure, each alternate seat or space, or grouping of seats or spaces, such as a car in a ferris wheel, shall be weighted as above. While so loaded, the device shall be operated at maximum normal speed for a period of ten (10) minutes. Then the device shall be unloaded and the other alternate units loaded as above, and the device shall be operated at maximum normal speed for a period of ten (10) minutes. Upon completion of this two-step test, the units shall be disassembled for inspection. 
(c)  Note. Practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship in special cases will be considered by the building official if a petition for a variation is presented, provided it can be proven that the device in question can be operated safely within the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(d)  Other tests. The building official may require other tests, such as magna flux or x-ray, which in his/her judgment are warranted under the circumstances, to assure the operational safety of a particular device. 
(e)  Effect of test. If the device fails to withstand a load test, it shall be deemed unsafe and shall not be used until and unless it has been repaired and has withstood a subsequent load test without failure in any material respect. 
(Code 1964, § 3A-6)  
Sec. 5-6. - Identification and rating plates. 
Every amusement device shall be identified by a trade or descriptive name and an identification number, and there shall be firmly attached thereto in a readily visible location, a metal plate containing that information and date of manufacture. Upon the same or another metal plate so attached, there shall be legibly impressed the maximum safe number of passengers, and the maximum safe speed. If such plate does not contain the rated speed and capacity of the device, a registered engineer must certify as to such rated speed and capacity. 
(Code 1964, § 3A-7)  
Sec. 5-7. - Rebuilt and modified devices. 
If an amusement device which has withstood a performance test as required is thereafter materially rebuilt or so modified as to change its original action: 
(1)  The device shall be reidentified by a different name or identification number, or both. 
(2)  The device shall be subject to all other provisions of this chapter as if it were a new device not previously used. 
(Code 1964, § 3A-8)  
Sec. 5-8. - Assembly and disassembly. 
(a)  Competent supervision. The assembly of an amusement device shall be done by or inspected under the immediate supervision of a person experienced and instructed in the proper performance of such work in respect to the device or structure. No device shall be assembled unless an inspector representing the building official is notified and is present and witnesses the assembly. 
(b)  Quality of assembly work. Assembly work shall be performed in a proper and workmanlike manner. Parts shall be properly aligned, and shall not be bent, distorted, cut or otherwise injured to force a fit. Parts requiring lubrication shall be lubricated in course of assembly. Fastening and locking devices, such as bolts, cap screws, cotter pins, lock washers, etc., shall be installed where required for dependable operation. Nuts shall be drawn tight, cotter pins shall be spread and lock nuts firmly set. 
(c)  Quality and inspection of parts. Parts which are excessively worn or which have been materially damaged shall not be used. Close visual inspection of parts shall be made during assembly to discover such wear or damage and immediate inspection of fastening devices shall be made after assembly to assure that they have been properly installed. 
(d)  Tools and equipment. Persons engaged in the assembly or disassembly of amusement devices or temporary structures shall be provided with and shall use tools of proper size and design to enable the work to be done safely. Broken, damaged and unsuitable tools shall not be used. 
(1)  Electrically operated tools shall be grounded during use. 
(2)  Ladders, scaffolds and safety belts used in assembly or disassembly work shall be of such design, material and construction as to provide reasonable and adequate protection to the persons using them. 
(3)  Fiber rope used in assembly or disassembly work shall be standard quality manila or equivalent in strength. 
(4)  Tackle blocks shall be of a size to fit the rope. 
(5)  All load-carrying equipment shall be designed and constructed throughout to support the intended load. 
(e)  Lighting. Assembly and disassembly of amusement devices and temporary structures shall be done under lighting conditions sufficient to permit the work to be properly performed and inspected. 
(f)  Persons in work area. A sufficient number of persons to do the work properly shall be engaged for the assembly or disassembly of amusement devices and temporary structures. Persons not so engaged shall be prevented from entering the area in which the work may create a hazard. 
(Code 1964, § 3A-9)  
Sec. 5-9. - Notices of intent to use devices. 
No amusement device shall be used at any time or location unless prior notice of intent to use the same has been given to the building official, and the proper occupancy mechanical permits and written approval, as required, shall be obtained from the city. Notice of planned schedules shall be in writing, identify the device or structure, and state the intended dates and locations of use. 
(Code 1964, § 3A-10) 
Cross reference— Circuses, carnivals and other exhibitions, § 11-61 et seq.  
Sec. 5-10. - Daily inspection and test. 
An amusement device shall be inspected and tested by the manager or his/her authorized representative on each day when it is intended to be used. The inspection and test shall be made by a person experienced and instructed in the proper assembly and operation of the device and shall be performed before the device is put into normal operation. The inspection and test shall include the operation of control devices, speed-limiting devices, brakes and other equipment provided for safety. A record of each inspection and test shall be made at once upon completion of the test on a form provided by the building official and shall be kept with the device and available to the building official upon demand. 
(Code 1964, § 3A-11)  
Sec. 5-11. - Prohibited use. 
No person shall knowingly use, or suffer or permit to be used, an amusement device which is not properly assembled or which is defective or unsafe in any of its parts, components, controls or safety equipment, or which has not been tested and inspected in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The building official may prohibit the use of any device which may be inherently dangerous, regardless of its structural soundness. 
(Code 1964, § 3A-12)  
Sec. 5-12. - Control of operation. 
Amusement devices shall be operated only by competent operators at least eighteen (18) years of age for devices designated for the exclusive use of small children and twenty-one (21) years of age for all other devices. Every operator shall have knowledge of the use and function of all normal and emergency operating controls and of the proper use of the device. A trained operator shall be in the immediate vicinity of the operating controls during operation and no other person not similarly trained shall be suffered or permitted to handle such controls during normal operation. This provision does not apply to amusement devices designated to be operated or controlled safely by a passenger. 
(Code 1964, § 3A-13)  
Sec. 5-13. - Overloading and overspeeding. 
An amusement device shall not be overcrowded, or loaded in excess of its safe carrying capacity; nor shall it be operated at an unsafe speed. 
(Code 1964, § 3A-14)  
Sec. 5-14. - Wind and storm hazards. 
An amusement device which is exposed to wind or storms shall not be operated under dangerous weather conditions except to release or discharge occupants. 
(Code 1964, § 3A-15)  
Sec. 5-15. - Imminent danger. 
If the building official finds that an amusement device presents an imminent danger, he/she may attach to such device or structure, a notice prohibiting the use thereof. Such notice shall not be removed until the device or structure is made safe, and then only by a representative of the building official. 
(Code 1964, § 3A-16)  
Sec. 5-16. - Lighting. 
Amusement devices, temporary structures, access thereto and exits therefrom shall, while in operation or occupied, be provided with illumination by natural or artificial means sufficient to guard against personal injuries under these circumstances in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1964, § 3A-17)  
Sec. 5-17. - Design and construction requirements. 
(a)  All structures used in connection with amusement devices shall be so designed and constructed as to carry safely all loads to which such structures may normally be subjected. 
(b)  All amusement devices shall be designed, constructed and installed so as to withstand any normal stresses to which they may be subjected, including required load tests. 
(c)  Before being used by the public, amusement devices shall be so placed or secured with blocking, cribbing, outriggers, guys or other means, as to be stable under all operating conditions. 
(Code 1964, § 3A-18)  
Sec. 5-18. - Exits. 
At least two (2) exits remote from each other shall be provided for each floor, tier, room or balcony in structures which house amusement devices and which are not places of public assembly. No exit shall be less than twenty-two (22) inches wide. 
(Code 1964, § 3A-19)  
Sec. 5-19. - Width; how measured. 
The width of a stairway shall be taken as the length of the treads between stringers. The width of a doorway shall be taken as the width of the door. 
(Code 1964, § 3A-20)  
Sec. 5-20. - Access and egress to and from amusement devices. 
Safe and adequate means of access to and egress from amusement devices shall be provided. Such means of access and egress shall have: 
(1)  Protection from adjacent hazards or from falling by the use of rails, enclosures, barriers or similar means. 
(2)  Secure treading and supporting surface free from debris, obstruction projections and slipping, tripping and other hazards. 
(3)  Adequate clearance. 
(4)  Design of stairways, landings and ramps. Stairways, landings and ramps shall be designed, constructed and maintained so as to sustain safely a live load of at least one hundred (100) pounds per square foot. 
(Code 1964, § 3A-21)  
Sec. 5-21. - Emergency brakes and anti-rollback devices. 
If cars or other components of an amusement device may collide in such a way as to cause personal injuries upon failure of normal controls, emergency brakes sufficient to prevent such collisions shall be provided. On rides which make use of inclined tracks, automatic anti-rollback devices shall be installed to prevent backward movement of the passenger-carrying units in case of failure of the propelling mechanism. 
(Code 1964, § 3A-22)  
Sec. 5-22. - Signal systems. 
Signal systems for the starting and stopping of amusement devices shall be provided where the operator of the device does not at all times have a clear view of the point at which passengers are loaded or unloaded. Any code of signals adopted shall be printed and posted at both the operator's and signalman's stations. All persons who may use these signals shall be carefully instructed in their use. Signals for the movement or operation of an amusement device shall not be given until all passengers and other persons who may be endangered are in a position of safety. 
(Code 1964, § 3A-23)  
Sec. 5-23. - Public protection. 
An amusement device shall not be used or operated while any person is so located as to be endangered by it. Areas in which persons may be so endangered shall be fenced, barricaded or otherwise guarded against public intrusion. 
(Code 1964, § 3A-24)  
Sec. 5-24. - Guarding of machinery. 
Machinery used in or with an amusement device shall be enclosed, barricaded or otherwise effectively guarded against contact. Guards removed for maintenance purposes shall be replaced before normal operation is resumed. 
(Code 1964, § 3A-25)  
Sec. 5-25. - Speed-limiting devices required. 
An amusement device powered so as to be capable of exceeding its maximum safe operating speed shall be provided with a maximum speed-limiting device. 
(Code 1964, § 3A-26)  
Sec. 5-26. - Passenger-carrying devices. 
The interior and exterior parts of all passenger-carrying amusement devices with which a passenger may come in contact shall be smooth and rounded, free from sharp, rough or splintered edges and corners, with no protruding studs, bolts, screws or other projections which might cause injury. Interior parts upon or against which a passenger may be forcibly thrown by the action of the ride shall be adequately padded. Devices which are self-powered and which are operated by a passenger shall have the driving mechanism so guarded and the guards so locked in place as to prevent passengers from gaining access to the mechanism. Such bars, footrests and other equipment as may be necessary for safe entrance and exit and for support while the device is in operation shall be provided. Such equipment and the fastening thereof shall be of sufficient strength to retain the passengers. The fastenings shall be of a type which cannot be inadvertently released. 
(Code 1964, § 3A-27)  
Sec. 5-27. - Electrical safety requirements. 
(a)  General requirement. All electrical wiring, equipment and apparatus used for amusement devices or for lighting shall be properly and legally installed, operated and maintained in accordance with the city's building code. 
(b)  Protection of employees. No employees shall be suffered or permitted to work in such proximity to any part of an electric power circuit that he/she may contact the same in the course of his/her work unless he/she is protected against shock by de-energizing the circuit, grounding it, or guarding it by effective insulation. If protection is supplied by de-energizing the circuit, the switch controlling the circuit shall be locked out to prevent inadvertent closing. 
(c)  High voltage lines. The outlets of electric power lines carrying more than one hundred twenty (120) volts shall be clearly marked to show their voltage. 
(d)  Transformers. All electrical transformer sub-stations shall be properly enclosed and proper warning signs shall be posted. 
(e)  Outdoor apparatus and wiring. Electrical apparatus and wiring located outdoors shall be of such quality and so constructed or protected that exposure to weather will not interfere with its normal operation. 
(f)  Elevated lines. Elevated power lines crossing access or other roads within the grounds of a carnival, fair or amusement park shall be so suspended as to provide minimum vertical clearance of eighteen (18) feet from the road surface and minimum horizontal clearance of three (3) feet on each side of the normal passage space of vehicles. 
(g)  Suspended electric wiring. Temporary electric wiring, if suspended, shall be so supported that its protective insulation will not be damaged. 
(h)  Grounding. Temporary electric installations shall be properly grounded. 
(i)  Exposed conductors. Bare wires and other uninsulated current-carrying parts shall be guarded against inadvertent contact by means of proper location or by a fence or other barrier. 
(j)  Overcurrent protection. Conductors shall be provided with overcurrent protective devices according to load. No such device shall be installed in neutral or grounding conductors. 
(k)  General grounding. Where electrical power is supplied for an amusement device or a temporary structure by a privately operated generating system, the generator and all equipment shall be properly grounded if the system incorporated a ground. 
(l)  Receptacles and caps. All receptacles and attachment caps shall be of the grounding type. 
(m)  Grounding of devices. Each electrically powered amusement device shall be effectively grounded. The grounding shall be made effective as to all noncurrent carrying metal parts which may become energized and which are exposed to contact by any person. An effective ground shall be one (1) having a resistance of twenty-five (25) ohms or less. 
(n)  Abrasion protection. Wiring laid on surfaces traversed by vehicular or pedestrian traffic shall be adequately protected against wear and abrasion. 
(o)  Master switch. Each electrically operated amusement device not designed to be controlled directly by the passenger shall be provided with a disconnect power switch placed within easy reach of the operator. 
(Code 1964, § 3A-28)  
Sec. 5-28. - Air compressors and equipment. 
Air compressors, air compressor tanks and equipment used in connection therewith shall be in accordance with the city's building code. 
(Code 1964, § 3A-29)  
Sec. 5-29. - Fire prevention and protection. 
Fabrics constituting part of an amusement device or a temporary structure shall be fire-resistant to meet the following standards: Two (2) strips, two and one-half (2½) inches by ten (10) inches, or test sections either of the fabric used or other fabrics identical therewith shall be tested. Each strip shall be thoroughly dry and shall then be subjected to an open flame applied to the lower edge while the strip is held vertically for fifteen (15) seconds. Neither strip shall flame for more than two (2) seconds after the test flame is removed from contact nor shall the average length of char exceed two and one-half (2½) inches. Progressive afterflow is considered unsatisfactory. Such a test is not required by this chapter if other evidence of the required degree of fire resistance is accepted by the building official as sufficient. 
(1)  Tent requirements. Tents shall comply with the following: 
a.  Tents used for assembly or other cover frequented by the public shall be flameproofed or of a material not considered readily flammable. Flameproofing will be done as often as necessary using the standard formulas set forth in N.F.P.A. Standard 701. 
b.  Certificate of flameproofing of tent fabrics shall be on file with a sample of the fabric used, at a location specified by the inspecting authority having jurisdiction. 
c.  During the hours such carnival is open to the public, there shall be present on the premises one (1) city firefighter, and at least one (1) uniformed city police officer. It shall be the responsibility of such carnival to pay such officers. 
d.  Fire watchers shall be employed. One (1) or more qualified persons to serve as fire watchers shall be employed by all circuses, carnivals or other exhibitions where tents can facilitate a crowd of more than fifty (50) persons assembling. Their only duty during time of occupancy of tent shall be to familiarize themselves with fire protection facilities, see that aisles and exitways are kept open and that "NO SMOKING" rules are enforced. 
e.  "NO SMOKING" signs shall be displayed visibly and of a letter size of three (3) inches or more in height and one-half inch or more in width, red on white background. 
f.  Two (2) units forty-four (44) inches of clear exit shall be required for each two hundred (200) square feet or fraction thereof of floor space, with no less than two (2) remote exits regardless of floor space; with the exception of fifteen (15) feet travel distance, one (1) exit will be required. Travel distance to the nearest exit shall be no further than fifty (50) feet in a direct route to the outside. 
g.  Tents of five thousand (5,000) or more square feet shall have lighted exit signs when occupied in the nighttime. Daytime use only will be marked by signs. 
(2)  Fire extinguishers. Approved fire extinguishers shall be provided where necessary to secure reasonable and adequate protection from fire hazards. 
a.  In addition to other requirements, each mechanized ride whether electrically or engine driven shall be required to have one B-C portable fire extinguisher of one (1) unit or more of protection accessible and within fifteen (15) feet of the operator. 
b.  Fire extinguishing agents of dry chemical or carbon dioxide are the acceptable types. 
c.  Portable fire extinguisher requirements for tents. Tents of one thousand (1,000) square feet or less shall maintain a two and one-half (2½) gallon water type fire extinguisher to be located at or near an exit. Tents of larger proportions shall maintain two-and-one-half gallon water-type fire extinguishers within a travel distance of fifty (50) feet. 
(3)  Flammable waste. Flammable waste such as oily rags and other flammable materials shall be placed in covered metal containers which shall be kept in easily accessible locations. Such containers shall not be kept at or near exits. 
(4)  Flammable liquids and gases. Gasoline and other volatile liquids and flammable gases when stored shall be in accordance with this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 3A-30) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9.  
Sec. 5-30. - Cleanliness. 
A suitable number of metal containers for refuse shall be provided in and around all amusement devices and temporary structures. Accumulations of trash or refuse shall be promptly removed. All parts of amusement devices and temporary structures used by passengers or customers shall be maintained in a clean condition. 
(Code 1964, § 3A-31)  
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-13, § 2, adopted April 21, 2004, amended Ch. 6, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Ch. 6 pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 10; sanitary nuisances, § 10-26 et seq.; solid waste, Ch. 18; buildings and building structure regulations, Ch. 22; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23; zoning, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Establishment and maintenance of a county pound in Broward County; providing for the appointment of an impounding officer, and defining his authority and duties; providing for the impounding and disposition of animals running at large or believed to be strays, or believed to be infected with rabies or other diseases; prescribing and conferring certain powers on the board of county commissioners in relation thereto, and providing a penalty, Laws of Fla., Sp. Acts, 1955, ch. 30636 as amended; animal control and cruelty to animals, F.S. ch. 828. 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter of the code, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Abandon means to forsake an animal in a street, road, public or private place without providing for the care, sustenance, protection, and shelter of such animal. 
Animal means every living nonhuman creature. 
Animal rescue organization means a duly incorporated nonprofit organization devoted to the rescue, care and adoption of stray, abandoned or surrendered animals and which does not breed animals. 
Animal shelter means a municipal, county, or related public animal shelter or duly incorporated nonprofit organization devoted to the rescue, care and adoption of stray, abandoned, injured, or surrendered animals, and which does not breed animals. 
At large means an animal not on the owner's property and not under restraint or the direct control, custody, charge or possession of the owner or other responsible person. 
Cat means an animal of the Felidae family of the order Carnivora. 
Certificate of source means a document from the source, an animal shelter, or an animal rescue organization, declaring the source of origin of the dog or cat sold or transferred or offered for sale or transfer. A certificate of source shall include at a minimum: (i) a brief description of the dog or cat, the name, address, telephone number, and e-mail address of the original source of the dog or cat; (ii) shall be signed by both the pet store operator certifying the accuracy of the certificate; and (iii) shall be signed by the purchaser or transferee of the dog or cat acknowledging receipt of the certificate. 
Civil citation means a civil violation citation issued to a violator that requires an appearance before the county court rather than the special magistrate. 
Control means the regulation of the possession, ownership, care and custody of animals. 
Dangerous dog means any dog that according to the records of the Broward County Animal Care and Regulation Division or other animal control or law enforcement authority: 
(1)  Has, when unprovoked, approached any person in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack upon the streets, sidewalks or any public grounds or places, provided that such actions are attested to in a sworn statement by one (1) or more persons and dutifully investigated by an officer; or 
(2)  Has severely injured or killed a domestic animal while off the owner's property; or 
(3)  Has aggressively bitten, attacked or endangered or has inflicted severe injury on a human being on public or private property; or 
(4)  Has been used primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting or is a dog trained for dog fighting. 
Direct control means immediate, continuous physical control of an animal at all times, such as by means of a fence, leash, cord or chain of sufficient strength to restrain the animal. 
Dog means an animal of the Canidae family of the order Carnivora. 
Harbor means the act of keeping and caring for an animal or providing premises to which the animal returns for food, shelter or care for a period of at least forty-eight (48) hours. 
Livestock shall include all animals of the equine, bovine, or swine class, including goats, sheep, mules, horses, hogs, cattle, ostriches, and other grazing animals. 
Officer means any code enforcement officer, as defined in Chapter 2, Article XI of the City Code, any animal care officer or any police officer. 
Owner means any natural person, firm, association or corporation who owns, keeps, harbors or controls an animal, and the knowledge and acts of agents and employees of corporations in regard to animals transported, owned, employed by or in the custody of a corporation shall be held to be the knowledge and act of such corporation. If the owner is a minor as defined by statute, the minor's parent(s) or legal guardian(s) shall be the owner for purposes of this chapter. 
Pet store means any retail establishment open to the public that sells or transfers, or offers for sale or transfer, dogs and/or cats, regardless of the age of the dog or cat. 
Pet store operator means a person who owns or operates a pet store. 
Severe injury means any physical injury to a human being or animal that results in a broken bone or bones, or any cut, puncture, piercing or breakage of the skin or tissue made with the teeth or fangs of any animal, or a disfiguring laceration or lacerations requiring sutures or reconstructive surgery or as further defined in F.S. § 767.11(3), as amended from time to time. 
Summons to appear means a hearing notice issued to an alleged violator, in accordance with the provisions of section 2-330 et seq. of the city code of ordinances (community standards and code enforcement), advising the alleged violator of a hearing before the special magistrate concerning a violation. 
Unprovoked means that the victim who has been conducting himself or herself peacefully and lawfully has been bitten or chased in a menacing fashion or attacked by a dog. 
Wild animal means any animal classified as wildlife by the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission, pursuant to the Florida Administrative Code, Title 68 and Florida Statutes, Chapter 372, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 04-13, § 2, 4-21-04; Ord. No. 16-15, § 2, 8-17-16)  
Sec. 6-2. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this chapter to ensure that dogs are subject to classification as "dangerous" upon the first instance of severely injuring or killing a domestic animal while off of its owner's property, while adopting the remaining provisions of section 4-2(k) of the Broward County Animal Care and Regulation Ordinance, Part II Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4 Animal and Fowl's definition of "dangerous dog." Further it is the intent of this Chapter to provide for animal control in the City of Miramar, utilizing the County Ordinance and the Broward County Division of Animal Care and Regulation's procedures and penalties to enforce this chapter as well as Chapter 2, "Administration", Article XI, "Community Standards and Code Enforcement" and any other applicable provisions of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 04-13, § 2, 4-21-04)  
Sec. 6-3. - Dogs at large prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this section for any person to permit any dog to be at large as defined herein. 
(b)  No dog shall be allowed to stray, run or go at large upon any public property or street, sidewalk or park. No dog shall be allowed to stray, run or go at large upon the private property of another without the consent of the property owner. A dog shall be kept under the direct control of the owner or keeper when, outside, on the private property of another. While on a dog owner's or keeper's property, a dog shall be kept in such a manner so that it cannot stray, run or go at large upon any public property or street, sidewalk or park. 
(c)  Any dog that is on private property without the consent of the property owner or resident may be captured in a humane trap or otherwise humanely confined. A person capturing an at large dog will be responsible for the humane care of the dog until the captured dog is turned over to the Broward County Animal Care and Regulation Division, or other humane organization, or licensed wildlife trapper. A person shall not entice a dog to become at large for the purpose of trapping or apprehending when that dog would otherwise not be at large. 
(d)  Any person confining or leashing a dog must do so in a manner that is not injurious to the dog's health. 
(e)  In order for a dog to be allowed on a public street, road, park or other public property, unless otherwise specifically permitted, the dog shall be under the direct control of the owner or keeper, except while hunting pursuant to a permit or during an obedience demonstration, show, trial, training exercise, competition, show and/or match or educational program, so long as sufficient precautions are taken by the owner of the dog and/or sponsor of the event to ensure the safety and protection of both the public and other animals. 
(f)  Any dog at large that has attacked or bitten any person or domestic animal in an unprovoked attack shall be in violation of this section. 
(g)  "At large" shall not include dogs actually working livestock, or dogs being trained to work livestock. 
(h)  Any dog found by an officer to be at large may be seized and impounded and, as an alternative or in addition to impoundment, the officer finding said dog at large shall issue a citation as provided in section 4-28 of the Broward County Animal Care and Regulation Ordinance, Part II Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4 Animals and Fowl or issue a Civil Citation/ Summons to Appear as provided in Chapter 2, "Administration", Article XI, "Community Standards and Code Enforcement", of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 04-13, § 2, 4-21-04)  
Sec. 6-3.5. - Tethering of dogs. 
"Dog tethering" is defined as the restraining of a dog outside of a house or other habitable structure by tying the dog to any object or structure, including, without limitation, a house, tree, fence, post, garage or shed, by any means, including, without limitation, a chain, rope, cord, leash or running line, but shall not include the use of a leash used to walk the dog or to forms of restraint used in the transportation of a dog. It shall be unlawful for a dog's owner, as defined in section 6-1 above, to tether a dog except when all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The dog is in visual range of the owner, and the owner is located outside with the dog. 
(2)  The tether is connected to the dog by a buckle-type collar or a body harness made of nylon or leather, not less than one (1) inch in width. 
(3)  The tether terminates at both ends with a swivel, is at least ten (10) feet long and is free of tangles. 
(4)  Pulley, running line or trolley systems are at least fifteen (15) feet in length and are less than seven (7) feet above the ground. 
(5)  The dog is tethered in such a manner as to prevent injury, strangulation or entanglement. 
(6)  The dog is not outside during a period of extreme weather, including, without limitation, extreme heat or near-freezing temperatures, thunderstorms, tornadoes, tropical storms or hurricanes. 
(7)  The dog has access to clean drinking water and dry ground. 
(8)  The dog is not sick or injured. 
(9)  If there are multiple dogs, each dog is tethered separately. 
This section shall be enforced utilizing the city's code enforcement process found at City Code, Chapter 2, "Administration", Article XI, "Community Standards and Code Enforcement", or by any other applicable enforcement procedure available by City Ordinance or state law. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the arrest and criminal prosecution of an owner for acts of animal cruelty within the scope of and punishable by the provisions of F.S. Ch. 828. 
(Ord. No. 10-07, § 2, 3-3-10)  
Sec. 6-4. - Nuisance dogs and cats. 
(a)  Any person wishing to capture and remove a nuisance dog or cat from his or her property may obtain a live animal trap from the Broward County Animal Care and Regulation Division, as provided in section 4-4 of the Broward County Animal Care and Regulation Ordinance, Part II Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4 Animals and Fowl. 
(b)  Any animal found to be a nuisance and removed to the division shall be impounded in accordance with section 4-5 of the Broward County Animal Care and Regulation Ordinance, Part II Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4 Animals and Fowl. 
(Ord. No. 04-13, § 2, 4-21-04)  
Sec. 6-5. - Confinement during heat. 
Any unspayed female dog or cat in heat (estrus) shall be confined during such period of time in a house, building or secure enclosure. Said enclosure shall be constructed so that no other dog or cat may gain access to the confined animal, except for intentional breeding purposes. 
(Ord. No. 04-13, § 2, 4-21-04)  
Sec. 6-6. - Permitting animal to commit a nuisance. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this section for any person who owns or harbors any animal to permit said animal to defecate upon: 
(1)  The sidewalk of any public or private street; or 
(2)  Any public park, public property or public school ground, other than in areas designated for that purpose; or 
(3)  Any private property not belonging to the owner of the animal unless said person makes an immediate effort to remove any feces deposited by the animal; or 
(4)  Any public or private swale or street right-of-way serving to convey storm water to a canal, lake or other receiving water, unless said person makes an immediate effort to remove any feces deposited by the animal. 
(b)  The actions of an animal constitute a nuisance when an animal disturbs the right of, threatens the safety of, or harms a member of the general public, or damages the property of others. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, possess or maintain an animal in such a manner so as to constitute a public nuisance. By way of example, and not of limitation, the following acts or actions by an owner or possessor of an animal are declared to be a public nuisance: 
(1)  Allowing or permitting any animal to habitually bark, whine, howl, crow, cackle or make other loud and continual noise resulting in a serious annoyance or interference to the neighboring residents, causing a disturbance of the public peace and welfare, shall be deemed to be committing an act in violation of this section. 
(2)  Allowing or permitting an animal to continually damage the property of anyone other than its owner, including, but not limited to, turning over garbage containers or damaging gardens, flowers or other plant material. 
(3)  Maintaining an animal with a medical condition that could lead to a widespread epidemic that would ultimately be dangerous to the public health, unless the animal is kept in a manner that minimizes the public health threat and is undergoing treatment for the disease in accordance with locally accepted veterinary standards. 
(4)  Maintaining an animal or animals in an environment of unsanitary conditions which results in offensive odors or is dangerous to the animal or to public health, welfare or safety. 
(d)  In addition to the penalties provided in the City Code for the violation of the provisions hereof, the city reserves the right to institute any lawful civil action or criminal proceeding appropriate to enforce this chapter and prevent or abate public nuisances arising or related to violations thereof. 
(Ord. No. 04-13, § 2, 4-21-04)  
Sec. 6-7. - Prima facie evidence of violation. 
If any animal shall be found in violation of the provisions of this chapter, proof of the violation and identity of the animal shall be prima facie evidence of the violation of this chapter by the owner of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 04-13, § 2, 4-21-04)  
Sec. 6-8. - Dangerous dogs. 
(a)  In the event that an incident involving any dog that may be dangerous as defined in this chapter is reported, then the Broward County Division of Animal Care and Regulation may proceed with the procedures and penalties for dangerous dogs contained in the Broward County Animal Care and Regulation Ordinance, Part II Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4 Animals and Fowl, or the City may proceed with the procedures and penalties described in either Chapter 4 of the County Code or in the City Code. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the definition of "dangerous dog" as provided in this chapter, no dog may be classified dangerous if an injury or damage is sustained by a person who, at the time said injury or damage was sustained, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the dog, or if lawfully on the property, was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the dog or its owner or a family member, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. No dog may be classified dangerous if the dog was protecting or defending a human being within the immediate vicinity of the dog from an unjustified attack or assault. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to dogs owned and used by a law enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 04-13, § 2, 4-21-04)  
Sec. 6-9. - Animal bites with injuries. 
(a)  If any animal inflicts serious injuries as defined in this chapter or attacks and/or kills a domestic animal as described in this chapter, definition of "Dangerous Dog", the animal's owner or keeper shall be subject to the provisions of section 4-14 of the Broward County Animal Care and Regulation Division, Part II Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4 Animals and Fowl. If the Animal Care and Regulation Division concludes following an animal bite investigation that the animal inflicted severe injuries while unprovoked, the owner or keeper shall, at all times that the animal is not securely confined indoors or confined in an enclosure: 
(1)  Muzzle the animal in such a manner as to prevent it from biting or injuring any person or other animal; and 
(2)  Keep the animal on a leash with the owner or keeper in attendance. 
(b)  If any animal inflicts serious injuries on a person or attacks and/or kills a domestic animal as described above, the owner or keeper of the animal and the animal shall be subject to the procedures and penalties for dangerous dogs contained in the Broward County Animal Care and Regulation Ordinance, Part II Code of Ordinances, Chapter 4 Animals and Fowl. 
(c)  Failure to comply with the requirements above shall constitute a violation of this section. Any person cited for an infraction for bites and/or unmuzzled animals shall pay the civil penalty or penalties in the amount set by Broward County. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions above, the city shall not be precluded from utilizing the procedures and penalties described in Chapter 2, "Administration", Article XI, "Community Standards and Code Enforcement", of the City Code, and any other means as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 04-13, § 2, 4-21-04)  
Sec. 6-10. - Wild animals. 
(a)  No person shall own or harbor any wild animal as a pet without the appropriate state permits pursuant to the Florida Administrative Code, Title 68 and F.S. Ch. 372, as amended from time to time. 
(b)  Zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions and circuses, which utilize wild animals in their performances or exhibitions shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 04-13, § 2, 4-21-04)  
Sec. 6-11. - Bird sanctuary. 
(a)  The city is hereby declared a bird sanctuary. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to hunt, wound, molest, injure, or kill any bird in the lands embracing the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to capture, except for the preservation of the health and welfare of the public, for resale or private use, any bird in the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-13, § 2, 4-21-04)  
Sec. 6-12. - Livestock. 
The keeping of livestock within the city is prohibited except as provided in section 713.2 of the Miramar Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 04-13, § 2, 4-21-04)  
Sec. 6-13. - Reserved.  
Sec. 6-14. - Sale or transfer of dogs and/or cats. 
(a)  No pet store shall display, sell, trade, deliver, barter, lease, rent, auction, give away, transfer, offer for sale or transfer, or otherwise dispose of dogs or cats in the city, except for dogs or cats that were: 
(1)  Bred and reared on property owned by and zoned for the person or pet store; 
(2)  Obtained from an animal shelter; 
(3)  Obtained from an animal rescue organization; or 
(4)  Obtained from an animal shelter or animal rescue organization that operates out of or in connection with a pet store. 
(b)  Certificate of source—A pet store shall post and maintain, on or within three (3) feet of each dog's or cat's kennel, cage or enclosure, a certificate of source for each dog or cat offered for sale or transfer, and shall provide a copy of such certificate to the purchaser or transferee of any dog or cat sold or transferred. 
(c)  Violations—Enforcement. 
(1)  Any person who violates this section shall be subject to the penalties set forth in sections 2-339 and 2-343 of the city code of ordinances, or by any other applicable enforcement procedure available by city ordinance or state law. 
(2)  Additionally, the city may initiate a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin any violation of this section. 
(3)  In addition to any other penalty, a pet store operator who is found to have falsified a certificate of source shall pay $2,500.00 in damages to each recipient of such falsified certificate. 
(Ord. No. 16-15, § 2, 8-17-16)  
Chapter 7 - CABLE TELEVISION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, adopted March 16, 2005, amended Ch. 7, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Business taxes, permits and business regulations, Ch. 11; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23. 
State Law reference— Cable television franchises, F.S. § 166.046; trespass and larceny of cable television service, F.S. § 812.14. 
 
ARTICLE I. - CABLE TELEVISION CODE 
 
Sec. 7-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the City of Miramar, Florida Cable Communications Code. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
Sec. 7-2. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not otherwise defined herein or in any franchise agreement that might be granted hereunder shall be given the meaning set forth in the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L. No. 102-385, 106 Stat. 1460, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996 codified at 47 U.S.C., and as those Acts may hereinafter be amended (collectively the "Cable Act"), and, if not defined therein, their common and ordinary meaning. 
Access channel means any channel on a cable system set aside without charge by the franchisee for non-commercial public, educational and/or governmental use. 
Affiliate means any person which directly or indirectly owns or controls a grantee or franchisee, any person which a grantee or franchisee directly or indirectly owns or which it controls, or any person under common ownership or control with a grantee or franchisee. 
Applicant means any person submitting an application within the meaning of this chapter. 
Application means any proposal, submission or request to (1) construct and operate a cable system within the city; (2) transfer a franchise or control of the franchisee; (3) renew a franchise; (4) modify a franchise; or (5) seek any other relief from the city pursuant to this chapter, a franchise agreement, the Cable Act, or other applicable law. An application includes an applicant's initial proposal, submission or request, as well as any and all subsequent amendments or supplements to the proposal and relevant correspondence. 
Basic cable service or basic service means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals, and public, educational, or governmental access channels. 
Business day or working day shall mean any Monday through Saturday. 
Cable Act means Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. §521 et. seq., as amended. 
Cable service means the one-way transmission of video or other programming services to subscribers together with any subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming services. Cable service shall include entities that provide cable service in their communities, regardless of whether the entity is a cable operator or another form of video service provider, which utilizes part of all of public rights-of-way. 
Cable system, cable television system, or system means any facility, operating by means of coaxial cable, optical fiber, or other transmission lines or forms of transmission and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the city. Such term does not include (a) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one (1) or more television broadcast stations; (b) a facility that serves only subscribers in one (1) or more multiple unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless such facility uses any street; (c) a facility of a common carrier that is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. § 201 et seq., except that such facility will be considered a cable system to the extent it is used in the transmission of video programming, whether on a common carrier or non-common carrier basis, directly to subscribers; or (d) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems. The foregoing definition of "cable system" shall not be deemed to circumscribe the valid authority of the city to regulate the activities of any other communications system or provider of communications services. 
City means the City of Miramar, a municipal corporation of the State of Florida, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form. 
Commission means the City Commission of the City of Miramar, Florida. 
Control of a franchisee, grantee or applicant means possession of the ability to direct or cause the direction of the management or policies of a franchisee, grantee or applicant, or the operation of a franchisee's system, either directly or indirectly, whether through operational control, ownership of voting securities, by contract or understanding, or in any other manner. 
Fair market value means the price that a willing buyer would pay to a willing seller for a going concern but with no value allocated to the franchise itself. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission, or any successor governmental entity thereto. 
Franchise means the right granted by the city to a franchisee in a franchise agreement to construct, maintain and operate a cable system under, on, and over streets, roads and any other public ways, rights-of-ways, or easements within all or specified areas of the city. The term does not include any license or permit that may be required by this chapter or other laws, ordinances or regulations of the city for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city or for disturbing or carrying out any work on any street. 
Franchise agreement means a contract entered into in accordance with the provisions of this chapter between the city and a franchisee that sets forth the terms and conditions under which the franchise will be exercised. 
Franchise area means the territory within the corporate limits of the city as of the effective date of a franchise and as those limits may change from time to time through annexation or other legal means, over which the terms of a franchise agreement shall extend. 
Franchisee means any person granted a franchise pursuant to this chapter who has entered into a franchise agreement with the city. 
Grantee means any person granted a franchise pursuant to this chapter, but who has not yet entered into a franchise agreement with the city. 
Gross revenues means all revenues recognized by the franchisee derived from the operation of the cable system to provide cable services within the city. Gross revenues includes, but is not limited to, fees charged subscribers for basic service; fees charged subscribers for any optional, premium, per-channel or per-program service; fees charged subscribers for any tier of service other than basic service; installation, disconnection, re-connection and change-in-service fees; leased access fees; revenue from converter rentals or sales; revenues from studio and studio equipment rental; advertising revenues; revenues from home shopping channels; and the sale, exchange or cablecast by the franchisee of any programming developed on or for access channels or institutional users. It is hereby expressly provided that unless otherwise inconsistent with applicable law, gross revenues shall be the basis for computing the franchise fee imposed pursuant to section 7-16 hereof. Gross revenues shall not include any taxes on services furnished by the franchisee which are imposed upon any subscriber or user by the state, county, or other governmental unit and collected by the franchisee on behalf of said governmental unit and which the franchisee passes on in full to the applicable tax authority or authorities (provided, however, that the franchise fee shall not be considered such a tax). Gross revenues shall also not include deposits, refunds and credits made to subscribers, and bad debt. 
Institutional network means a voice, data and/or video communications system, as may be described more specifically in a franchise agreement, constructed, operated and/or maintained by the franchisee for the city, the transmissions on which are generally available only to, and intended to be sent and received by, persons other than cable subscribers generally. 
Interconnection means the electronic connection of two (2) or more cable systems for the purpose of sharing access channel programming or other signals. 
Leased access channel means a channel designated in accordance with Section 612 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 532, for commercial use by persons unaffiliated with the franchisee. 
Overbuild means a cable system constructed to serve subscribers in an area of the city served by an existing franchisee. 
Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint venture, organization or legal entity of any kind, and any lawful trustee, successor, assignee, transferee or personal representative thereof, but shall not mean the city. 
Service tier means a category of cable service provided by a franchisee and for which a separate charge is made by the franchisee. 
State-of-the-art means that level of technical performance, equipment, components and services equivalent to those which have been developed and demonstrated to be generally accepted and used in the cable industry, excluding "tests" involving new products offered for one (1) year or less. In no event shall a system having a bandwidth of less than seven hundred fifty (750) MHZ be considered "state-of-the-art," unless agreed to by the city. Nothing herein shall be construed to require a franchisee to employ any specific transmission technology. 
Street or streets means the surface, the air space above the surface and the area below the surface of any public street, highway, road, boulevard, concourse, driveway, freeway, thoroughfare, parkway, sidewalk, bridge, tunnel, park, waterway, dock, bulkhead, wharf, pier, court, lane, path, alley, way, drive, circle, easement, or any other public right-of-way or public place, including public utility easements dedicated for compatible uses, or any other property in which the city holds any kind of property interest or over which the city exercises any type of lawful control, and any temporary or permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon, as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to construct and operate a cable system. 
Subscriber means any person who lawfully receives cable service delivered over the cable system. 
Subscriber base means the total number of residential and commercial subscribers within the city. For purposes of calculating and identifying subscribers under bulk or multi-user contracts, for determining compliance with this chapter, for imposing capital contributions pursuant to this chapter and fines for violations of this chapter, a franchisee shall count each individual unit or home (e.g., in a multiple family dwelling, a unit will be defined as each subscriber unit within the structure) included within a contract as one (1) subscriber. Franchisee shall not use any equivalency measures except as may be required by FCC rules. 
System malfunction means any cable system equipment, facility or signal failure or malfunction that results in the loss of satisfactory service on one (1) or more channels to one (1) or more subscribers. A malfunction is major if it affects ten (10) or more subscribers. 
Transfer of a franchise means any transaction in which (1) a majority ownership interest or change of control in a franchisee or its cable system is transferred from one (1) person or group of persons to another person or group of persons so that control of a franchise or cable system is transferred; or (2) the rights and/or obligations held by a franchisee under a franchise agreement are transferred or assigned to another person or group of persons. A transfer is "pro forma" when it involves a transfer to an affiliate or subsidiary of the franchisee and will not result in a substantial change in the ultimate ownership or control of the franchisee. 
Two-way capability means the incorporation into a cable system of all appropriate design and engineering characteristics and features so that two-way transmission, including addressability, over the system can be implemented and activated. 
Video channel or channel means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television channel, including the associated audio signal, as television channel is defined by the FCC by regulation or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
Sec. 7-3. - Intent and purposes. 
(a)  It is the intent of the city and the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare by providing for the grant of one (1) or more franchises for the construction and operation of cable systems within the city; to provide for the regulation, to the extent provided for by law, of each cable system within the city in the public interest; unless prohibited by federal or state law, to provide for the payment of fees and other valuable consideration by a franchisee to the city for the use of streets by its cable system; to promote the widespread availability of quality cable service to city residents and businesses, the city, and other public institutions; to encourage the development of cable and other communications technologies and cable systems as a means of communication between and among members of the public, city businesses, the city, and other public institutions; to promote competitive cable rates and services; to promote the safe and efficient use of streets; and to encourage the provision of a diversity of informational sources to city residents, businesses, the city, and other public institutions by cable technology. 
(b)  Recognizing the continuing development of communications technology and uses, it is the policy of the city to encourage experimentation and innovation in the development of cable system uses, services, programming and techniques that will be of general benefit to the community to the extent all such experiments and innovations are consistent with applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
Sec. 7-4. - Grant of authority; franchise required. 
(a)  The city may grant one (1) or more franchises in accordance with this chapter. 
(b)  No person may construct or operate a cable system, multi-channel video programming distribution system, or any communications transmission facilities or information service facilities over, on, or under public streets in the city without a franchise granted by the city unless otherwise authorized by law, and no person may be granted a franchise without having entered into a franchise agreement with the city pursuant to this chapter or the city's police power. 
(c)  Franchisee shall submit an application, and obtain applicable authorization from the city separate and apart from this chapter for the privilege of providing other communications, telecommunications, information, telephone, video or data services unless the city is expressly prohibited by applicable law from imposing this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
Sec. 7-5. - Franchise characteristics. 
(a)  A franchise authorizes use of streets for installing cables, wires, lines, optical fiber, underground conduit, ducts, conductors, amplifiers, vaults, and other facilities as necessary and pertinent to operate a cable system within a specified area of the city, but does not expressly or implicitly authorize the franchisee to provide service to, or install cables, wires, lines, underground conduit, or any other equipment or facilities upon private property without owner consent (except for use of compatible easements pursuant to Section 621 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 541(a)(2)), or to use publicly or privately owned conduits without a separate agreement with the owners. 
(b)  A franchise is nonexclusive, and will not expressly or implicitly preclude the issuance of other franchises to operate cable systems within the city, or affect the city's right to authorize use of streets to other persons to operate cable systems or for other purposes as it determines appropriate. 
(c)  Once a franchise agreement has been accepted and executed by the city and a franchisee, such franchise agreement shall constitute a contract between the franchisee and the city, and the terms, conditions and provisions of such franchise agreement, together with this chapter and all other duly enacted and applicable laws, shall define the rights and obligations of the franchisee and the city relating to the franchise. 
(d)  All privileges prescribed by a franchise shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of the streets, and the city reserves the right to reasonably designate where a franchisee's facilities are to be placed within or, upon the streets. 
(e)  A franchise shall be a privilege that is in the public trust and is personal to the original franchisee. No transfer of a franchise shall occur without the prior consent of the city and unless application is made by the franchisee, and city approval obtained, pursuant to section 7-24 hereof and the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
Sec. 7-6. - Franchisee subject to other laws, police power. 
(a)  A franchisee shall at all times be subject to and shall comply with all applicable federal, state and city laws. A franchisee shall at all times be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power of the city. 
(b)  Except as may be specifically provided in this chapter or under the terms of a franchise agreement and subject to the Cable Act, the failure of the city, upon one (1) or more occasions, to exercise a right or to require compliance or performance under this chapter or a franchise agreement shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver of such right or a waiver of current or subsequent compliance or performance. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
Sec. 7-7. - Interpretation of franchise terms. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to a franchise agreement as if fully set forth in the franchise agreement as of the effective date of the franchise agreement, and the express terms of the franchise agreement will prevail over conflicting or inconsistent provisions in this chapter, unless such franchise agreement expresses an explicit intent to waive a requirement of this chapter. In the event of a conflict between the terms of an existing franchise agreement and this chapter, the franchise agreement shall govern unless otherwise provided by applicable law. 
(b)  This chapter is not intended to create private rights of a contractual nature enforceable against the city. 
(c)  Except as to matters which are governed by federal law or regulation, a franchise agreement will be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the State of Florida. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
Sec. 7-8. - Applications for grant, renewal, modification or transfer of franchises. 
(a)  A written application shall be filed with the city for (1) grant of a new franchise; (2) renewal of a franchise under the formal procedures in accordance with Section 626 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546; (3) modification of a franchise agreement; (4) a transfer of a franchise; or (5) any other relief from the city pursuant to this chapter or a franchise agreement. 
(b)  To be acceptable for filing, a signed original of the application shall be submitted together with five (5) copies, be accompanied by the required application filing fee as set forth in subsection 7-8(i) hereof, conform to any applicable request for proposals, and contain all required information. All applications shall include the names and addresses of persons authorized to act on behalf of the applicant with respect to the application. 
(c)  All applications accepted for filing shall be made available by the city for public inspection. 
(d)  An application for the grant of a new franchise may be filed pursuant to a request for proposals issued by the city or on an unsolicited basis. The city, upon receipt of an unsolicited application, may issue a request for proposals. If the city elects to issue a request for proposals upon receipt of an unsolicited application, the applicant may submit an amended application in response to the request for proposals, or may inform the city that its unsolicited application should be considered in response to the request for proposals, or may withdraw its unsolicited application. An application that does not conform to the requirements of a request for proposals may be considered non-responsive and denied on that basis. 
(e)  An application for the grant of an initial franchise shall contain, at minimum, the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant and identification of the ownership and control of the applicant, including: the names and addresses of all persons with five (5) percent or more ownership interest in the applicant, including the names and addresses of parents or subsidiaries holding such ownership interests directly or indirectly; the persons who control the applicant; all officers and directors of the applicant; and any other cable system ownership interest of each named person; 
(2)  An indication of whether the applicant, or any person controlling the applicant, or any officer, director or person with five (5) percent or more of ownership interest in the applicant, has been adjudged bankrupt, had a cable franchise or license revoked, or been found by any court or administrative agency to have violated a security or antitrust law, or to have committed a felony, or any crime involving moral turpitude; and, if so, identification of any such person and a full explanation of the circumstances; 
(3)  A demonstration of the applicant's technical, legal and financial ability to construct and/or operate the proposed cable system, including identification of key personnel; 
(4)  A statement prepared by a certified public accountant or duly authorized financial officer of the applicant regarding the applicant's financial ability to complete the construction and operation of the cable system proposed; 
(5)  A description of the applicant's prior experience in cable system ownership, construction and operation, and identification of communities in which the applicant or any person controlling the applicant or having more than a ten (10) percent ownership interest in applicant has, or has had, a cable franchise or license or any interest therein; 
(6)  Identification of the area of the city to be served by the proposed cable system, including a description of the service area's boundaries; 
(7)  A description of the physical facilities proposed, including channel capacity, performance characteristics, headend, and access facilities; upon request, the applicant shall make information on technical design available for inspection; 
(8)  Where applicable, a description of the construction of the proposed system, including an estimate of plant mileage and its location, the proposed construction schedule, a description, where appropriate, of how services will be converted from existing facilities to new facilities, and information on the availability of space in conduits including, where appropriate, an estimate of the cost of any necessary rearrangement of existing facilities; 
(9)  For informational purposes, the proposed rate structure, including projected charges for each service tier, installation, converters, and other equipment or services, and the applicant's ownership interest in any proposed program services to be delivered over the cable system; 
(10)  A demonstration of how the applicant's proposal will reasonably meet the future cable-related needs and interests of the community, including a description of how the proposal will meet the needs described in any recent community needs assessment conducted by or for the city; 
(11)  A description of cable services offered by the applicant and applicant's intention to make such cable services available to subscribers in the city; 
(12)  In the case of an application for a new franchise or the transfer of a franchise where the transferee is not a publicly traded corporation, pro forma financial projections for the first five (5) years of the franchise term, including a statement of projected income, and a schedule of planned capital additions, with all significant assumptions explained in notes or supporting schedules; 
(13)  If an applicant proposes to provide cable service to an area already served by an existing cable franchisee, the identification of the area where the overbuild would occur, the potential subscriber density in the area which would encompass the overbuild, and the ability of the streets to accommodate an additional system; 
(14)  Any other information as may be reasonably necessary to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this chapter and information that the city may request of the applicant that is relevant to the city's consideration of the application; 
(15)  An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the application, acknowledging the enforceability of application commitments, and certifying that the proposal meets all federal and state law requirements. 
(f)  An application for modification of a franchise agreement shall include, at minimum, the following information: 
(1)  The specific modification requested; 
(2)  The justification for the requested modification, including the impact of the requested modification on subscribers and others, and the financial impact on the applicant if the modification is approved or disapproved; 
(3)  A statement whether the modification is sought pursuant to Section 625 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 545, and, if so, a demonstration that the requested modification meets the standards set forth in 47 U.S.C. § 545; 
(4)  Any other information necessary for the city to make an informed determination on the application for modification; and 
(5)  An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the application, and certifying that the application is consistent with all federal and state law requirements. 
(g)  An application for renewal of a franchise shall comply with the requirements of section 7-23 hereof. 
(h)  An application for approval of a transfer of a franchise shall comply with the requirements of section 7-24 hereof. 
(i)  Unless prohibited by applicable law, to be acceptable for filing, an application shall be accompanied by a filing fee in the following amount, as appropriate: 
(1)  For a new or initial franchise: ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00); 
(2)  For renewal of a franchise: ten thousand dollars ($10,000); 
(3)  For a transfer of a franchise (other than a pro forma transfer): ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00); 
(4)  For a pro forma transfer of a franchise: one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); 
(5)  For modification of a franchise agreement pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 545: five thousand dollars ($5,000.00); 
(6)  For any other relief: one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
The purpose of the filing fee is to defray a portion of the city's cost in processing an application. The filing fee is therefore intended to be a charge incidental to the awarding or enforcing of a franchise within the meaning of section 622(g)(2)(D) of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 542(g)(2)(D), and may not be deducted from the franchise fee imposed in a franchise agreement or passed through to subscribers. 
(j)  Unless otherwise prohibited by applicable law, the grant of an initial franchise, a renewed franchise, an application to modify a franchise agreement, or an application to transfer a franchise shall be subject to a processing fee in an amount not to exceed the reasonable and justifiable costs incurred by the city in considering the application, including, but not limited to in-house staff times, attorneys' fees, or administrative costs, less the amount of the filing fee pursuant to section 7-8(i). Within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the resolution approving or denying the franchise agreement or modification or transfer thereof by the city commission, the city shall notify the applicant of the amount of any processing fee and its method of calculation. If the processing fee is not paid to the city within sixty (60) calendar days of the date of the city commission resolution approving or denying the franchise agreement or a modification or transfer thereof, the city shall notify such applicant and the applicant shall pay a late fee eighteen (18) percent per annum of the amount of the unpaid or underpaid fee provided, however, that such rate does [not] exceed the maximum amount allowed under applicable law. If said fee is not received in total by the city within sixty (60) calendar days of the date of the invoice, the city shall notify the applicant and, if applicable, the franchise shall be revoked. This processing fee is intended to be a charge incidental to the awarding or enforcing of a franchise within the meaning of Section 622(G)(2)(d) of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 542(G)(2)(d), and may not be deducted from the franchisee fee imposed in a franchise agreement and shall not be passed through to subscribers. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
Sec. 7-9. - Grant of franchises. 
(a)  The city may grant a franchise for a period not to exceed ten (10) years to serve all or a specified area of the city. 
(b)  The city may make the grant of an initial franchise conditioned upon the completion of construction within a reasonably prescribed time or upon the performance of other specific obligations which are to be set forth in the franchise agreement, specifying that failure to comply with the condition will cause the franchise to become null and void without further action by the city, or may require the franchisee to pay liquidated damages as specified in a franchise agreement. 
(c)  In evaluating an application for an initial franchise, the city may consider, among other things, the following factors: the applicant's technical, financial, and legal qualifications to construct and operate the proposed system; the adequacy of the proposed construction arrangements, facilities, equipment, and services based on the public convenience, safety and welfare; the applicant's experience in constructing and operating cable systems and providing cable service in other communities, if any; the ability of city streets to accommodate the proposed system; the potential disruption to users of city streets and any resultant inconvenience to the public; and whether the proposal will meet reasonably anticipated community needs and serve the public interest. Evaluation by the city shall not be based on the content of the programming the applicant proposes to provide. 
(d)  The city shall hold a public hearing to consider an application or applications. The applicant(s) shall be notified of the hearing and shall be given an opportunity to be heard. Based upon the application(s), the testimony presented at the public hearing, any recommendations of the city manager or staff, and any other information relevant to the application(s), the city shall decide by resolution whether to grant or deny a franchise application(s) and decide the terms and conditions of any franchise(s) granted. Upon the grant of a franchise, the grantee's application shall become an integral part of said franchise, and the grantee shall be bound by the representations therein made. This subsection shall satisfy the public notice requirements of 47 U.S.C § 546. Following at least ten (10) days prior notice to the grantee and the public, the city commission may hold a public hearing at which it will receive comment on the proposed franchise agreement. 
(e)  If the city grants a franchise application, the city and the grantee shall agree on the terms of a franchise agreement within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the city resolution making the grant. This period may be extended for good cause by the city. If agreement is not reached with the city within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the city resolution making the grant, or if the period is not extended by the city, the franchise grant will be null and void without further action by the city. 
(f)  After complying with the above requirements, the city commission shall approve or disapprove the proposed franchise agreement by resolution, or may direct that it be subject to further negotiation. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
Sec. 7-10. - Insurance; surety; indemnification. 
(a)  A franchisee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of the franchise specifically agrees that it will maintain, throughout the entire term of the franchise including any renewals thereof, the following liability insurance coverage insuring the city and the franchisee and naming the city as additional insured: worker's compensation and employer liability insurance to meet all requirements of Florida law, automobile liability insurance and general comprehensive liability insurance with respect to the construction, operation and maintenance of the cable system, and the conduct of franchisee's business in the city, in the minimum amounts of: 
(1)  One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for property damage in any one (1) accident; 
(2)  One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal bodily injury to any one (1) person; 
(3)  Three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) for personal bodily injury in any one (1) accident 
(4)  Automobile liability insurance covering all owned, hired and non-owned vehicles used in connection with any activities arising out of this chapter. Such insurance shall afford coverage with a combined single limit of no less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence; and 
(5)  Franchisee shall require any subcontractors to provide adequate insurance and provide proof of insurance to the city upon request. 
(b)  All insurance policies shall be with insurance companies authorized to do business in the State of Florida; shall be with companies with a minimum rating of A-1 in Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition and in a form approved by the city manager. The city may require coverage and amounts in excess of the above minimums where necessary to reflect changing liability exposure and limits or where required by law. 
(c)  A franchise shall keep on file with the city certificates of insurance and, upon reasonable notice and request, shall make all insurance policies available for city inspection. 
(d)  All insurance liability policies shall name the city, its officers, boards, commissions, commissioners, agents and employees, as additional insureds and shall further provide that any cancellation or reduction in coverage shall not be effective unless thirty (30) days prior written notice thereof has been given to the city. A franchisee shall not cancel any required insurance policy without submission of proof that the franchisee has obtained alternative insurance satisfactory to the city which complies with this chapter. 
(e)  A franchisee, following receipt of notice of a claim from the city, shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the city, its officials, boards, commissions, commissioners, agents, and employees, against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings, judgments for damages or equitable relief and costs and expenses arising out of the construction, maintenance or operation of its cable system, the conduct of franchisee's business in the city, or in any way arising out of the franchisee's enjoyment or exercise of a franchise granted hereunder, regardless of whether the act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or a franchise agreement, provided, however, that franchisee's obligation hereunder shall not extend to any claims caused by the willful misconduct or sole gross negligence of the city, its officials, boards, commissioners, agents or employees. Franchisee shall not be required to hold the city harmless for action relating to programming decision outside of franchisee's control, or the city's use of the cable system or the use of public, government and education access channels, facilities or funding. This provision includes, but is not limited to, the city's reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in defending against any such claim, suit or proceedings; and claims arising out of copyright infringements or a failure by the franchisee to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors, or franchisees of programs to be delivered by the cable system, claims arising out of Section 638 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 558, and claims against the franchisee for invasion of the right of privacy, defamation of any person, firm or corporation, or the violation or infringement of any copyright, trade mark, trade name, service mark or patent, or of any other right of any person, firm or corporation. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from participating in the defense of any litigation by its own counsel and obtaining indemnification of the reasonable costs associated therewith. 
(f)  No provision of this section shall be construed as a waiver by the city of any statutory limitations or damages under Florida law. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
Sec. 7-11. - Security fund. 
(a)  A franchise agreement shall provide that, prior to the franchise becoming effective, the franchisee shall post with the city security fund to ensure the franchisee's faithful performance of and compliance with all provisions of this chapter, the franchise agreement, and other applicable law, and compliance with all orders, permits and directions of the city, and the payment by the franchisee of any claims, liens, fees, or taxes due the city which arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the system. Such fund may be in the form of a cash deposit, letter of credit, or bond as agreed to in the franchise agreement. The amount of the security fund shall be the amount that the city determines, under circumstances existing at the time, that is necessary to protect the public, to provide adequate incentive to the franchisee to comply with this chapter and the franchise agreement, and to enable the city to effectively enforce compliance therewith. In no event shall such fund be less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000). The franchise agreement shall provide for the procedures to be followed with respect to the security fund. Neither the posting of the cash deposit of filing of an indemnity bond or any form or surety bond with the city, nor the receipt of any damages by the city thereunder, shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the franchisee or limit the liability of the franchisee under the terms of its franchise for damages, either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise. 
(b)  The rights reserved to the city with respect to the security fund or an indemnity bond are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved by this chapter or authorized by other law or the franchise agreement, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such security fund or indemnity bond will affect any other right the city may have. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
Sec. 7-12. - Construction bond. 
(a)  A franchise agreement shall provide that, prior to any cable system construction, upgrade, rebuild or other significant work in the streets, a franchise shall establish in the city's favor a construction bond in an amount specified in the franchise agreement or other authorization as necessary to secure the restoration of the streets and to ensure the franchisee's faithful performance of the construction, upgrade, rebuild or other work, but the amount of such construction bond shall not be less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,0000). 
(b)  In the event a franchisee subject to such a construction bond fails to complete the cable system construction, upgrade rebuild or other significant work in the streets in a safe, timely and competent manner in accord with the provisions of the franchise agreement, there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the franchisee, or the cost of completing or repairing the system construction, upgrade, rebuild or other significant work in the streets plus a reasonable allowance for attorneys' fees, up to the full amount of the bond. The city may also recover against the bond any amount recoverable against the security fund pursuant to section 7-11 hereof where such amount exceeds that available under the security fund. 
(c)  The franchise agreement shall specify that upon completion of the system construction, upgrade, rebuild or other significant work in the streets and payment of all construction obligations of the cable system to the satisfaction of the city, the city may eliminate the bond or reduce its amount. However, the city shall subsequently require an increase in the bond amount for any subsequent construction, upgrade or other work in the streets. In any event, the total amount of the bond shall not exceed the amount specified in the franchise agreement. 
(d)  The construction bond shall be issued by a surety having a minimum rating of A-1 in Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition; shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney; and shall contain the following endorsement: 
"This bond may not be canceled, or allowed to lapse, until sixty (60) days after receipt by the city, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice from the issuer of the bond of intent to cancel or not to renew." 
(e)  The rights reserved by the city with respect to any construction bond established pursuant to this section are in addition to all other rights and remedies the city may have under this chapter, the franchise agreement, or at law or equity. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
Sec. 7-13. - Minimum facilities and services. 
(a)  [ Generally. ] The following minimum requirements for facilities and services apply to all franchises granted by the city. The city may require in a franchise agreement that a franchisee exceed these minimum requirements as incorporated within a franchise agreement, where it determines, under circumstances existing at the time of the application, that the additional requirements are necessary to meet the city's future cable related needs and interests or to serve the public interest. Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, a franchisee shall make available facilities, services, products, benefits, and a level of technology to all subscribers in the city no less than that offered by the franchisee, its parent, affiliate, or subsidiary to any community of equivalent population within twelve (12) months of same being offered to any other city in Broward County, Florida. However, the city hereby reserves the right to waive the aforestated time for good cause. Good cause shall be determined by the city commission if, in its sole discretion, determines such waiver is warranted for good cause. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, a franchisee shall not have any obligation pursuant to this section for a period of twelve (12) months after the effective date of this chapter. 
(1)  Any franchisee granted a franchise or renewal franchise after the effective date of this chapter shall agree to construct, upgrade or reconstruct its cable system with a minimum capacity of at least seven hundred fifty (750) MHz, or the equivalent hereof, including two-way capability as defined herein, and have a minimum capacity of at least seventy-eight (78) video channels available for immediate or potential use. The terms and conditions of a franchise agreement may provide for a larger minimum channel capacity requirement and for future upgrade or the rebuild of a cable system. 
(2)  The city may require in a franchise agreement that a franchisee provide access channels, facilities and other support for public, educational and/or governmental use, in accordance with this chapter. 
(3)  At the request of the city, a franchisee shall provide live and repeat cablecasting of city commission meetings to all subscribers located within the city as may be required in a franchise agreement. 
(4)  A cable system shall provide leased access channels as required by federal law. 
(5)  The franchisee located closest and within two hundred (200) feet from its distribution plant, shall provide to every local government building, accredited public and private schools (K—12) (not to include "home schools"), and public library at least one (1) cable service outlet to each floor of the aforementioned city buildings within its franchise area that are passed by its cable system at no cost to the city or school involved, and shall charge only its standard commercial rate for time and material costs for any additional service outlets to such facilities. 
(6)  A cable system shall include an "emergency alert" capability, which shall allow the city or the appropriate government body in an emergency, to the extent permitted by applicable law, to interrupt cable service, remotely override the audio of all channels on the cable system or to allow for video crawl over all channels consistent with FCC rules regarding access to emergency information for persons with hearing or vision disabilities. 
(7)  A franchisee shall make available to its subscribers equipment capable of decoding closed circuit captioning information for the hearing impaired. A franchisee may impose a reasonable charge for such equipment. 
(8)  Standard installation shall consist of a drop, not exceeding one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from the cable plant to the nearest part of a subscriber's residence or commercial building. Residential drops in excess of one hundred twenty-five (125) feet may be charged according to the franchise rate schedule. 
(9)  To the extent permitted by applicable law, at a minimum, the franchisee will provide a free modem and free unlimited cable internet service to one (1) computer in all connected schools within a year after franchisee makes personal computer-based internet access service via cable commercially available to any residential subscribers within the city. At a minimum, basic and enhanced basic service and service offered on migrated and new product tiers will be provided to all connected public and private schools free of charge. The franchisee will provide a free monthly educational program listing to each connected school to the extent such program listing is available. The franchisee will sponsor local workshops on use of the cable modem service. 
(b)  Interconnection. 
(1)  Upon request and as specified in a franchise agreement, a franchisee shall be required to interconnect with every other cable system within the city on fair and reasonable terms for the purposes of allowing subscribers to view access channels and for the city to utilize services provided over an institutional network or its equivalent. 
(2)  Applications for initial or renewed franchises shall include a plan for interconnection of the cable system to any or all other cable systems operating within the city. Franchisees may apply to the city for relief from this requirement for interconnection. 
(c)  Upon request, as part of an initial or renewal franchise proposal, which renewal proposal shall be subject to the criteria of Section 626 of the Cable Act with respect to assessment of community needs, if requested, a proposal to provide an institutional network ("I-Net") to the city taking into consideration the interconnection of all government and other public buildings as designated by the city. A franchisee may provide the city, subject to city approval, with an equivalent of an I-Net, based on current technology, or a capital grant in lieu of the obligation set forth herein. 
(d)  Construction/build-out. 
(1)  A franchise agreement may specify the construction schedule that will apply to any required construction, upgrade or rebuild. The schedule shall provide for prompt completing of the project, considering the amount and type of construction required, as well as for liquidated damages if the schedule is not met. 
(2)  Unless a franchise agreement provides otherwise, a franchisee shall make cable service available to every dwelling within the franchisee's franchise area. 
(e)  Franchisee's failure to comply with this section shall result in imposition of fines to be paid by the franchisee to the city in the amount of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation with each day of a continuing violation constituting a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
Sec. 7-14. - Technical standards. 
(a)  Any cable system within the city shall meet or exceed the technical standards of the FCC or other applicable federal or state technical standards, including any such standards as hereinafter may be amended or adopted including but not limited to digital transmission, HDTV or other advanced technologies. Specifically, all cable systems shall satisfy the FCC's technical standards contained in 47 C.F.R. 76.605, as such standards may be amended. The system shall be capable of delivering all National Television Systems Committee (NTSC) color and monochrome standards signals and designed to provide picture quality of TASO grade 2 or better and superior reliability. All television signals transmitted on a cable system shall include any closed circuit captioning information for the hearing impaired. Antennas, supporting structures, and outside plant used in the system shall be designed to comply with all generally accepted industry practices and standards and with all federal, state, county, city and/or utility laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(b)  All construction, installation and maintenance shall comply with the National Electrical Safety Code, the National Electric Code, the Florida Building Code and all laws and accepted industry practices, and as hereinafter may be amended or changed. 
(c)  At the times specified in the franchise agreement or as required by FCC rules, the franchisee shall perform at its expense proof of performance tests designed to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this chapter, the franchise agreement, and FCC requirements. The franchisee shall provide, upon request, the proof of performance test results promptly to the city. The city shall have the right to inspect the cable system facilities during and after their construction to ensure compliance with the requirements of the franchise agreement, this chapter, and FCC standards. 
(d)  The city may require, based on good cause, an annual proof of performance test, or other tests as specified in a franchise agreement or applicable law or regulation, to be performed at the expense of the franchisee. The franchisee shall provide the test results promptly to the city. 
(e)  The franchisee shall provide the city ten (10) days advance written notice when a proof of performance test required in subsections (c) and (d) above is scheduled so that the city may have an observer present. 
(f)  A franchisee shall not design, install or operate its facilities in a manner that will interfere with the signals of any communication facilities of the city, pre-existing: broadcast stations, the facilities of any public utility, the cable system of another franchisee, or individual or master antennas used for receiving television or other broadcast signals. 
(g)  In any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, a franchisee shall agree to maintain that level of technology to satisfy the state-of-the-art as defined in section 7.02 herein. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
Sec. 7-15. - Access channels and facilities. 
(a)  Municipal access channels. 
(1)  Applications for an initial or renewed franchise may, and at the city's request, shall include proposals for the provision of at least two (2) access channels, which shall contain programming as authorized solely by the city. 
(2)  At any time the initial access channels provided to the city by a franchisee is programmed during at least eight (8) hours per day with non-duplicative programming (i.e., bulletin board messages will not be considered programming for purposes of this section), Monday through Friday, for six (6) consecutive weeks, the franchisee shall, without charge, at the request of the city, provide the city with a third access channel. In the event the programming on the access channels falls below the amount specified above, then a franchisee shall have the right to deactivate the subsequently provided access channels. The city may by resolution adopt rules and regulations concerning use of the access channels. 
(3)  The city may require in a franchise agreement that a franchisee provide live cablecasting of city commission meetings in their entirety to all of franchisee's subscribers located within the city. The city may require the replay of such meetings at times specified by the city. 
(b)  Facilities to support programming on the access channels. 
(1)  A franchise agreement may provide for the use of the franchisee's studio facilities, equipment, and personnel services within Broward County for the production of live and videotaped municipal programs, subject to reasonable availability and to scheduling requirements of the franchisee. 
(2)  A franchisee shall provide, at the request of the city, use of the franchisee's studio equipment and technical services for character generation and cablecasting of such character generation on the municipal access channel, subject to reasonable availability and scheduling requirements of the franchisee. 
(3)  A franchise agreement may provide that upon the city's request, the franchisee shall provide at its cost, trained personnel and necessary equipment for: 
a.  Live cablecasting of events at the location of commission meetings; and 
b.  The production of videotapes of municipal programs and events that take place at locations other than the location of commission meetings. Such videotapes shall be played and replayed on the access channel at times specified by the city. 
c.  Live cablecasting may be facilitated with the interconnection among franchisees pursuant to this chapter. At the time of the city's request for live cablecasting of commission meetings, the franchisee serving the largest number of subscribers shall be responsible for live cablecasting production of professional quality, including all necessary equipment and trained personnel. If requested by the franchisee so responsible, all other franchisees shall share in the cost of producing and delivering the live cablecasting to all subscribers on a pro-rata per subscriber basis. 
d.  In the event that the city changes the location of city commission meetings and desires to change the location where live cablecasting of city commission occurs, the city may extend a franchisee's franchise agreement by one (1) year to allow the franchisee to recover the incremental costs of the construction of the additional plant required to provide the live cablecasting from the new location, or in the alternative, the city may agree to reimburse the franchisee the costs of construction. 
(c)  At the city's discretion, a franchise agreement may provide for a financial grant in lieu of some or all of the facilities, equipment, and services referenced in this subsection. 
(d)  All facilities, equipment, services, and all other support to be provided by a franchisee pursuant to this chapter or a franchise agreement shall constitute capital costs which are required to be incurred by the franchisee for public, educational, or governmental access facilities within the meaning of §622(g)(2)(c) of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. §542(g)(2)(c). Such support grants do not constitute a franchise fee or tax within the meaning of the Cable Act, state law, this chapter, or any franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
Sec. 7-16. - Compensation for use of rights-of-way 
This section and any franchise fee provision in a franchise agreement, shall not apply during such time as Florida Law prohibits the city from collecting franchise fees or similar compensation. During the period Florida Law prohibits the city from collecting franchise fees, a franchisee shall pay the tax required by Florida Law to the State of Florida. If the city is legally entitled to charge franchise fees or similar fees, a franchisee will pay the highest fee legally authorized or as provided in a franchise agreement. 
(1)  A franchisee, as compensation for the privilege granted under a franchise for the use of the city's streets to construct and operate a cable system, shall pay to the city a franchise fee in an amount up to a maximum of either (1) five (5) percent of the franchisee's gross revenues derived from the operation of its cable system within the city during the term of its franchise; or (2) in the event the cable act or other applicable law is amended to permit the city to assess a franchise fee of a greater amount than that specified in (1) above, the maximum amount permitted by such amendment to the cable act or other applicable law. 
(2)  A franchisee shall pay the franchise fee due to the city on a quarterly basis. Payment for each quarter shall be made to the city not later than thirty (30) calendar days after the end of each calendar quarter. 
(3)  A franchisee shall file with the city, within ninety (90) days after the expiration of each calendar year or portion thereof during which its franchise is [in] force, a financial statement setting forth the computation of gross revenues used to calculate the franchise fee for the preceding year or portion thereof and a detailed explanation of the method of computation. The statement shall be certified by a certified public accountant or the franchisee's chief financial or other duly authorized financial officer. The franchisee will bear the cost of the preparation of such financial statements. 
(4)  No acceptance by the city of any franchise fee payment shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of payment be construed as a release of any claim the city may have for additional sums payable. 
(5)  The franchise fee payment is not a payment in lieu of any other tax, fee or assessment. 
(6)  The city may, from time to time, and upon reasonable notice, inspect, copy and audit any and all books and records of the franchisee relevant to the determination of gross revenues and the computation of franchise fees due, and may recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the franchise. The cost of the audit will be borne by the franchisee if, as a result of the audit, the city determines that the franchisee has underpaid the franchise fees owed in an amount exceeding three (3) percent of the franchise fees actually paid. A franchisee shall make all books and records necessary to satisfactorily perform the audit readily available to the auditors in Broward or Dade County, for inspection and copying. 
(7)  In the event that a franchise fee payment is not received by the city on or before the due date set forth in subsection (c) above, or is underpaid, the franchisee will be charged interest from the due date at an interest rate equal to three (3) percent above the rate for three-month federal treasury bills at the most recent United States Treasury Department sale of such treasury bills occurring prior to the date of the due date of the franchise fee payment. In addition, the franchisee will pay a late charge of eighteen (18) percent of the amount of the unpaid or underpaid franchise fee payment, provided, however, that such rate does not exceed the maximum amount allowed under Florida law. 
(8)  When a franchise terminates for whatever reason, the franchisee shall file with the city within ninety (90) calendar days of the date its operations in the city cease a financial statement, audited by a certified public accountant, showing the gross revenues received unaudited by the franchisee since the end of the previous fiscal year. Adjustments will be made at that time for franchise fees due to the date that the franchisee's operations ceased. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
Sec. 7-17. - Reports and records. 
(a)  Within six (6) months of the close of its fiscal year, a franchisee shall provide the city an annual report that includes the following information: 
(1)  A summary of the previous year's activities in development of the system, including but not limited to, services initiated or discontinued, number of subscribers for each tier or type of service (including gains and losses), homes passed, and miles of cable distribution plant in service. The summary shall also include a comparison of any construction, including system upgrades, during the year with any projections previously provided to the city, as well as rate and charge increases and/or decreases for the previous fiscal year. 
(2)  Unless prohibited by applicable law, a financial statement, including a statement of income, balance sheet, and a statement of sources and applications of funds. The statement shall be audited if franchisee has audited statements performed in its normal course of business. If not, the statement shall be certified by the franchisee's chief financial officer or other duly authorized financial officer of the franchisee. The statement shall include notes that specify all significant accounting policies and practices upon which it is based. A summary shall be provided comparing the current year with previous years since the beginning of the franchise. 
(3)  A copy of updated maps depicting the location of all cable plant, showing areas served and locations of all trunk lines and feeder lines in the city. 
(4)  A summary of subscriber or resident complaints, identifying the number and nature of complaints and their disposition. Where complaints involve recurrent system problems, the nature of each problem and the corrective measures taken shall be identified. More detailed information concerning complaints shall be submitted upon request of the city, subject to applicable privacy laws. 
(5)  A summary of the number of outages, number of planned outages, number of outages during prime viewing hours (8:00 p.m.—11:00 p.m. daily), and number of outages by duration. 
(6)  If the franchisee is a corporation, a list of officers and members of the board of directors; the officers and members of the board of directors of any parent corporation; and if the franchisee or its parent corporation's stock or ownership interests are publicly traded, a copy of its most recent annual report. 
(7)  If the franchisee is a partnership, a list of the partners, including any limited partners, and their addresses; and if the general partner is a corporation, a list of officers and members of the board of directors or the corporate general partner, and the officers and directors of any parent corporation; and where the general partner or its parent corporation's ownership interests are publicly traded, a copy of its most recent annual report. 
(8)  A list of all persons holding ten (10) percent or more ownership interest in the franchisee and any parent corporation. 
(9)  A copy of the franchisee's rules and regulations applicable to subscribers of the cable system. 
(10)  A report on the number of senior citizen, economically disadvantaged or disabled subscribers receiving any rate discounts, the number of multiple dwelling buildings and units therein receiving any discount pursuant to section 7-20(a) hereof, and the amount of any such discounts for specific services if franchisee offers separate rates or discounts for those categories of subscribers. 
(11)  A full schedule and description of services, service hours and location of the franchisee's customer service office or offices available to subscribers in the city, and a schedule of all rates, fees and charges for all services provided over the cable system. 
(b)  A franchisee shall provide, upon the request of the city, the following documents: 
(1)  Annual report of the franchisee or its parent or any affiliate of franchisee which controls franchisee and issues an annual report; 
(2)  Copyright filings reflecting the operation of the system; 
(3)  FCC forms 325 and 395A for the system, or their successor forms; 
(4)  Any filing made at the FCC or any state or federal agency regarding the franchisee's cable system, including proof-of-performance tests and RF signal leakage tests; and 
(5)  Any notice of deficiency, forfeiture, or documents instituting any investigation, civil or criminal proceeding issued by any state or federal agency regarding the system, franchisee, or any affiliate of franchisee, provided, however, that any such notice or documents relating to an affiliate of franchisee need be provided only to the extent the same may directly affect franchisee's operations in the city. For example, a notice that an affiliate which has a management contract for the city's system was not in compliance with FCC EEO requirements would be deemed to affect or bear on operations in the city. 
(6)  Any request for protection under bankruptcy laws, or any judgment related to a declaration of bankruptcy. 
(c)  Unless prohibited by applicable law, a franchisee shall make a complete set of books and records available for inspection, copying of non-proprietary information, and audit by the City in Broward, Dade or Palm Beach County, for purposes of ascertaining compliance with requirements of this chapter and the franchise agreement. Such inspection, copying and audit shall be upon reasonable notice and during normal business hours. 
(d)  Upon written request by the franchisee and to the extent permitted by applicable law, information of a proprietary nature submitted by the franchisee to the city pursuant to this chapter or a franchise agreement will not be made available for public inspection. 
(e)  The franchisee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city, its elected officials, employees and agents from any liability which might arise from the city's efforts in safeguarding the proprietary nature of any franchise information or documentation so designated by the franchisee. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
Sec. 7-18. - Customer service requirements. 
To provide franchisees a reasonable opportunity to make necessary changes to their operations, the customer service requirements contained within this chapter will be enforced beginning ninety (90) days after the effective date of this chapter. A franchisee shall satisfy other customer service requirements established by the city from time to time by ordinance or resolution. In addition, franchisee shall at all times comply with any additional or stricter requirements established by applicable law, including, without limitation, FCC customer service standards and Florida and federal consumer protection laws. 
(a)  A franchisee shall maintain at least one business office either in the city or within five (5) miles of the city that is open during normal business hours, including 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., on Saturday. If a franchisee satisfies this requirement with an office located within five (5) miles of the city rather than an office located in the city, then such a franchisee shall also (1) maintain a payment center or payment drop in the city and notify subscribers of its location; (2) ensure that its ability to respond to city subscribers is not adversely affected by the absence of a business office in the city, including, without limitation, employing a sufficient number of service technicians whose primary responsibility is to respond to service requests and complaints of city subscribers; and (3) upon a showing of sufficient need or demand, shall open an office within the city limits. 
(b)  (1)  A franchisee shall maintain a listed local, toll-free telephone number and employ a sufficient number of telephone lines, personnel and answering equipment or service to allow reasonable access by subscribers and members of the public to contact the franchisee on a full-time basis, twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week including holidays. Telephone answering time (including hold and transfer time) shall not exceed thirty (30) seconds or four (4) rings before reaching a live trained and qualified representative. This standard shall be met ninety (90) percent of the time during normal operating conditions and measured on a quarterly basis. Each franchisee shall, upon city request, supply quarterly statistical data measuring its compliance with the standards set forth herein for the year preceding the city's request. 
(2)  If franchisee violates the telephone answering standards contained herein for three (3) consecutive calendar months, the city may require the franchisee to provide the city with a communication traffic study within sixty (60) days of notice. The study will be conducted on all customer service trunk lines and must include information on the efficiency of the communications system measure from the telephone company's central office, as well as other performance information available from the franchisee's communications equipment. The study must provide information that confirms the franchisee's communications system is properly trunked and staffed to meet the requirements of this subsection using generally accepted telephonic engineering standards. 
(3)  Based upon the findings of the traffic study that additional personnel or equipment is needed and other relevant considerations, the city may require the franchisee to staff a minimum specified number of customer service representatives or to add particular equipment to handle telephone calls to the extent permitted by applicable law. If the city requires staffing or additional equipment, the city and the franchisee shall determine the minimum number of customer service representatives and equipment necessary to allow the franchisee to meet the telephone answer standards contained in this subsection. For purposes of this calculation, the number of calls received daily shall be the median number of calls received on a daily basis of the three-month period that the standards were not met. 
(c)  A franchisee shall employ and maintain sufficient qualified personnel and equipment to be available: 
(1)  To accept payments; 
(2)  To exchange or accept converters or other equipment; 
(3)  To receive subscriber complaints or requests for service or repairs on a full-time basis, twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week; 
(4)  To initiate service installations, undertake normal repairs, and initiate action with respect to subscriber service complaints on Monday through Friday, from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., and on Saturday from 9:00 a.m. through 6:00 p.m.; and 
(5)  To enable a service technician to respond to any service call received between 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays, by the end of the next business day. 
(d)  Standard installation work shall be performed within seven (7) calendar days after an order has been placed except in those instances where a subscriber specifically requests an installation date beyond the seven (7) calendar day period. If scheduled installation is neither started nor completed as scheduled, the subscriber will be telephoned by an employee of the franchisee the same day. Evening personnel shall also attempt to call subscribers at their homes between the hours of 5:30 and 8:00 p.m. If the call to the subscriber is not answered, an employee of the franchisee shall telephone the subscriber the next day. 
(e)  Installation work shall be prioritized as follows: 
(1)  Service change and rescheduling of appointments for existing subscribers; 
(2)  Installation of service for new subscribers; 
(3)  Disconnection of service for existing subscribers. 
(4)  Subscribers who have experienced two (2) missed installation or service appointments due to the fault of franchisee shall receive installation free of charge. If the installation was to have been provided free of charge or if the appointment was for service or repair, the subscriber shall receive three (3) months of the most widely subscribed to service tier free of charge. 
(f)  All appointments for service, installation, or disconnection shall be specified by date. The franchisee shall offer a choice of morning (8:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m.), afternoon (12:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m.) or all-day (8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.) appointment opportunities. If at any time an installer or technician believes it impossible to make a scheduled appointment time, an attempt to contact the customer will be made prior to the time of appointment and the appointment rescheduled. 
(g)  Franchisee identification. 
(1)  Employee badges. The franchisee shall cause all its field employees and field contract workers to wear a picture identification badge indicating that they work for the franchisee. This badge shall be clearly visible to the public. Upon request, employees must provide a supervisor's name and telephone number for city employees and subscribers to contact. 
(2)  All company vehicles shall prominently display the name under which the franchisee is doing business, and logo, if any, in a manner clearly visible to the public. Contractor vehicles shall prominently display the contractor name, contractor license number, if applicable, and the franchisee's name. There must be a listed local telephone number for the names displayed. 
(3)  When any work is performed by or on behalf of the franchisee in the public rights-of-way where the work involves cutting or trenching, or requires more than one (1) hour to perform, each franchisee will post a sign that prominently displays the name under which the franchisee is doing business in the city, and franchisee's telephone number. 
(4)  The telephone number posted must be a local or toll free number. The phone must connect to persons trained to receive and respond to calls regarding employees, construction and problems (including repair problems) associated with construction. 
(h)  Disconnection. 
(1)  Voluntary disconnection. 
a.  A subscriber may terminate service at anytime. 
b.  A franchisee shall promptly disconnect from the franchisee's cable system any subscriber who so requests. No period of notice prior to voluntary termination of service may be required of subscribers by any franchisee. So long as the subscriber returns equipment within three (3) business days of the disconnection, no charge may be imposed by any franchisee for such voluntary disconnection, or for any cable services delivered after the date of disconnect request. 
c.  A subscriber may be asked, but not required, to disconnect the franchisee's equipment and return it to the business office. 
d.  Any security deposit and/or other funds due the subscriber shall be refunded on disconnected accounts after the converter has been recovered by the franchisee. The refund process shall take a maximum of forty-five (45) days from the date disconnection was requested to the date the customer receives the refund. 
(2)  Involuntary disconnection. If a subscriber fails to pay a monthly subscriber or other fee or charge, the franchisee may disconnect the subscriber's service outlet; however, such disconnection shall not be effected until forty-five (45) days after the due date of the monthly subscriber fee or other charge, and ten (10) days advance written notice of intent to disconnect to the subscriber in question. If the subscriber pays within forty-five (45) days of the due date and after notice of disconnection has been given, the franchisee shall not disconnect. After disconnection, upon payment by the subscriber in full of all proper fees or charges, including the payment of the reconnection charge, if any, the franchisee shall promptly reinstate service. 
(3)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the franchisee from removing its property from a subscriber's premises upon the termination of service. At the subscriber's request, a franchisee shall remove all of its facilities and equipment from the subscriber's premises within thirty (30) calendar days of the subscriber's request. Where removal is impractical, such as with buried cable or internal wiring, facilities and equipment may be disconnected and abandoned rather than removed, unless there is a written agreement stating otherwise, provided, however, that such agreement must be consistent with applicable law and FCC rules. 
(i)  A franchisee shall have available at all times personnel, equipment and procedures capable of locating and correcting system malfunctions. Major system malfunctions shall be corrected without delay, and corrective measures initiated immediately. Corrective action for all other malfunctions shall be initiated as provided for in the franchise agreement, but not later than the next business day after the subscriber service call is received. Any service complaint shall be resolved within five (5) working days. 
(j)  A franchisee shall develop written procedures for the investigation and resolution of all subscriber or city resident complaints, including, but not limited to, those regarding the quality of service and equipment malfunction, which procedures shall be subject to the review and approval by the city manager. A subscriber or city resident who has not been satisfied by following the franchisee's procedures may file a written complaint with the city manager, who will investigate the matter and, in consultation with the franchisee as appropriate, attempt to resolve the matter. A franchisee's good faith or lack thereof in attempting to resolve subscriber and resident complaints in a fair and equitable manner will be considered in connection with the franchisee's renewal application. 
(k)  (1)  Each franchisee shall provide to subscribers written information in each of the following areas at the time of installation, at least once annually, and at any future time upon request by the subscriber: 
a.  How to use the cable service; 
b.  Installation and service maintenance policies; 
c.  The products and services offered; 
d.  Prices and service options; 
e.  Channel positions of programming carried on the system; 
f.  The procedures of the franchisee for the receipt and resolution of customer complaints, the address of the franchisee and telephone number to which complaints may be reported, and the hours of operation. 
g.  The availability of the "lock-out" device. 
h.  The information of the franchisee, collection, and disclosure policies for the protection of the privacy of the subscriber. 
Copies of the aforementioned information shall be provided to the city. 
(2)  In addition, each franchisee shall provide reasonable written notice, at the request of the city, of any city meeting regarding requests or applications by the franchisee for renewal, transfer or modification of its franchise or change in service, rates or charges to subscribers. The city shall make such a request in writing, no less than forty-five (45) days prior to the mailing of any billing by franchisee. Said notices shall be made at expense of the franchisee and said expense shall not be considered part of the franchise fee or a tax within the meaning of the Cable Act, state law, this chapter, or any franchise agreement. 
(l)  A franchisee shall provide subscribers, the city manager, and the city commission with at least thirty (30) days advance written notice of any changes in rates, charges, channel lineup, or initiations or discontinuations or changes of service or services offered over the cable system. 
(m)  A franchisee may intentionally interrupt service on the cable system only for good cause and for the shortest time possible and, except in emergency situations, only after a minimum of forty-eight (48) hours prior notice to subscribers and the city of the anticipated service interruption; provided, however, planned maintenance which does not require more than two (2) hours interruption of service and which occurs between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. shall not require such notice. In the latter circumstance, notice shall be given to the subscriber and city no less than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the anticipated service interruption. 
(n)  A franchisee shall maintain a complete record of all service complaints received, whether written, verbal, or telephonic, and action taken. These records shall be maintained in Broward, Dade or Palm Beach County and shall be available for inspection and copying by the city during normal business hours upon reasonable prior notice, subject to applicable federal law. Such records shall be subject to the provisions of section 7-17(d) of this chapter. Such records shall be retained for at least one (1) year after their recordation. If, after one (1) year, franchisee wishes to dispose of such records, franchisee shall notify the city and, at the city's request, turn such records over to the city. 
(o)  A franchisee shall, upon an affected subscriber's request, provide a pro-rated twenty-four-hour credit to the subscriber's account for any period of four (4) hours or more within a twenty-four-hour period during which a subscriber experienced an outage of service or substantial impairment of service, whether due to a system malfunction or other cause. 
(p)  Billing. 
(1)  The franchisee's first billing statement after a new installation or service change shall be pro-rated as appropriate and shall reflect any security deposit. 
(2)  The franchisee's billing statement must be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Invoices will also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and credits. 
(3)  The franchisee's billing statement must show a specific payment due date not earlier than ten (10) days after the date the statement is mailed. Any balance not received within fifteen (15) days after the due date may be assessed a late fee consistent with applicable law. The late fee will appear on the following month's billing statement. 
(4)  The franchisee must notify the subscriber that he or she can remit payment in person at the franchisee's office in the city and inform the subscriber of the address of that office. 
(5)  Subscribers shall not be charged a late fee or otherwise penalized for any failure by the franchisee, its employees, or contractors, including failure to timely or correctly bill the subscriber, or failure to properly credit the subscriber for a payment timely made. 
(6)  In the event of a billing dispute, the franchise shall waive a late fee during the period until a final resolution of the dispute is agreed upon between the franchisee and the city. 
(7)  A franchisee shall not charge subscribers an additional fee for paying bills by telephone or online using credit cards unless such fee is reasonably related to the costs incurred by the franchisee in processing such payments. 
(q)  Alteration of service. A franchisee may not substantially alter the service being provided to a subscriber (including by re-tiering, restructuring a tier or otherwise) without the express permission of such subscriber, unless it complies with this subsection. 
(1)  If a franchisee wishes to alter the service being provided to a subscriber (including by re-tiering, restructuring a tier or otherwise) in such a way that the subscriber will no longer be able to obtain the same package of services, then the franchisee must provide the subscriber with thirty (30) days notice of such alteration, explain the substance and full effect of the alteration, and provide the subscriber the right within the thirty-day period following notice, to opt to receive any combination of services offered by the franchisee. 
(2)  Except provided herein, no charge may be made for any service or product which the subscriber has not affirmatively indicated, in a manner separate and apart from payment of the regular monthly bill, that he or she wishes to receive. 
(r)  A franchisee shall comply with all customer service standards applicable to cable systems of the FCC and any other applicable federal, state, county or municipal law concerning customer service standards, consumer protection, and unfair trade practices. 
(s)  Customer service planning. 
(1)  Affirmative customer service plan required. Each franchisee shall develop an affirmative plan for measuring customer satisfaction; identifying best practices in delivery of customer service; internally assessing the franchisee's response to customer demands; and translating those assessments into customer-driven quality improvements. Each franchisee holding a franchise as of the effective date of this chapter shall provide the plan to the city within ninety (90) days of the passage of this chapter. A person who receives a franchise after the effective date of this chapter shall provide a plan within ninety (90) days of the effective date of its franchise. 
(2)  The city may cooperate with franchisees to assist in the development of the customer service plan. 
(3)  Disaster recovery. In the event of a disaster that results in a major service interruption, a franchisee shall undertake diligent efforts, including but not limited to, allocating employees and equipment from other areas, having employees work overtime, and hiring contractors, to restore service as promptly as possible to affected subscribers. In no event shall such restoration take longer than a reasonable time after electric service is restored to affected plant unless such extension is approved by the city manager. Franchisees shall develop a hurricane preparedness plan ("HPP"), which shall be provided to the city, with proprietary information redacted. The HPP shall at a minimum contain procedures to provide for maintenance of service to franchisee's headend including at least 24-hours backup power supply and shall contain procedures to restore service in the field of the event of disaster as quickly as possible. If a franchisee updates or revises the HPP, the franchisee shall submit the revised HPP to the city. If the franchisee does not provide the HPP, the city may provide a notice of violation after which time the franchisee shall have thirty (30) days to provide the HPP to the city, or shall be subject to a fine in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each day that the violation continues. 
(t)  Certification of compliance. 
(1)  The franchisee shall certify in writing to the city on February 1 and August 1 of each year that, based upon internal due diligence by the franchisee and to the best of the franchisee's knowledge, it is in substantial compliance with the consumer protection standards set forth in this chapter. At the request of the city, the franchisee shall submit such documentation as may be required to demonstrate the franchisee's compliance with this chapter. This documentation shall be submitted within forty-five (45) days of the franchisee's receipt of the city's request. 
(u)  Administration of customer service requirements. 
(1)  City manager authority. The city manager or his or her designee (when used herein "city manager" shall mean the city manager or his or her designee) shall have the responsibility for the administration of the customer service requirements contained in this chapter. Such responsibility shall include the resolution of all complaints against a franchisee regarding the quality of service, billing matters, equipment malfunctions, and all other customer matters. The city manager's authority includes the authority to order refunds or fines. The city manager may settle or compromise any controversy arising from operations of the franchisee, either on behalf of the city, the franchisee, or any subscriber, in accordance with the best interests of the public. 
(2)  Notice of decision. Any decision made by the city manager shall be provided to the franchisee in writing. The franchisee shall have (10) ten days from receipt of such written decision to respond in writing to such decision. 
(3)  Authority to require service. In cases where requests for service have been ignored or where the service provided is unsatisfactory for any reason, the city manager shall have the power to require the franchisee to provide service if in the opinion of the city manager, such request for service is reasonable. 
(4)  Appeal of city manager's decision. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the city manager, including the franchisee, may appeal the matter to the city commission. The aggrieved person shall have ten (10) days from receiving the written decision of the city manager to file a written appeal to the city commission. No interest or late charge shall accrue during the pendency of such appeal. The city commission may accept, reject, or modify the decision of the city manager, based upon a review of the information provided. No adjustment, settlement, or compromise, whether instituted by the city manager or by the commission, shall be contrary to the provisions of this chapter or any franchise agreement issued pursuant to this chapter, and neither the city manager nor the commission, in the adjustment, settlement, or compromise of any controversy, shall have the right or authority to add to, modify, or delete any provision of this chapter or of the franchise agreement, or to interfere with any rights of subscribers or any franchisee under applicable law or private contract. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the city commission may appeal the matter to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(v)  Enforcement of customer service requirements. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking action to protect the health, safety or welfare of the public or to prevent eminent danger of damage to property. Enforcement of the customer service requirements contained herein shall be governed by the following: 
(1)  In addition to the powers delegated in subsection (u) above, the city manager shall have the authority to order refunds from a franchisee to individual subscribers who have submitted a written complaint to the city and to assess fines against a franchisee for any violation of this chapter or any franchise, which fines will be paid to the city. 
(2)  Refunds. In ordering refunds to subscribers, the city manager shall be governed by the schedule set out below in which the refund indicated is expressed as a percentage of the subscriber's monthly bill. The refunds listed are to be made on a per violation basis with each day of a continuing violation constituting a separate violation. The refund ordered by the city manager pursuant to this division shall not exceed one hundred (100) percent of a subscriber's monthly bill, unless a violation has continued at least thirty (30) days. 
(3)  Fines. Prior to assessing fines against a franchisee for violation any customer protection standards in section 7-18, the city shall notify a franchisee of its non-compliance with the respective subsections above, and franchisee shall have thirty (30) calendar days after receipt of such notification to cure the violation or to respond with a plan satisfactory to the city to cure the violation. If the franchisee does not cure the violation or provide a satisfactory plan to cure the violation within such time-period, the city may fine a franchisee for violation of each subsection a maximum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation with each day of continuing violation constituting a separate violation. Fines are to be assessed on a per violation basis with each day of a continuing violation constituting a separate violation, or each occurrence of a violation constitute a separate violation, whichever is appropriate. The fines shall begin to accrue on the first business day after the thirty-day cure period has terminated. 
(4)  Notice and opportunity to cure. Prior to ordering a refund or assessing a fine, the city manager shall provide the franchisee with notice of the city's intention to assess a refund and/or fine, which notice shall contain a description of the alleged violation. Following receipt of such notice, the franchisee shall cure or commence to cure such violation. Final cure of a violation shall toll the accrual of assessed fines and refunds. Where a specific consumer protection provision does not contain a specific amount of time for a franchisee to cure a violation or provide a satisfactory plan to cure the violation, the franchisee shall have thirty (30) calendar days from the date of receipt of the written notice to file a written response with the city manager. The city and the franchisee shall make good faith reasonable efforts to resolve the dispute in question. A management level employee of the franchisee shall sign the franchisee's written response and all statements contained therein will be regarded as material representations to the city. 
(5)  Prior to ordering a refund and/or assessing a fine, the city manager shall consider any justification or mitigating factor advanced in the franchisee's written response, including but not limited to rebates or credits to the subscriber or the franchisee's good faith efforts to cure the violation. The city manager may, after consideration of the response of the franchisee, waive or reduce any proposed refund or fine. In the case of a violation of this chapter or any franchise, the city manager may not assess any fine if the franchisee has reasonably resolved the complaint, cured the violation or provided a satisfactory plan to cure the violation within a reasonable time frame not to exceed ten (10) days. Such time period may be extended for good cause shown. However, an affected subscriber may be entitled to a credit or refund as provided herein. It is the intent of the city to determine refunds and/or fines as a reasonable estimate of the damages suffered by the city and/or the subscribers. 
(6)  Subsequent to the notice of proposed refund and/or fine to franchisee and consideration of the franchisee's response, if any, the city manager may issue an assessment of refund or fine. The refund and/or fine shall be paid within thirty (30) days of written notice to the franchisee. The city may enforce payment of the refund or fine in any court having jurisdiction or by drawing down any security fund submitted by the franchisee. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
Sec. 7-19. - Subscriber privacy. 
(a)  A franchisee shall at all times protect the privacy of all subscribers to the full extent required by Section 631 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 551 and state law. A franchisee shall not condition subscriber or other service on the subscriber's grant of permission to disclose information which, pursuant to federal or state law, cannot be disclosed without the subscriber's explicit consent. No penalties or extra charges may be invoked by the franchisee for a subscriber's failure to grant consent. 
(b)  Unless otherwise permitted by federal or state law, neither the franchisee nor its agents or employees shall, without the prior and specific written authorization of the subscriber involved, sell, or otherwise make available for commercial purposes the names, addresses or telephone numbers of any subscriber or subscribers, or any information which identifies the individual viewing habits of any subscriber or subscribers. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
Sec. 7-20. - Discrimination prohibited. 
(a)  No franchisee may in its rates or charges, or in the availability of the services or facilities of its system, or in any other respect, make or grant undue preferences or advantages to any subscriber, potential subscribers, or group of subscribers or potential subscribers, nor subject any such persons or group of persons to any undue prejudice or any disadvantage. A franchisee shall not deny, delay, or otherwise burden service or discriminate against subscribers or users on the basis of age, race, creed, religion, color, sex, disability, national origin, marital status, or political affiliation, except for discounts for senior citizens, the economically disadvantaged or disabled that are applied in a uniform and consistent manner. A franchisee may also offer bulk discounts to multiple dwelling buildings if such discounts are applied in a uniform and consistent manner, but only to the extent such discounts are otherwise permissible by law. 
(b)  A franchisee shall not deny cable service to any potential subscriber because of the income of the residents of the area in which the subscriber resides. 
(c)  A franchisee shall not refuse to employ, nor discharge from employment, nor discriminate against any person in compensation or in terms, conditions or privileges of employment because of age, race, creed, religion, color, sex, disability, national origin, marital status, or political affiliation. The franchisee shall comply with federal, state and local laws and regulations governing equal employment opportunities, as the same may be from time to time amended. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
Sec. 7-21. - Use of streets. 
(a)  Compliance with City Code. A franchisee shall at all times comply with and abide by all applicable provisions of the City Code, as it may be amended, with respect to installation and maintenance of its facilities, including, but not limited to the "communications rights-of-way ordinance," of the city as said ordinance may hereinafter be amended, codified at Chapter 23 of the City Code. 
(b)  Additional standards for use of streets. 
(1)  Any pavements, sidewalks, curbing or other paved area taken up or any excavations made by a franchisee shall be done under the supervision and direction of the city under permits issued for work by the proper officials of the city, and shall be done in such manner as to give the least inconvenience to the inhabitants of the city. A franchisee shall, at its own cost and expense, and in a manner approved by the city, replace and restore any such pavements, sidewalks, curbing or other paved areas, and landscaped areas and swales in as good a condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done, and shall also make and keep full and complete plats, maps and records showing the exact locations of its facilities located within the public streets, ways, and easements of the city. These maps shall be made available by the city for inspection and copying at any time during business hours by the city. 
(2)  Except to the extent required by law, a franchisee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove, any of its property when required by the city by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street construction, street resurfacing or widening, change of street grade, installation or sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, tracks, or any other type of municipal or public utility improvements; provided, however, that the franchisee shall, in all such cases, have the privilege of abandoning any property in place. 
(3)  A franchisee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting same, and the franchisee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance, except in the case where the requesting person is the city, in which case no such payment shall be required. The franchisee shall be given not less than five (5) calendar days advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(4)  A franchisee shall have the authority to trim the trees or other natural growth upon and overhanging the streets so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires, cables and other equipment of the franchisee, except that, at the option of the city, such trimming may be done by it or under its supervision and direction at the expense of the franchisee. 
(5)  A franchisee shall use, with the owner's permission, existing underground conduits or overhead utility facilities whenever feasible. Copies of agreements for use of conduits or other facilities shall be filed with the city as required by the franchise agreement or upon city request. 
(6)  All wires, cable lines, and other transmission lines, equipment and structures shall be installed and located to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. The city may issue such rules and regulations concerning the installation and maintenance of a cable system installed in, on, or over the streets, as may be consistent with this chapter and the franchise agreement. 
(7)  The city reserves the right to place and maintain, and permit to be placed or maintained sewer, gas, water, electric, storm drainage, communications, and other facilities, cable or conduit, and to so, and to permit to be done, any underground and overhead installation or improvement that may be deemed necessary or proper by the city in streets occupied by the franchisee. Franchisee may allow city facilities to be co-located within city streets through the use of joint trench during any of franchisee's construction projects. Such joint trench projects shall be negotiated in good faith by separate agreement between franchisee and city and may be subjected to other city street requirements. The city further reserves without limitation the right to alter, change, or cause to be changed, the grading, installation, relocation or width of the streets within the limits of the city and within said limits as same may from time to time be altered. 
(8)  All safety practices required by law shall be used during construction, maintenance and repair of a cable system. A franchisee shall not place facilities, equipment or fixtures where they will interfere with any gas, electric, telephone, water, sewer or other utility facilities, or obstruct or hinder in any manner the various utilities serving the residents of the city of their use of any street or any other public right of way. 
(9)  A franchisee shall, at all times: 
(a)  Install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures and other equipment in accordance with the requirements of the city's building code and electrical safety ordinances and any other applicable building or electrical safety code, and in such manner that they will not interfere with any installations of the city. 
(b)  Keep and maintain in a safe, suitable, substantial condition, and in good order and repair, all structures, lines, equipment, and connections in, over, under, and upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys, and public ways or places of the city, wherever situated or located. 
(10)  On streets where electrical and telephone utility wiring is located underground, either at the time of initial construction of a cable system or at any time thereafter, a franchisee's cable shall also be located underground at the franchisee's expense. Between a street and a subscriber's residence, a franchisee's cable must be located underground if both electrical and telephone utility wiring are located underground. If either electric or telephone utility wiring is aerial, a franchisee may install aerial cable except where a property owner or resident requests underground installation and agrees to bear the additional cost of such installation over and above the cost of aerial installation. 
(11)  A franchisee shall publicize the initial build or any substantial rebuild, upgrade, or extension of its facility that involves work in streets in each affected neighborhood at least one (1) week prior to commencement of that work by causing written notice of such construction to be delivered to the city and by notifying those persons whose property is within three hundred (300) feet of the work in at least two (2) of the following ways: by telephone, in person, by mail, by distribution of flyers, by publication in local newspapers, or in any other manner approved by the city that is reasonably calculated to provide adequate notice. Apart from any initial build or substantial rebuild or upgrade, any underground construction will be publicized in accordance with the aforementioned notice requirements. Before performing construction on private property, a franchise shall use its best efforts to contact the property owner or resident and describe the construction performed. 
(12)  In the event the use of any part of a cable system is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, or in the event such system or property has been installed in any street without complying with the requirements of this chapter or applicable franchise agreement, or the franchise has been terminated, canceled or expired, the franchisee, within thirty (30) days after written notice by the city, shall commence removal from the streets of all such property as the city may require. 
(13)  The city may extend the time for the removal of franchisee's equipment and facilities for a period not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days, and thereafter such equipment and facilities may be deemed abandoned. 
(14)  In the event of such removal or abandonment, the franchisee shall restore the area to as good a condition as prior to such removal or abandonment. 
(15)  (a)  Subject to this chapter, the city may suspend a permit issued or deny an application for a subsequent permit to a franchisee for work in the streets for one or more of the following: 
i.  Failure to satisfy permit conditions, or conditions set forth in this section or other applicable City Codes, regulations or orders governing the streets, including without limitation, failure to take reasonable safety precautions to alert the public of work at the work site, or to restore any streets. 
ii.  Misrepresentation or fraud by franchisee; 
iii.  Failure to have a valid franchise; 
iv.  Failure to relocate or to remove facilities as may be required by the city. 
(b)  After the suspension or denial of a permit pursuant to this section, the city shall provide notice of the reason to the franchisee. Upon correction of any grounds that gave rise to a permit suspension or denial, the city may lift the suspension or denial. 
(16)  (a)  Agreements with a developer for cable service. To the extent not prohibited by applicable law, if a provider of cable services enters into an agreement with a developer as defined in the City Code or with a homeowners association controlled by a developer to provide cable services to individual units in an association consisting of ten (10) or more units, the agreement shall include, and shall be deemed to include if not expressly set forth therein, a clause that allows the homeowners association to terminate the agreement any time within twelve (12) months after the developer turns over control of the association to the resident members of the association pursuant to F.S. § 720.307. 
(b)  This subsection shall not apply to agreements entered into by developers to obtain cable services for common areas of such developments. To the extent not prohibited by applicable law, this subsection shall apply to agreements entered into by developers with other providers of video services, including but not limited to providers of direct broadcast satellite services. To the extent not prohibited by applicable law, this subsection shall apply to agreements entered into by a developer or a condominium association under the control of a developer for cable services in multi-dwelling residences of ten (10) or more units. 
(c)  An association may terminate such agreement pursuant to the procedures specified in the declarations, articles of incorporation, bylaws or other documents governing the association's actions. 
(d)  If an association exercises its rights herein, the homeowners, resident members, occupants, and association shall not incur disconnect fees, penalties, or subsequent service charges pursuant to the agreement. This subsection does not affect the ability of a homeowner, occupant or an association to enter into an agreement for cable services independent of any agreement for cable services entered into by a developer. 
(e)  Prior to assumption of control of an association by the resident members, the developer, association under the control of the developer, or the provider of cable services shall ensure that new home owners and occupants receive adequate written notice of the existence of an agreement for cable services and its terms and the rights under this subsection. 
(f)  This subsection does not affect existing agreements for cable services entered by a developer or an association under the control of a developer before the effective date of this chapter or agreements that have been entered or may in the future be entered by an association under the control of the resident members. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
Sec. 7-22. - Enforcement remedies. 
(a)  In addition to any other remedies available at law or equity, the city may apply any one (1) or combination of the following remedies in the event a franchisee violates this chapter, its franchise agreement or applicable state or federal law: 
(1)  Impose a fine in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation with each day of a continuing violation constituting a separate violation for any violation of the franchise agreement or this chapter. Payment of fines by the franchisee will not relieve the franchisee of its obligation to comply with the franchise agreement and the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  Revoke the franchise pursuant to the procedures specified in section 7-25 hereof. 
(3)  In addition to or instead of any other remedy, the city may seek legal or equitable relief from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  In determining which remedy or remedies are appropriate, the city shall take into consideration the nature of the violation, the person or persons bearing the impact of the violation, the nature of the remedy required in order to prevent further violations, and such other matters as the city determines are appropriate to the public interest. 
(c)  Before imposing a fine pursuant to this section, the city, through its established code enforcement procedures, shall give the franchisee written notice of the violation and its intention to assess such fine, which notice shall contain a description of the alleged violation. Whenever practical, the franchisee shall have thirty (30) calendar days after notice to cure the violation or provide a satisfactory plan to cure the violation and the city shall make good faith reasonable efforts to assist the franchisee in resolving the violation. If the violation is not cured or a satisfactory plan has not been provided within that thirty (30) day period, the city may collect all fines owed, beginning on the first business day after the cure period as determined by the city has terminated, either by removing such amount from the security fund or through any other means allowed by law. 
(d)  Failure of the city to enforce any requirements of a franchise agreement or this chapter shall not constitute a waiver of the city's right to enforce that violation or subsequent violations of the same type or to seek appropriate enforcement remedies. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
Sec. 7-23. - Renewal of franchise. 
Renewal shall be conducted in a manner consistent with Section 626 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546. To the extent such additional requirements are not prohibited by applicable law, the following additional requirements shall apply. 
(a)  Upon completion of the review and evaluation process set forth in Section 626(a)(1)(2) of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546, should that process be invoked, the city shall notify the franchisee that it may file a renewal application including a renewal proposal. The notice shall specify the information to be included in the renewal application and the deadline for filing the application, which shall be no earlier than twenty-one (21) calendar days following the date of the notice. 
(1)  The application shall comply with the requirements of sections 7-8(a), (b), (c), (g) and (i) and hereof and provide the specific information requested in the notice. If the franchisee does not submit a renewal application by the date specified in the city's notice to the franchisee given pursuant to this subsection, the franchisee will be deemed not to be seeking renewal of its franchise. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the renewal application, the city shall publish notice of its receipt and make copies available to the public. The city, following prior public notice, may hold one (1) or more public hearings on the renewal application. 
(b)  In the event a public hearing on the renewal application is held, or in the event that the city commission considers the renewal application without a public hearing, the city commission will either: 
(1)  Pass a resolution agreeing to renew the franchise, subject to the negotiation of a franchise agreement satisfactory to the city and the franchisee; or 
(2)  Pass a resolution that makes a preliminary assessment that the franchise should not be renewed. 
(c)  If a preliminary assessment is made that a franchise should not be renewed, at the request of the franchisee or on its own initiative, the city will commence a proceeding in accordance with Section 626(c) of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546(c) to address the issues set forth in Section 626(c)(1)(A)—(D) of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546(c)(1)(A)—(D). 
(d)  Any request to initiate a renewal process or proposal for renewal not submitted within the time period set forth in Section 626(a) of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546(a), shall be deemed an informal proposal for renewal and shall be governed in accordance with Section 626(h) of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 546(h). The city may hold one (1) or more public hearings or implement other procedures under which comments from the public on an informal proposal for renewal may be received. Following such public hearings or other procedures, the city commission shall determine whether the franchise should be renewed and the terms and conditions of any renewal. Applications for renewal submitted prior to the effective date of this chapter shall comply with section 7-23(d). 
(e)  If the city commission grants a renewal application, the city and the franchisee shall agree on the terms of a franchise agreement, before such renewal becomes effective. 
(f)  If renewal of a franchise is lawfully denied, the city may acquire ownership of the cable system or effect a transfer of ownership of the system to another person upon approval of the city commission in a manner not inconsistent with federal law. Any such acquisition or transfer shall be at fair market value, determined on the basis of the cable system valued as a going concern but with no value allocated to the franchise itself. The city may not acquire ownership of the system or approve a Transfer while an appeal of a denial for renewal is pending in any court pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 546(e). 
(g)  If renewal of a franchise is lawfully denied and no appeal is pending, and the city does not purchase the cable system or approve or effect a transfer of the cable system to another person, the city may require the former franchisee to remove its facilities and equipment at the former franchisee's expense. If the former franchisee fails to do so within a reasonable period of time, the city may have the removal done at the former franchisee's and/or surety's expense. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
Sec. 7-24. - Transfers. 
(a)  No transfer of a franchise shall occur without prior written approval of the city. 
(b)  All applicants for a transfer of a franchise shall be filed at least one hundred twenty (120) calendar days prior to the effective date of the transfer, shall meet the requirements of this chapter, and shall provide complete information on the proposed transaction, including details on the legal, financial, technical and other qualifications of the transferee, and on the potential impact of the transfer on subscriber rates and service. Except in the case of a pro forma transfer, the applicant shall provide, at a minimum, the information required in subsections 7-8(e)(1)—(5) and (e)(14), with respect to the proposed transferee. If the information to be provided in response to these items will not change as a result of the transfer, the transferee may so indicate in its response. The information required in subsections 7-8(e)(6)—(8), and (13) shall also be provided whenever the proposed transferee expects material changes to occur in those areas. 
(c)  An application for approval of a pro forma transfer of a franchise shall be considered granted on the ninety-first (91st) calendar day following the filing of such application with the city unless, prior to that date, the city notifies the franchisee to the contrary. An application for approval of a pro forma transfer of a franchise shall clearly identify the application as such, describe the proposed transaction, and explain why the applicant believes the transfer is pro forma. Unless otherwise requested by the city within thirty (30) calendar days of the filing of an application for a pro forma transfer, the applicant shall be required only to provide the information required in subsections 7-8(e)(1), (3) and (14) with respect to the proposed transferee. 
(d)  In making a determination on whether to grant an application for a transfer of a franchise, the city commission shall consider the legal, financial, technical and other qualifications of the transferee to operate the system; whether the incumbent cable operator is in compliance with its franchise agreement and this chapter and, if not, the proposed transferee's commitment to cure such noncompliance; and whether operation by the transferee would adversely affect cable services to subscribers, or otherwise be contrary to the public interest. 
(e)  No application for a transfer of a franchise shall be granted unless the transferee that will hold the franchise agrees in writing that it will abide by and accept all terms of this chapter and the franchise agreement, and that it will assume the obligations and liabilities of the previous franchisee under this chapter and the franchise agreement. 
(f)  Approval by the city of a transfer of a franchise does not constitute a waiver or release of any of the rights of the city under this chapter or the franchise agreement, whether arising before or after the date of the transfer. 
(g)  A brief summary of the proposed transferee's plans for at least the next five (5) years regarding line extension, plant and equipment upgrades, channel capacity, expansion or elimination of cable services, and any other changes affecting or enhancing the performance of the cable system. 
(h)  Unless prohibited by applicable law, the city may impose a processing fee to cover its actual out-of-pocket in excess of the filing fee in considering an application for transfer of a franchise. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
Sec. 7-25. - Revocation or termination of franchise. 
(a)  A franchise may be revoked by the city commission for a franchisee's failure to construct, operate or maintain the cable system as required by this chapter or the franchise agreement, or for any other material violation of this chapter or material breach of the franchise agreement. To invoke the provisions of this subsection (a), the city shall give the franchisee written notice, by certified mail at the last known address, that the franchisee is in material violation of this chapter or in material breach of the franchise agreement and describing the nature of the alleged violation or breach. If within thirty (30) calendar days following receipt of such written notice from the city to the franchisee, the franchisee has not cured such violation or breach, or has not commenced corrective action and such corrective action is not being actively and expeditiously pursued, the city may give written notice to the franchisee of its intent to revoke the franchise, stating its reasons. 
(b)  Prior to revoking a franchise under subsection (a) hereof, the city commission shall hold a public hearing, upon thirty (30) calendar days notice, at which time the franchisee and the public shall be given an opportunity to be heard. Following the public hearing the city commission may determine whether to revoke the franchise based on the evidence presented at the hearing, and other evidence of record. If the city commission determines to revoke a franchise, it shall issue a written decision setting forth the reasons for its decision. A copy of such decision shall be transmitted to the franchisee. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) hereof, any franchise may, at the option of the city following a public hearing before the city commission, be revoked one hundred twenty (120) calendar days after an assignment for the benefit of creditors or the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over the business of the franchisee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy assignment for the benefit of creditors, or other action or proceeding, unless within that one hundred twenty (120) day period: 
(1)  Such assignment, receivership or trusteeship has been vacated; or 
(2)  Such assignee, receiver or trustee has fully complied with the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise agreement and has executed an agreement, approved by a court having jurisdiction, assuming and agreeing to be bound by the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise agreement. 
(d)  In the event of foreclosure or other judicial sale of any of the facilities, equipment or property of a franchisee, the city may revoke the franchise, following a public hearing before the city commission, by serving notice upon the franchisee and the successful bidder at the sale, in which event the franchise and all rights and privileges of the franchise will be revoked and will terminate thirty (30) calendar days after serving such notice, unless: 
i.  The city has approved the transfer of the franchise to the successful bidder; and 
ii.  The successful bidder has covenanted and agreed with the city to assume and be bound by the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement and this chapter. 
(e)  If the city revokes a franchise, or if for any other reason a franchisee abandons, terminates or fails to operate or maintain service to its subscribers, the following procedures and rights are effective: 
(1)  The city may require the former franchisee to remove its facilities and equipment at the former franchisee's expense. If the former franchisee fails to do so within a reasonable period of time, the city may have the removal done at the former franchisee's and/or surety's expense. 
(2)  The city, by resolution of the city commission, may acquire ownership, or effect a transfer, of the cable system at an equitable price. 
(3)  If a cable system is abandoned by a franchise, the city may sell, assign or transfer all or part of the assets of the system. 
(f)  Where the city has issued a franchise specifically conditioned in the franchise agreement upon the completion of construction, system upgrade or other specific obligation by a specified date, failure of the franchisee to complete such construction or upgrade, or to comply with such other specific obligation as required will result in the automatic forfeiture of the franchise without further action by the city where it is so provided in the franchise agreement, unless the city, at its discretion and for good cause demonstrated by the franchisee, grants an extension of time. 
(g)  Except as provided in subsection (f), no adverse action against a franchisee may be taken by the city pursuant to this section except after a noticed public hearing at which the franchisee is given an opportunity to participate. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
Sec. 7-26. - Continuity of service mandatory. 
(a)  It is the right of all subscribers to receive all available services from the franchisee as long as their financial and other obligations to the franchisee are satisfied. 
(b)  In the event of a termination or transfer of a franchise for whatever reason, the franchisee shall ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service regardless of the circumstances. The franchisee shall cooperate with the city to operate the system for a temporary period following termination or transfer as necessary to maintain continuity of service to all subscribers. The temporary period will not exceed six (6) months without the franchisee's written consent. During such period the cable system shall be operated under such terms and conditions as the city and the franchisee may agree, or such other terms and conditions that will continue, to the extent possible, the same level of service to subscribers and that will provide reasonable compensation to the cable operator. 
(c)  In the event a franchisee fails to operate the system for seven (7) consecutive days without prior approval of the city or without just cause, the city may, at its option, operate the system or designate an operator until such time as the franchisee restores service under conditions acceptable to the city or until a permanent operator is selected. If the city is required to fulfill this obligation for the franchisee, the franchisee shall reimburse the city for all costs or damages resulting from the franchisee's failure to perform that are in excess of the revenues from the system received by the city. Additionally, the franchisee will cooperate with the city to allow city employees and/or city agents free access to the franchisees' facilities and premises for purposes of continuing system operation. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
Sec. 7-27. - Rates. 
(a)  At such time as federal and state law permit rate regulation, the city reserves all rights to implement and impose such regulation, and may do so by amendment to this chapter, by separate ordinance, by amendment to a franchise agreement, or in any other lawful manner. 
(b)  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city from regulating rates for cable services to the full extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
Sec. 7-28. - Performance evaluation. 
The city may conduct periodic performance evaluations of a franchisee as the city determines is necessary. A franchisee shall cooperate with these evaluations reasonably and in good faith. If the city implements a survey of cable subscribers in connection with a performance evaluation, the city may require a franchisee to distribute the city's questionnaire to its subscribers at the city's expense. Upon request and upon reimbursement of the city's copying costs, the franchisee may receive copies of all responses. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
Sec. 7-29. - Administration. 
(a)  The city manager, either directly or through a duly appointed designee, shall have the responsibility for overseeing the day-to-day administration of this chapter and franchise agreements. The city manager shall be empowered to take all administrative actions on behalf of the city, except for those actions specified in this chapter that are reserved to the city commission. The city manager may recommend that the commission take certain actions with respect to the franchise. The city manager shall keep the commission apprised of developments in cable and provide the commission with assistance, advice and recommendations as appropriate. 
(b)  The city commission shall have the sole authority to regulate rates for cable services, grant franchises, authorize the entering into of franchise agreements, modify franchise agreements, renew or deny renewal of franchises, revoke franchises, and authorize the transfer of a franchise. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
Sec. 7-30. - Force Majeure. 
In the event a franchisee's performance of or compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter or the franchisee's franchise agreement is prevented by a cause or event not within the franchisee's control, such inability to perform or comply shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof, provided, however, that franchisee uses all practicable means to expeditiously cure or correct any such inability to perform or comply. For purposes of this chapter and any franchise agreement granted or renewed hereunder, causes or events not within a franchisee's control shall include, without limitation, acts of God, floods, earthquakes, landslides, hurricanes, fires and other natural disasters, acts of public enemies, riots or civil disturbances, sabotage, strikes and restraints imposed by order of a governmental agency or court (unless such order is procured at franchisee's behest). Causes or events within franchisee's control, and thus not falling within this section, shall include, without limitation, franchisee's financial inability to perform or comply, economic hardship, and misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance by any of franchisee's directors, officers, employees, contractors or agents. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
Sec. 7-31. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall be applicable to all cable franchises applied for, granted or renewed after its effective date, and shall apply to all cable franchises granted prior to its effective date to the full extent permitted by state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
Sec. 7-32. - Municipal cable system ownership authorized. 
(a)  To the full extent permitted by law, the city may acquire, construct, own, and/or operate a cable system. 
(b)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit in any way the ability or authority of the city to acquire, construct, own, and/or operate a cable system to the full extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
Sec. 7-33. - Reservation of rights. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to amend this chapter as it shall find necessary in the lawful exercise of its police powers. 
(b)  To the extent allowed by applicable law, any additional regulations adopted by the city shall be incorporated into this chapter and complied with by all franchisees within thirty (30) days of the date of adoption of such additional regulations. 
(c)  The city reserves the right to exercise the power of eminent domain to acquire the property of the franchisee's cable system. 
(d)  The city shall at all times have the right, upon reasonable notice and during normal business hours, to examine and copy a franchisee's non-proprietary records and to inspect a franchisee's facilities to the extent needed to monitor a franchisee's compliance with and performance under this chapter and the franchisee's franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
ARTICLE II. - BASIC TIER CABLE RATES 
 
Sec. 7-34. - Regulation. 
(a)  The city commission shall implement enforcement of cable television customer service obligations as set forth in the Act and accompanying federal regulations. 
(b)  Enforcement of FCC cable television customer service obligations shall not relieve any cable television system operator or any obligation or duty imposed by state or local law or ordinance or imposed in any cable television franchise, agreement, or license. 
(c)  The city commission may impose, by subsequent ordinance, specific enforcement mechanisms and penalties for violation of the FCC cable television customer service obligations. 
(d)  Except as provided herein or otherwise permitted by law, the city commission recognizes and agrees to follow any regulations promulgated by the FCC in connection with the Act. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, § 2, 3-16-05)  
Chapter 8 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Elections, art. VI. 
Cross reference— Mayor and city commission, § 2-26 et seq.; recall of elected officials, § 2-31. 
State Law reference— State election code, F.S. chs. 97—104. 
 
Sec. 8-1. - State election law adopted. 
All general laws of the state relating to elections are hereby adopted as parts of this chapter. 
(Code 1964, § 9-9)  
Sec. 8-2. - Required public records background checks for political candidates and all current elected officials; payment of fee by candidate or elected official for background check; results public record. 
(a)  Background checks required. All candidates for a municipal elective public office within the city shall, simultaneously with filing for such office, have the following background check conducted: 
(1)  A criminal history background information check pertaining to the state, as is allowed by the Florida Public Records Law, F.S. Ch. 119. A fee for such background check shall be set and amended by resolution of the city commission. 
(2)  This section shall apply to incumbents in office at the time of its passage. The incumbents will pay the prescribed fee and have the background check performed. 
(b)  Payment of cost by candidate. The candidate for elective office and all current elected officials shall pay the fee set forth above to cover the costs charged the city by the agency. This fee will be paid to the city clerk in conjunction with the qualifying fees prescribed by law. The city clerk will issue a receipt to the candidate, who will promptly present the receipt to the police department as evidence of payment for this regulatory fee. The results of the background check will be public records available to the extent allowed by chapter 119, Florida Public Records Law, and the rules and regulations of the Florida Department of Law Enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 91-12, § 1, 12-17-90; Ord. No. 14-16, § 7, 6-17-14)  
Sec. 8-3. - Vacancy in candidacy. 
If the death, withdrawal, or removal from the ballot of a duly qualified candidate following the end of the qualifying period results in fewer than two (2) candidates remaining on the ballot for that particular office, the remaining candidate shall be declared elected and no election for that office shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 91-46, § 1, 9-19-91)  
Chapter 9 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alarm systems, Ch. 3; fire prevention and protection for amusement devices, § 5-29; health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 10; business taxes, permits and business regulations, Ch. 11; solid waste, Ch. 18; gas, § 21-126 et seq.; buildings and building structure regulations, Ch. 22; unsafe buildings and structures, § 22-46 et seq.; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23; vegetation, Ch. 25. 
State Law reference— Fire prevention and control, F.S. ch. 633. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 9-1. - Municipal hydrants restricted in use, for fire purposes only. 
(a)  Limitation. Municipal fire hydrants may be used for fire purposes only. All fire hydrants shall have no connections whatsoever with any taps that may be used for other than fire purposes. 
(b)  Exemption. The foregoing shall not prevent persons authorized by the city from conducting periodic tests of the fire system, provided that such tests shall be made in the presence of a representative of the city. 
(c)  Violation; penalty. Any person making an unauthorized connection to a municipal fire hydrant shall be guilty of a violation of a municipal ordinance and shall be punished as provided in Section 1-13 of this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 10-1; Ord. No. 14-16, § 8, 6-17-14) 
Cross reference— Water, § 21-26 et seq.; buildings and building structure regulations, Ch. 22.  
Sec. 9-2. - Open burning restrictions. 
(a)  Outdoor fires. No person shall ignite, cause to be ignited, permit to be ignited, suffer, allow, burn or maintain any outdoor fire, except as provided in subsections (b), (c) and (d). 
(b)  Exemptions. The following activities shall be exempt from the prohibitions contained in subsection (a): 
(1)  Outdoor, noncommercial preparation of food. 
(2)  Outdoor heating devices using approved fuel for the purpose of frost protection. 
(3)  Training exercises conducted by the city fire department. 
(c)  Temporary use permits. The city commission may, by resolution, issue a temporary use permit to authorize an outdoor fire if it determines that such outdoor fire will not present a hazard to the surrounding residents or endanger the peace, safety and welfare of the residents of the city. A temporary use permit for open burning shall require compliance with all the provisions set forth in subsection (d) and any other conditions the city commission may wish to impose. The city commission has the authority to revoke the temporary use permit in the event of on-going, continuous complaints. 
(d)  Permits for open burning. After the granting of a temporary use permit by the city commission, the fire department may issue a permit for open burning of wooden material or vegetation generated by an on-site land clearing operation subject to the conditions set out below. No off-site materials may be brought to the location. 
(1)  Two (2) methods of open burning shall be permitted: 
a.  Air-current incinerators using a four-sided chamber; or 
b.  A pit burner which is a portable air-blower unit. Each pit operation shall require individual air blowers. 
(2)  All burning shall comply with all applicable city, county and state laws, ordinances, rules and regulations including chapter 17, sections 17-2 and 17-5, Florida Administrative Code, as amended from time to time. 
(3)  An application for a permit shall be submitted to the fire department accompanied by the appropriate fee as set out below and a site specific description of the area to be permitted. 
(4)  Any required approvals or permits from the Department of Environmental Regulation, Florida Department of Forestry, Broward County Environmental Quality Control Board hereinafter referred to as (EQCB), or any other governmental agency with jurisdiction, shall be submitted with the application for permit. 
(5)  Daily notice of a proposed burn shall be given to the fire department. No burning shall commence without a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours' advance notice to the fire chief. The fire chief shall have the authority to: 
a.  Delay the ignition of all burning. 
b.  Order the extinguishment of burning. 
c.  Order any other action deemed necessary to ensure the burning does not create a hazard. 
(6)  The permit issued under this section shall be limited to sixty (60) days. The city may extend the term of the permit for up to thirty (30) days in the event delays were caused by city action. A valid EQCB permit shall be in effect for the original term and any extension thereof. 
(7)  Burning may not commence before 9:00 a.m. and must cease one (1) hour before sunset. No burning shall be permitted on Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. 
(8)  Burning shall only be permitted at least one hundred (100) yards from any public road or five hundred (500) yards from an occupied structure. 
(9)  The permittee shall be liable for any damages caused by the burning as well as any costs incurred by the city in suppressing a fire beyond the scope of the permit. 
(10)  All burning permitted shall be conducted under the direct supervision of a qualified land-clearing contractor licensed by the county. A copy of the contractor's county license shall accompany the application. The land-clearing contractor shall be on-site during all burning operations. 
(11)  Adequate equipment, as determined by the fire chief, shall be kept on-site to extinguish a fire immediately. 
(e)  Fees. Permit fees shall be set and amended by resolution of the city commission. 
(f)  Establishment of rules and regulations. The fire chief is hereby authorized to establish written rules and regulations to govern the issuance of permits and to ensure the proper supervision of burning conducted pursuant to this section. 
(g)  Revocation of permit. Failure of any person to obey a written or oral directive from the fire chief pursuant to this section, or any of the conditions set forth herein, shall result in the revocation of the permit to burn. Reapplication for a permit after revocation shall be subject to double the original fee or double the fee applicable to the new application which includes any part of the land included within the revoked application. 
(h)  Penalty. Violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable as provided by law. 
(Code 1964, § 10-2; Ord. No. 14-16, § 9, 6-17-14) 
Cross reference— Health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 10; weeds and debris, § 10-91 et seq.; solid waste, Ch. 18; buildings and building structure regulations, Ch. 22; vegetation, Ch. 25.  
Sec. 9-3. - Abatement of hazards, dangerous conditions. 
Whenever the fire chief or any officer or member of the fire department shall find any building or other structure which for want of any violations-to-fire-code repairs or by reason of age or dilapidated condition or for any other cause is especially liable to fire or presents a hazard to life safety and which is so situated as to endanger other property by contamination or collapse and whenever any such officer from time to time shall find in any building or upon any premises or place any combustibles, contaminants, explosive matter, dangerous accumulations of rubbish or unnecessary accumulations of wastepaper, boxes, shavings or other highly inflammable materials especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger property; shall find obstructions to or upon fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors, windows and other places liable to interfere with the operations of the fire department or the egress and exit of occupants in case of fire; or shall find smoking within theaters or overcrowding of theaters or other places wherein people are congregated, the fire chief or other officer shall order the condition to be remedied. Such order shall forthwith be complied with by the owner or occupant of the premises or building, unless the order is revoked or modified. Any owner or occupant failing to comply with such an order shall be punished as provided in this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 10-6; Ord. No. 90-52, § 1, 6-4-90)  
Sec. 9-4. - Property owners, tenant to keep property clear of inflammables. 
It shall be the duty of all property owners within the limits of the city to keep their property clean and in a safe condition. No owner of any property in the city shall permit wood or combustible, inflammable or hazardous materials to remain upon the premises so as to constitute a fire hazard. 
(Ord. No. 90-52, § 2, 6-4-90)  
Sec. 9-5. - Permits for hazardous or flammable materials and explosives. 
(a)  Inspection and approval of receptacles, vehicles or storage places. Before a permit may be issued for the keeping, storage, use, manufacture, sale, handling, transportation or other disposition of hazardous or flammable materials, rubbish, crude petroleum or any of its products, gun or blasting powder, dynamite or explosives of any kind, including fireworks, firecrackers and signaling explosives, the fire chief, fire marshal, chief inspector or the inspector's assistants shall inspect and approve the receptacles, vehicles, buildings or storage places to be used for any such purposes. In cases where laws or regulations enforceable by departments other than the division of fire and life safety are applicable, joint approval shall be obtained from all departments concerned. 
(b)  Scope of permit; transferability. A permit shall constitute permission to properly maintain, store or handle materials or to conduct processes which produce conditions hazardous to life or property used in connection with such activities. Such permit shall not be transferable, and any change in use or occupancy of premises shall require a new permit. 
(c)  Applications. All applications for a permit required by this section shall be made to the division of fire and life safety. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by such plan as may be required by the fire chief. 
(d)  Location; inspection. Permits shall at all times be kept on the premises designated therein and shall at all times be subject to inspection by any officer of the fire, police or building department. 
(e)  One permit per establishment; list of materials. One (1) permit only shall be required by an establishment dealing in or using explosives or hazardous materials that are kept in the establishment at any one (1) time, but each of the materials shall be listed in the permit. 
(f)  Enumeration of permits required. Permits shall be required for the following, as specified in the building code adopted by reference in this Code: 
(1)  Cellulose nitrate plastics (pyroxylin); 
(2)  Compressed gasses; 
(3)  Explosives; 
(4)  Fireworks; 
(5)  Fumigation and thermal insecticidal fogging; 
(6)  Hazardous materials; 
(7)  Liquefied petroleum gases and compressed natural gas; 
(8)  Places of assembly. The certificate of occupancy and/or business tax receipt shall constitute a permit; 
(9)  Tents and air-supported structures; 
(10)  Removal or abandonment of a flammable or combustible tank; 
(11)  Welding or cutting (acetylene, generator and calcium carbide); 
(12)  Storage of flammable and combustible liquids and solids, except that less than six (6) gallons in total quantity stored in one- and two-family detached residential dwelling units shall not require a permit; 
(13)  Open burning; 
(14)  Carnivals, circuses and other special events. 
(g)  Limitations. The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for or an approval of any violation of this Code. 
(h)  Compliance. Compliance with this Code is the responsibility of the permit holder and/or the owner of the property. 
(i)  Suspension or revocation. Any permit issued under this section may be suspended or revoked when it is determined by the fire chief that: 
(1)  It is used by an applicant other than the person to whom the permit was issued; 
(2)  It is used for a location other than that for which it was issued; 
(3)  Any of the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit have been violated; 
(4)  The applicant fails, refuses or neglects to comply with any order or notice duly served upon him under the provisions of this Code within the time provided therein; 
(5)  There has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or application was based. 
(Ord. No. 90-52, § 7, 6-4-90; Ord. No. 07-10, § 3, 2-21-07)  
Sec. 9-6. - Inspection of hazardous manufacturing, storage of gases and explosives and fire alarm and automatic sprinkler systems. 
The fire chief, fire marshal, chief inspector or an assistant specially designated therefor shall inspect, as often as may be necessary, but not less than two (2) times a year, all specially hazardous manufacturing processes, storage or installations of acetylene or other gases, chemicals, oils, explosives of every kind, including fireworks, firecrackers, gun or blasting powder, dynamite or other explosives and/or flammable materials, all interior fire alarms and automatic sprinkler systems, and such other hazards or appliances as the fire chief shall designate, and shall make such orders as may be necessary for the enforcement of the laws and ordinances governing the same and for safeguarding of life and property from fire. 
(Ord. No. 90-52, § 8, 6-4-90)  
Sec. 9-7. - Recovery of costs for fire rescue. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the terms in this subsection shall be defined as follows: 
Cost recovery means those necessary and reasonable costs incurred by the city or its agents in connection with rescue, emergency medical services, mitigation, health, life and safety issues, suppression and investigation of suspicious or incendiary fires, mitigating, minimizing, removing or abating discharges of hazardous substances, including but not limited to the following: actual labor costs of city personnel or its authorized agents, costs of equipment operation rental, subcontract or purchase and costs of expendable items, etc. 
Discharge means any intentional or unintentional action or omission resulting in the releasing, spilling, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying or dumping of a hazardous substance upon public or private property located within the corporate limits of the city. 
Forfeiture shall be defined as set forth in Florida State Statute Chapter 932. 
Hazardous substance means any substance or material in a quantity or form which, in the determination of the fire chief or the chief's authorized designee, poses an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health, safety or welfare of persons or property within the city and shall include but not be limited to those hazardous substances listed in the N.F.P.A. Guide on Hazardous Materials, the E.P.A.'s list of extremely hazardous substances, the Florida Substance List promulgated by the department of labor and employment security, the Emergency Response Guide from D.O.T., or 49 CFR. 
(b)  Authority of fire department. The fire department is hereby authorized to take such steps as necessary to protect the life, safety and health of the public and to take all such steps necessary to respond and abate emergencies and recover all associated costs. 
(c)  Liability for costs. Any person(s), property owner, rentor or agent charged with a city or Florida State Statute violation responsible for action by the fire department or its authorized agents in order to provide a service or protect the public health, safety or welfare shall be jointly and severally liable to the city for the costs incurred by the city in investigating, mitigating, minimizing, removing and abating any such discharge or fire. 
(d)  Record of costs. Following the emergency or service rendered by the fire-rescue department caused by fire or the unauthorized discharge of hazardous substances, the fire department shall submit a detailed record of the costs attributable thereto. 
(e)  Reimbursement of costs. Any person responsible for an emergency action that is to be reimbursed shall reimburse the city for the full amount of all costs. 
(1)  The finance/support services department will be responsible for billing and collecting fees assessed under Section 9-87. If assessed fees are not paid within 45 days after billing, finance/support services shall take all steps necessary to collect fees. 
(2)  Fees charged shall be due when rendered. Payments will be considered past due 19 days from the billing date and will be subject to an appropriate late charge. 
(f)  Penalty for failure to pay. Any person responsible who fails to reimburse the city within the time set forth in subsection (e) of this section shall be subject to an administrative penalty fee determined by the city on of the total amount of the bill or unpaid balance. 
(g)  Additional remedies. The remedy provided for in this section shall be supplemental to and in addition to all other available remedies at law and equity and may be negotiated or waived by the city manager when in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-52, § 9, 6-4-90; Ord. No. 98-39, § 1, 6-17-98; Ord. No. 14-16, § 10, 6-17-14)  
Sec. 9-8. - Outdoor cooking on balconies of multiple-story buildings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use barbecue grills or other similar cooking utensils on the balconies, terraces, porches or other open areas of a multiple-story building, where a designated cooking area has been provided and approved by the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 90-52, § 14, 6-4-90)  
Sec. 9-9. - Key boxes. 
In all new and existing buildings, there shall be installed a key box for such buildings when the fire chief determines that access to or within a structure or an area is unduly difficult because of secured openings, or where immediate access is necessary for lifesaving or firefighting purposes. The key box shall be a type approved by the fire chief and shall contain: 
(1)  Keys to locked points of ingress, whether on the interior or exterior of such building. 
(2)  Keys to locked mechanical equipment rooms. 
(3)  Keys to locked electrical rooms. 
(4)  Keys to elevator controls. 
(5)  Keys to other areas as directed by the fire chief. 
If at any time the keys stored in the lock box change, then the building owner or manager is to notify the fire department and supply new keys to the fire chief. The fire chief shall approve the location of lock boxes. This section shall not apply to the construction, improvements or renovation to any single-family residential building. 
(Ord. No. 91-44, § 1, 9-4-91)  
Secs. 9-10—9-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Officers, employees, divisions and departments, § 2-106 et seq.; fees for ambulance rescue unit calls, § 2-225; pensions, Ch. 15; firefighters pension plan and trust fund, § 15-76 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9-26. - Establishment, composition and organization. 
The fire department of the city is hereby created and established, consisting of a chief and as many subordinate officers, firefighters, employees and other members as may be necessary. The fire department shall consist of two (2) divisions, to be designated as "paid" and "volunteer"; and all persons belonging to each division shall be referred to as "members" of the fire department. 
(Code 1964, § 10-17)  
Sec. 9-27. - Authority, duties generally. 
(a)  Control of fires management. The fire department shall have control of the management of all fires within the limits of the city, and its officers shall have the power to prevent anyone interfering in any way with the department or with any of the employees of the department in the performance of their duties. 
(b)  Control of areas in vicinity of fires. The fire department shall have jurisdiction of all areas in the vicinity of a fire or conflagration, and its personnel shall have the power to prevent any interference with the department or any of its companies, squads or members in the performance of their duties. 
(c)  Equipment maintenance; building inspection. The department shall keep an inventory of equipment, inspect buildings and premises in the city for the purpose of ascertaining and correcting fire hazards, and do everything necessary and proper to eliminate fire risks and hazards. 
(Code 1964, § 10-18)  
Sec. 9-28. - Interference with and impersonation of fire official. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any fire official carrying out any duties or functions prescribed by this Code. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to use an official badge, uniform or other credential to impersonate a fire official for the purpose of gaining access to any building, structure, marine vessel, vehicle or premises in this city. 
(Ord. No. 90-52, § 3, 6-4-90)  
Sec. 9-29. - Fire chief to head department, serve as fire marshal. 
There shall be a chief of the fire department, who shall be known as the "fire chief," and who shall be the head of the department and shall also be fire marshal. 
(Code 1964, § 10-20; Ord. No. 91-22, § 9, 3-4-91)  
Sec. 9-30. - Fire chief to have police authority at fires. 
The fire chief shall have police authority at fires in the city and shall be in charge of the territory immediately adjacent to and in the vicinity of any fire. He/she is hereby authorized to arrest and take into custody any person violating any of the rules or regulations promulgated by him/her with reference to the control of fires. 
(Code 1964, § 10-21)  
Sec. 9-31. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 9 of Ord. No. 91-22, adopted Mar. 4, 1991, deleted the provisions of§ 9-31, which pertained to the control of equipment by the fire chief and derived from Code 1964, § 10-22.  
Sec. 9-32. - Inspection of buildings for fire hazard. 
It shall be the duty of the fire chief to inspect or cause to be inspected by his/her officers or employees, from time to time, various buildings within the city, to ascertain the existence of any fire hazard. 
(Code 1964, § 10-23)  
Sec. 9-33. - Adoption of rules and regulations governing department, members. 
The fire chief shall prepare and submit to the city manager, for his/her approval, rules and regulations governing the fire department and all of the members thereof. 
(Code 1964, § 10-24; Ord. No. 91-22, § 9, 3-4-91)  
Sec. 9-34. - Records of members. 
A complete list of all members of the fire department shall be kept on file in the office of the fire chief. 
(Code 1964, § 10-25)  
Sec. 9-35. - Insurance coverage for members. 
All members of the fire department shall be protected under the insurance coverage provided by the city through its policies of insurance. 
(Code 1964, § 10-26)  
Sec. 9-36. - Right of volunteer members to appeal disciplinary actions to civil service board. 
All volunteer members of the fire department shall have the right to appeal disciplinary actions to the civil service board of the city. The method of appeal and the rules of procedure governing such appeals shall be as provided in Rule XXIII of section 16.110, "Civil service rules and regula- tions." Nothing in this article shall be construed to give the volunteer members any of the rights or protections of the civil service code except the right of appeal recited herein. 
(Code 1964, § 10-27)  
Sec. 9-37. - Inspectors; fire prevention bureau/division of fire and life safety established. 
(a)  The fire chief shall be responsible for the enforcement of the city fire and life safety code. The fire chief may detail, subject to the approval of the city manager, qualified members of the fire department as inspectors from time to time as shall be necessary. 
(b)  To assist in the performance of the responsibilities and duties placed upon the fire chief, a fire prevention bureau/division of fire and life safety is hereby created. This division shall operate under the supervision of the fire chief. The fire chief shall designate, subject to the approval of the city manager, a fire code official as fire marshal. The fire marshal shall be the administrator of the division of fire and life safety. The fire marshal shall be responsible for the direct administration and enforcement of the city fire prevention code under the direction and supervision of the fire chief. The fire chief may also designate, subject to the approval of the city manager, such number of fire inspectors or inspector technicians, as shall from time to time be deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 90-52, § 4, 6-4-90; Ord. No. 91-22, § 9, 3-4-91)  
Sec. 9-38. - Duties of division of fire and life safety. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the division of fire and life safety to enforce all laws and ordinances of the city, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The prevention of fires; 
(2)  The storage, sale and use of combustible, flammable, explosive or hazardous materials; 
(3)  The installation and maintenance of automatic and other fire alarm systems and fire extinguishing equipment; 
(4)  The maintenance and regulation of fire escapes and means of egress from any occupancy; 
(5)  Public education in fire and life safety. 
(b)  The division shall have such other powers and perform such other duties as are set forth in other sections of this chapter and as may be conferred and imposed from time to time by law. The fire chief may delegate any powers or duties under this chapter to the fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 90-52, § 5, 6-4-90)  
Sec. 9-39. - Authority for inspections; identification. 
The fire chief, fire marshal or any inspectors, upon complaint of any person or whenever deemed necessary, shall inspect all buildings and premises within their jurisdiction. Persons authorized to enter and inspect buildings, structures, marine vessels, vehicles and premises shall be identified by proper credentials issued by the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 90-52, § 6, 6-4-90)  
Sec. 9-40. - Annual fire safety permit/inspection fees. 
The City of Miramar is hereby authorized to collect an annual fire safety permit/inspection fee against buildings and structures within the city to provide funding for the cost of providing such fire safety inspection services. The city administration shall be authorized to adopt administrative policies regarding the collection of the permit/inspection fee. The annual fees shall be set and amended by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 91-44, § 2, 9-4-91; Ord. No. 14-16, § 11, 6-17-14) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 91-44, § 2, adopted Sept. 4, 1991, repealed former § 9-40, which pertained to division of fire and life safety fee schedule, and enacted similar new provisions as set out herein. Formerly, such section derived from Ord. No. 90-52, § 10, adopted June 4, 1990.  
Sec. 9-41. - Fire safety permits, licenses, service fees and plan review fees. 
The city is hereby authorized to collect permits, licenses, service and plan review fees to recover costs associated with such services and work in conjunction with the City of Miramar Police Department in forfeiture and restitution. The city administration shall be authorized to adopt administrative policies regarding the collection of the following fees which will be based on federal, state, county and city recognized reimbursement costs for apparatus equipment and actual or average costs for all city personnel, subcontractors and other city departments requested by fire-rescue. 
(1)  Permit/license and service fees based on time to the nearest hour for inspection, personnel, apparatus, equipment shall be set and amended by resolution of the city commission. 
(2)  Fire safety plan review fees: A fee per square foot shall be set and amended by resolution of the city commission and shall be levied on all new construction and alterations to structures, except one- and two-family detached residential dwelling units, in the city. This fee shall encompass building plan review required prior to the issuance of a building permit and the necessary fire inspections required prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 91-44, § 3, 9-4-91; Ord. No. 98-38, § 1, 6-17-98; Ord. No. 98-39, § 1, 6-17-98; Ord. No. 14-16, § 12, 6-17-14) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 91-44, § 3, adopted Sept. 4, 1991, repealed former§ 9-41, which pertained to billing and collection of fire and life safety fees, and enacted new provisions as set out herein. Formerly, such section derived from Ord. No. 90-52, § 11, adopted June 4, 1990.  
Sec. 9-42. - Right of appeal. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by any decision of the fire chief or the chief's authorized designee shall have the right of appeal provided, as is applicable, in the Metropolitan Dade County Fire Prevention Code and/or South Florida Building Code, Broward Edition, and such person shall institute appeal under such laws. If no right of appeal which is applicable is provided by those laws, then an aggrieved person shall have a right to file a written appeal within thirty (30) days of the decision being appealed having occurred with the city manager's office, upon payment of a fifty-dollar appellate fee and a written appeal containing the decision being appealed and a statement of facts and positions relied upon. To avoid or contest such decision, the appeal shall be lodged with the city clerk's office, who will transmit copies to the city manager. 
(b)  The hearing shall be conducted by the city manager in compliance with the basic concept of due process, including notice and hearing. The hearing will be informal and the rules of evidence and of procedure will not apply. The appellant, and the city, may be represented by counsel. The city manager will render a final, written decision within ten (10) days of the date of such hearing. 
(Ord. No. 90-52, § 12, 6-4-90; Ord. No. 91-44, § 4, 9-4-91)  
Sec. 9-43. - Emergency ambulance call fees. 
The rates to be charged for each emergency ambulance call resulting in transportation by the emergency medical service of the city shall be set and amended by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 91-18, § 2, 2-19-91; Ord. No. 92-46, § 1, 9-16-92; Ord. No. 97-43, § 1, 9-17-97; Ord. No. 01-33, § 2, 5-16-01; Ord. No. 05-05, § 2, 12-1-04) 
Editor's note— For purposes of classification, § 9-73 added by Ord. No. 91-18, § 2, adopted Feb. 19, 1991, was included as § 9-43 of Art. II at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 9-44—9-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Business taxes, permits and business regulations, Ch. 11; buildings and building structure regulations, Ch. 22. 
 
Sec. 9-51. - Adoption of fire prevention code. 
(a)  The 1988 Edition, South Florida Fire Prevention Code, Broward County Edition, chapter 52 of the South Florida Building Code, Broward County Edition, is hereby adopted for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion. One (1) copy of this code will be kept in the office of the city clerk and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. The code hereby adopted shall be enforced by the chief of the fire department. 
(b)  In addition to the code adopted in subsection (a) of this section, the South Florida Building Code, 1988, Broward County Edition and any future editions thereof, all N.F.P.A. codes adopted by the South Florida Building Code including but not limited to N.F.P.A. 101 Life Safety Code; and N.F.P.A. 1124 Fireworks, Manufacture, Transportation and Storage Code, and other adopted codes be and the same are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as fully as if set out word for word herein. Not less than one (1) copy of the above adopted codes shall be filed in the office of the city clerk, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the corporate limits of the city. Wherever the words "municipality" or "authority having jurisdiction" are used in such codes, they shall be held to mean the city. 
(Code 1964, § 10-36; Ord. No. 90-52, § 15, 6-4-90) 
State Law reference— Minimum fire safety standards, F.S.§ 633.25.  
Sec. 9-52. - Violations of code. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of the code adopted by this article or fail to comply therewith or to violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder or to build in violation of any detailed statement or specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder to fail to pay any fee within sixty (60) days of a written bill being issued or any certificate or permit issued thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken or to fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified, in writing, by the fire chief or fire marshal within the time fixed herein shall severally for each and every such violation or noncompliance be subject to the jurisdiction of the code enforcement board and/or prosecuted in law or equity in a court of competent jurisdiction by the city, at its discretion. Proof of such unlawful act or failure shall be deemed prima facie evidence is that of the owner, lessee or other person in control of the premises. Prosecution or lack thereof of either the owner, lessee, occupant or other person in charge shall not be deemed to relieve any of the others. The imposition of one (1) penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The application of subsection (a) above shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Code 1964, § 10-39; Ord. No. 90-52, § 13, 6-4-90)  
Secs. 9-53—9-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SMOKE DETECTORS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Business taxes, permits and business regulations, Ch. 11; buildings and building structure regulations, Ch. 22; buildings, § 22-26 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9-66. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approved smoke detector shall mean any photo-electric or ionization-type smoke detector listed by Underwriters' Laboratories as complying with current standards and which complies with the requirements of this article and NFPA 74, 1988 edition, or amendments thereto, with respect to manufacture and location and which emits an alarm which is audible in the sleeping rooms. 
Child day-care center shall mean any building or portion of a building in which more than twelve (12) children receive care, maintenance and supervision. 
Child day-care home shall mean any building or portion of a building in which fewer than thirteen (13) children receive care, maintenance and supervision by other than their parents or legal guardians. 
Habitable room shall mean every room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping or eating purposes, excluding laundries, pantries, foyers, communicating corridors, closets and storage spaces. 
Separate sleeping area shall mean every area of a dwelling in which bedrooms are located. Bedrooms separated by other use areas, such as kitchens or living rooms (but not bathrooms), shall be considered as separate sleeping areas for the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 10-40) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 9-67. - Premises applicable. 
Every building, mobile home, living unit, room or area that is used or intended to be used for sleeping and any building that is occupied by pre-school children, aged, infirm or disabled persons whether equipped with sleeping accommodations or not, shall have installed, in accordance with the requirements of this article, approved smoke detectors. 
(Code 1964, § 10-41)  
Sec. 9-68. - Installation of approved smoke detectors. 
(a)  Existing occupancy with approved smoke detector. Any existing occupancy in which approved smoke detectors were installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section was derived may continue such use. 
(b)  Existing occupancy with approved smoke detector. Any existing occupancy in which approved smoke detectors have not been installed prior to the effective date of this section shall have installed approved smoke detectors as follows: 
(1)  Electric powered detectors shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Approved smoke detectors utilizing AC primary source of electric power shall be used. 
b.  Electrical power shall be a dependable commercial light and power supply source. A visible "power on" indicator shall be provided. 
c.  A restraining means shall be used at the plug-in of any cord-connected installation. 
d.  No detector shall be subject to loss of power by a wall switch. 
e.  Neither loss nor restoration of primary power shall cause an alarm signal. 
f.  No extension cord shall be used for a cord-connected installation. 
(2)  Battery powered detectors shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  All power requirements are met for at least one-year's life, including weekly testing. 
b.  A distinctive audible trouble signal is given before the battery is incapable of operating the devices for alarm purposes. 
c.  The unit is capable of producing an alarm signal for at least four (4) minutes at the battery voltage at which a trouble signal is normally obtained, followed by seven (7) days of trouble signal operation. 
d.  The audible trouble signal is produced at least once every minute for seven (7) consecutive days. 
e.  The monitored batteries meeting these specifications are clearly identified on the unit near the battery compartment. 
f.  Detectors having a test button in order to test the unit are desirable. 
(c)  Additions. When additions increasing floor area are made to an existing occupancy listed and the area of the addition is twenty-five (25) percent or more of the area of the existing occupancy, the existing occupancy and the addition shall be made to comply with subsection (f) below. 
(d)  Repairs and alterations. When repairs and alterations amounting to more than fifty (50) percent of the value of the existing occupancy are made during any twelve-month period, the occupancy shall be made to conform to subsection (f) below. 
(e)  Change of occupancy. Any existing occupancy not included in section 9-67 of this chapter which changes its occupancy to an occupancy included in section 9-67 shall be required to conform to subsection (f) below. 
(f)  New occupancy. Any new occupancy to which this article applies shall install approved smoke detectors as follows: 
(1)  Location shall be approved by the fire marshal. 
(2)  Shall meet the requirements of subsections (b)(1)a, b, d, e above. 
(3)  Detectors shall be installed on a separate electrical circuit, used for no purpose other than detectors, such circuit being connected to the electrical service wires ahead of a circuit breaker or fuses controlling the normal electrical supply to the occupancy. 
(4)  All the installations shall meet the requirements of NFPA 74, 1988 edition, or amendments thereto. 
(Code 1964, § 10-42)  
Sec. 9-69. - Location in applicable premises. 
Approved smoke detectors shall be located in existing and new buildings in each living unit outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms, except as provided below, and on each additional story of the building, including basements, but excluding crawl spaces and unfinished attics: 
(1)  Dormitories, child day-care centers, residential-custodial care facilities: Approved smoke detectors shall be installed in all habitable rooms. 
(2)  Hotels, roominghouses, convalescent homes, supervisory care facilities: Every room used, or intended to be used, for sleeping shall be provided with an approved smoke detector. 
(Code 1964, § 10-43)  
Sec. 9-70. - Responsibility of owner or person in charge of property. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner or the person in charge of every structure to which this article applies to install approved smoke detectors as required by this article. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the tenant in respect of rental property to test and maintain detectors within dwelling units or rooming units, and to notify the owner or authorized agent in writing of all deficiencies. The owner shall be responsible for providing each tenant with written information regarding detector testing and maintenance. 
(c)  The tenant shall be responsible for replacement of the battery, except that such battery and smoke detector shall be in operating condition at the time that the tenant takes possession. The owner or authorized agent shall correct any reported deficiencies in the smoke detector, and shall not be deemed to have violated this article for a deficient smoke detector when he, she or it has not received notice of the deficiency. 
(Code 1964, § 10-44)  
Sec. 9-71. - Compliance. 
Smoke detectors required by this law shall be installed within six (6) months after the passage on February 25, 1985, of this section for existing occupancy and prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy for new occupancy. 
(Code 1964, § 10-45)  
Sec. 9-72. - Violations. 
Violations of this article shall be subject to the imposition of penalties applicable generally to municipal ordinance violations, and in addition, persons and entities violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the code enforcement board established by ordinance. 
(Code 1964, § 10-46)  
ARTICLE V. - PLANNED BUILDING GROUPS 
 
Sec. 9-73. - Adoption of fire code. 
The National Fire Protection Association 1141, 1990 edition, as amended, be and the same is hereby adopted as a fire code regulation governing the development of planned building groups. 
(Ord. No. 92-38, § 1, 7-15-92)  
Sec. 9-74. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - STANDARDS FOR WATER DISTRIBUTION/FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION 
 
Sec. 9-75. - Review of plans. 
Prior to issuance of any building permit approval, the water distribution plans shall be reviewed by the utilities department in coordination with the fire department. Inspection and testing of the building's water distribution/fire suppression systems shall be required by the city's fire department prior to the granting of the certificate of occupancy on such property. 
(Ord. No. 97-35, § 1, 6-4-97)  
Sec. 9-76. - Fire flow calculations. 
Fire flow calculations shall be prepared by a professional engineer currently licensed in the state for each newly constructed building in excess of five thousand (5,000) square feet in size. All calculations must be in accordance with the Guide for Determination of Required Fire Flow, published by the Insurance Services Office, December 1974 edition. 
(Ord. No. 97-35, § 1, 6-4-97)  
Sec. 9-77. - Fire flow requirements. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this section is to assure an adequate water supply for fire suppression by establishing minimum flow rates required to control and extinguish fires that may occur within prescribed occupancy classifications. The requirements of this section shall be applicable to public and private water systems, including individual properties and land development projects. 
(b)  Required fire flow. 
(1)  [ Generally. ] The "required fire flow" is the rate of flow needed for fire fighting purposes to confine a major fire to the buildings within a block or other contiguous group. The determination of this flow depends upon the size, construction, occupancy and exposure of buildings within and surrounding the block or group of buildings, and upon the existence of automatic sprinkler protection. The determination of required fire flow in each case shall be made by the city engineer according to the criteria established by this section and by the Guide for Determination of Required Fire Flow, Published by the Insurance Services Office, December 1974 edition, which is adopted and incorporated herein by reference. 
Note: Buildings located in commercial, industrial or multi unit residential districts may reduce fire flow requirements by up to fifty (50) percent for complete automatic sprinkler protection. Automatic sprinkler installations must be in accordance with NFPA standards as adopted by the City Code. 
(2)  Supplemental flow systems. If the minimum fire flow requirements set out in this section cannot be met by the water supply utility, then the applicant for a building permit shall be responsible for installing the necessary provisions to improve the system to an acceptable level as determined by the city engineer. 
(3)  Main sizes. Main sizes and system patterns shall be subject to approval of all applicable agencies pursuant to fire and normal flow demand criteria. 
(4)  Distribution systems. The supply mains shall be of adequate size and have properly arranged connections to the arterial mains which shall extend throughout the systems and have numerous connections to the secondary feeders that supply the minor distribution. All distribution systems shall be designed to reduce dead-end mains and provide a loop for new and existing mains. 
Note: Dead-end mains shall not exceed six hundred (600) feet in length. This requirement may be waived by the fire chief or designee where deemed unnecessary or impractical for the safety of the public. 
(c)  Testing fire flow. 
(1)  The City of Miramar Fire-Rescue Department has established fifty-five (55) psi as the maximum allowable normal operating pressure (static pressure) when computing the available water supply for all new automatic sprinkler systems. 
(Ord. No. 97-35, § 1, 6-4-97)  
Sec. 9-78. - Fire hydrants. 
All new fire hydrants shall be compression type with the bottom valve opening to be five and one-fourth (5¼) inches in diameter. They shall be erected so as to have the center of the steamer connection a minimum of eighteen (18) inches above the crown of the nearest roadway or eighteen (18) inches above the surrounding ground and with the steamer opening of four and one-half (4½) inches (maximum height) in size with four (4) National Standard Threads per inch. All fire hydrants shall be "traffic type" to breakaway upon impact. The fire hydrant main body valve shall open against the flow and shall close with the flow. 
(Ord. No. 97-35, § 1, 6-4-97)  
Sec. 9-79. - Visibility and access to fire hydrants. 
(a)  No fire hydrant shall be substantially obscured or access impeded from the adjacent roadway or access way by placing walls, vehicles, plants or other form of visual screening. No visual screen or physical blockage shall be placed to any point within four (4) feet of the front and sides, or four (4) feet behind the fire hydrant. One (1) blue double-reflective department of transportation type road marker is to be adhered to the hard surfaces roadway in the middle of the lane nearest to, and directly in front of the newly installed fire hydrants. 
(b)  Fire hydrants located on commercial sites housing industrial, storage, mercantile, business, educational, institutional, and assembly occupancies shall have a space four (4) feet on both sides of the centerline that must be kept open at all times. A no parking sign or other designation indicating that parking is prohibited shall be provided in the four-foot space on both sides of the centerline of the hydrant. 
(c)  The city is authorized to have removed, at the violators expense, any obstruction of the fire hydrant that might impede or hinder fire department or utility department operations. 
(d)  All pavement markings shall be of thermoplastic paint. 
(Ord. No. 97-35, § 1, 6-4-97)  
Sec. 9-80. - Use of fire hydrants. 
(a)  No person shall use or operate any fire hydrant or other valve or any fire system intended for use by the fire department for extinguishing fires or testing any portion of the system, unless such person secures prior written approval from the fire department or utility director of the city. 
(b)  No person shall remove, tamper with, or otherwise disturb any fire hydrant or firefighting appliance except for the purpose of extinguishing fires, firefighting training, or making necessary repairs without first obtaining written approval by the fire department or utility director of the city. 
(Ord. No. 97-35, § 1, 6-4-97)  
Sec. 9-81. - Fire hydrant location. 
(a)  The maximum space between fire hydrants: 
(1)  Every street intersection shall have one (1) fire hydrant on at least one (1) corner of the intersection unless situated at four-lane or more divided trafficway where two (2) hydrants will be required. This requirement may be waived by the fire chief or designee where deemed unnecessary or impractical for the safety of the public. 
(2)  In high value or high life hazard districts, the intermediate distance between hydrants shall not exceed three hundred (300) feet with hydrants so located that all buildings in the complex can be reached by comparatively short hose lines from more than one (1) hydrant. In single-family residential districts, the intermediate distance between hydrants cannot exceed five hundred (500) feet. 
(3)  In all new commercial buildings, a hydrant shall be installed within three hundred (300) feet of any portion of the exterior of the structure. 
(4)  Fire hydrants shall be located within three (3) feet of the curb line of fire lanes, streets, or private streets when installed along such access ways. Exception: This requirement may be waived by the fire chief or designee where deemed unnecessary or impractical for the safety of the public. 
(5)  The distance for measure shall be by centerline of traffic way as the fire apparatus would normally travel and/or driveway access on the property where additional hydrants are to be located on private property where the apparatus would normally travel. 
(Ord. No. 97-35, § 1, 6-4-97)  
Sec. 9-82. - Fire hydrant protection. 
Permanent barrier. Fire hydrants located in parking areas shall be protected by a permanent barrier approved by the fire chief that will prevent physical damage from vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 97-35, § 1, 6-4-97)  
Sec. 9-83. - Color coding hydrants. 
Color coding of hydrants shall be indicated by the gallons per minute flow. All fire hydrants shall be painted yellow (Rust-Oleum #944 safety yellow or approved equal) and color coded as follows: 
Class Flow Color of Bonnets and Caps 
A 	1,000 gpm or greater 	Green 
B 	500—1,000 gpm 	Orange 
C 	Less than 500 gpm 	Red 
 
(Ord. No. 97-35, § 1, 6-4-97)  
Sec. 9-84. - Back-flow protection for fire sprinkler systems. 
(a)  All backflow preventors shall be of reduced pressure type with a relief vent to the atmosphere. 
Exception: Non-industrial occupancies that are not hazardous to the potable water system as determined by the city engineer may not require a relief vent. 
(b)  The use of a backflow preventor for more than one (1) building is prohibited. 
(c)  All backflow preventors shall be installed above ground. 
(d)  All backflow preventors must be protected by a permanent barrier as approved by the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 97-35, § 1, 6-4-97)  
Sec. 9-85. - Fire department connections. 
(a)  Definition: A connection through which the public fire department can pump water into the automatic sprinkler, standpipes or other system furnishing water for fire extinguishment. 
(b)  Location: 
(1)  Fire department connections for automatic sprinkler systems, standpipes or other systems furnishing water for fire extinguishment shall be located within forty (40) feet of a fire hydrant. 
(2)  The fire department connection and the nearest fire hydrant shall be located on the same side of the roadway or fire lane. 
(3)  Fire department connections and the nearest hydrant shall be located within three (3) feet of the curb line of fire lanes, streets. 
Exception: This requirement may be waived by the fire chief or designee where deemed unnecessary or impractical for the safety of the public. 
(c)  There shall be a space four (4) feet on both sides of the centerline that must be kept open at all times. The area in front of the fire department connection shall be designated by yellow painting, striping, or markings on the curbs and roadways. Signs shall be provided following these guidelines: twenty-four (24) inches (height) by eighteen (18) inches (width), white background with red letters, stating "No Parking Tow-Away Zone". These signs shall be seven (7) feet in height from the roadway to the top of the sign. 
(d)  The city is authorized to have removed, at the violators expense, any obstruction of the fire department connection that might impede or hinder fire department or utility department operations. 
(e)  All pavement markings shall be of thermoplastic paint. 
(Ord. No. 97-35, § 1, 6-4-97)  
ARTICLE VII. - EMERGENCY ACCESS FOR PUBLIC SAFETY PERSONNEL[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-05, § 2, adopted January 26, 2011, amended the title of Art. VII to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. VII was entitled, "Emergency Access for Fire Department Equipment and Operations." See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 9-86. - Vehicular access. 
(a)  Means of access for fire department access. All means of access to property within the city shall comply with the current edition of the Florida Fire Prevention Code and the following requirements: 
(1)  All means of access shall be surfaced with solid pavement, natural or concrete stones or by grass turf reinforced by concrete grids designed to accommodate fire apparatus weighing a minimum of thirty-two (32) tons. 
(2)  Turns in means of access shall be constructed with a minimum radius of twenty-five (25) feet at the inside curb line and a radius of fifty (50) feet at the outside curb line. 
(3)  "No Parking" signs or approved designation indicating that parking is prohibited shall be provided at all normal and emergency access points throughout the planned community/property. 
(4)  The current owner of the means of access shall be the responsible party to maintain and enforce no parking regulations. 
(5)  The maximum allowable distance of any dead-end road shall be six hundred (600) feet. Any access road greater than one hundred fifty (150) feet shall have a method approved by the fire chief or designee for emergency vehicle turn around. 
Exception: This requirement may be waived by the fire chief or designee where deemed unnecessary or impractical for the safety of the public. 
(6)  Every dead-end roadway shall be provided at the closed end with an approved turnaround no less than one hundred (100) feet in diameter. 
Exception: This requirement may be waived by the fire chief where deemed unnecessary or impractical for the safety of the public. 
(7)  Planned developments shall have a minimum of one (1) primary access point and a secondary access point for emergency vehicles. 
Exception: This requirement may be waived by the fire chief or designee where deemed unnecessary or impractical for the safety of the public. 
(8)  Access points to any community or property shall remain free from obstructions, including, but not limited to, speed humps, barricades or planters on the ingress or egress sides of any community or property. 
(b)  Access gates. 
(1)  Access gates to gated communities shall be the types approved by the fire chief or designee. 
(2)  All access gates shall be designed to unlock with a readily accessible manual releasing device. 
(3)  During a power failure, all access gates shall be designed to fail in the open position. 
(4)  All entrance roads at gated communities shall be a minimum of fourteen (14) feet in width for single lanes and twenty (20) feet in width for double lanes, and a clear height of fourteen (14) feet. Such required minimum lane and heights shall remain unobstructed from bollards, medians, or any other type of devices unless approved by the fire chief or designee. 
(5)  All gates shall be programmed to open when emergency vehicles are entering or exiting any community/property in an emergency situation. 
(6)  Buildings that have a set back of more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from a public roadway, or have a set back of more than fifty (50) feet and are more than thirty (30) feet in height shall be supported with a designated fire lane. Fire lanes shall also be marked by yellow stripping, (preferably thermal plastic paint), or marking of curbs and proper signage at seventy-five (75) feet increments as to ensure that the minimum road width is not obstructed. 
(7)  At no time will the access gate obstruct the required twenty (20) feet minimum (single lane) and fourteen (14) feet (multiple lanes). 
(Ord. No. 98-34, § 1, 5-20-98; Ord. No. 11-05, § 2, 1-26-11)  
Sec. 9-87. - Gated access system requirements. 
(a)  Access system requirements. Gated communities within the city shall install, at the expense of the community association or other responsible party, a remote control system and backup access system at each resident access entry point of the community in compliance with this section no later than ninety (90) days after the adoption of this section. 
(b)  Remote control system. The remote control system required by this section is the system that has been specifically approved by the fire department for use and compatibility with the remote control devices maintained by the city's public safety personnel. 
(c)  Backup access system. The backup access system required by this section is the Knox Single Key Switch (Model No. 3502). 
(d)  Ability to communicate with fire-rescue department. Gated communities within the city shall provide, at the expense of the community association or other responsible party, a communications platform at each entrance of the community capable of transmitting dial call telephonic communications to the City of Miramar Fire-Rescue Department. This requirement may be satisfied by the presence of a twenty-four-hour guard at the entrance with access to telephonic communications and knowledge of the City of Miramar Fire-Rescue Department's contact information in cases of emergency. Any other platform designed to meet the requirements of this section shall be pre-programmed with easy to locate telephonic access to the City of Miramar Fire-Rescue Department. 
(e)  Personnel access authorization. Police and fire-rescue personnel shall be authorized to gain access to any gated community within the city to perform the duties of such public safety personnel in accordance with applicable law. 
(f)  System maintenance. Maintenance of the installed remote control and backup access systems shall be the responsibility of the community where they are installed. 
(Ord. No. 11-05, § 3, 1-26-11)  
ARTICLE VIII. - FIRE ALARMS 
 
Sec. 9-88. - False alarms. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Contractor shall mean a company or individual that has a certificate of competency from Broward County designating that company or individual as a specialty electrician in burglar and fire rescue alarms. 
(2)  Alarm company shall mean a private alarm-monitoring agency that contracts with property owners to monitor alarm systems. 
(3)  False fire-rescue alarm shall mean the activation of any alarm system signal that results in the response of the fire-rescue department caused by negligence, intentional misuse, malicious activation of the alarm system or malicious notification of a fire-rescue emergency via telephone to public safety emergency communications center. 
(4)  Fire alarm signal shall mean the audible transmission or other type of signal or message of a fire or rescue alarm to the fire-rescue department, as a result of the activation of a fire or rescue detection system, or activation of a fire suppression system. 
(5)  Rescue alarm is any alarm monitor used for the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(6)  Fire alarm system shall mean any mechanical, electronic or electrical device which is designed or used to detect the presence of fire, products of combustion, or the activation of fire suppression systems or equipment. Signal station residential smoke detectors are not considered fire alarm systems. 
(7)  Fire alarm malfunction shall mean the activation of any alarm which results in the response of the fire-rescue department caused by mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, lack of proper maintenance or any other fire rescue alarm response for which the fire-rescue department personnel are unable to gain access to the premises to determine the apparent cause of the alarm activation. 
(8)  Notice of false alarm (NOFA) is a written notice of a false fire-rescue alarm or fire-rescue alarm malfunction resulting in a response by the fire-rescue department that is served either by personal service to property owner or any authorized occupant, posted on the front entrance to the structure by a representative of the Miramar Fire-Rescue Department or delivered by certified mail to the most recent owner listed on the Broward County tax register. 
(9)  Single station (residential) smoke detector shall mean an assembly incorporating the detector, control equipment and alarm sounding device in one (1) unit powered by either unit containing batteries or electrical power wired in from the structure's electrical utility provider. 
(10)  Fee shall mean the assessment of a monetary charge payable to the City of Miramar, authorized pursuant to this chapter, to defer the expenses of responding to a false alarm or alarm malfunction. 
(11)  Owner means any person who owns the premises in which an alarm system is installed or the person or persons who lease, operate, occupy or manage the premises. 
(12)  Enforcement official shall mean the fire-rescue chief or his/her designated representative. 
(13)  Calendar year shall mean January 1 to December 31. 
(14)  Year 2K compliant shall mean all mechanical and electrical devices installed in accordance with this article shall be certified to operate in the year 2000. 
(b)  Identity of fire rescue alarm user. Every person who installs, owns, leases, possesses or operates a fire-rescue alarm system within the City of Miramar shall notify the community development department of the existence of said fire-rescue alarm system prior to the system being activated. It shall be the sole responsibility of the company installing any fire-rescue equipment to provide the owner and or occupants with a copy of the most current City of Miramar Fire-Rescue Ordinance. An "application for permit for fire-rescue alarm systems" form shall be completed and forwarded to the community development department prior to the system being activated along with the current permit fee. The application shall include the following: 
(1)  The name(s), address, business, home and pager numbers of the owner, lessee, operator, manager or persons with the ability to open the premises wherein the fire-rescue alarm is installed. 
(2)  The names and phone numbers of all person(s) who can be notified by the fire-rescue officer in the event of a fire-rescue emergency or a fire alarm activation. 
(3)  If any information provided on this application changes, the owner, occupant or manager is required to notify the fire-rescue department within fifteen (15) calendar days of such changes. 
(4)  All alarm companies must be registered and receive a permit approval from the fire life safety division. 
a.  Residential shall be at the time of activation or change in monitoring company. 
b.  Commercial shall be annually at time of business tax receipt, activation or change of monitoring company. 
(c)  Intentional activation of fire rescue alarms prohibited if a true rescue emergency does not exist. It is unlawful for any person to intentionally activate any fire-rescue alarm system or fire alarm signal except in the event of an actual emergency that requires a response of the fire-rescue department. Any testing of fire-rescue alarm system or signals must not be effected until the fire-rescue department has been notified prior to such test-taking place. Notification of an alarm test to alarm monitoring company does not satisfy the requirement to notify the fire-rescue department. 
(d)  Right of access. Any member of the fire-rescue department is hereby authorized to enter any structure, with mechanical force if necessary, that has a fire-rescue alarm activated if there is reasonable suspicion that a fire-rescue emergency could exist inside the structure or on the property. This authorization applies to any time of day or night. Nothing in this section is intended to preclude entry into property or structures by the fire-rescue department if they have reasonable suspicion to believe that a fire-rescue emergency exists without having an alarm activation and fire-rescue assistance or intervention is, or could be required. 
(e)  Civil liability. 
(1)  The City of Miramar, the fire-rescue department, the fire-rescue chief and all fire-rescue employees shall not be liable for failure to respond to a known repeated false alarm premises that has had over two (2) false alarms in any twenty-four-hour period. 
(2)  Fire rescue department response to false fire-rescue alarms or fire-rescue alarm malfunctions shall be subject to fees as provided in section 9-92(i)2. 
(f)  Alarms as a result of single station smoke detectors exempt. Fire-rescue department response to alarms initiated by residential single station smoke detectors is exempt from false alarm fees and permit requirements. The fire-rescue chief has determined that repeated false alarms represent a threat to safety. 
(g)  Fire rescue watch. If a fire-rescue alarm system and/or suppression, except for a single-family and duplex residential property, is disabled for any reason while the building is occupied, the fire-rescue department shall be notified and a fire-rescue watch shall be required. The fire-rescue watch must be satisfied by use of City of Miramar Firefighters and/or emergency apparatus unless waived by the fire-rescue chief or his/her designee. Cost of the fire-rescue watch will be based on the overtime rate for the employee and any associate costs for the operation of the apparatus. Fees for the fire-rescue watch will be assessed to the property owner. 
(h)  Appeal. 
(1)  Any person who is levied a fine for a false alarm has the right to appeal as provided for in Section 9-42 of this Code. 
(2)  Violation of this article may, at the option of the city, be prosecuted as provided by law pertaining to civil or criminal prosecutions in county court for failure to comply with this Code. 
(i)  Fees shall be set and amended by resolution of the city commission. 
(j)  Billing procedures. 
(1)  The finance/support services department will be responsible for billing and collecting fees assessed under Section 9-87. If assessed fees are not paid within 45 days after billing, finance/support services shall inform fire-rescue to take appropriate action. 
(2)  Fees charged shall be due when rendered. Payments will be considered past due 19 days from the billing date and will be subject to an appropriate late charge. 
(Ord. No. 98-38, § 1, 6-17-98; Ord. No. 07-10, § 3, 2-21-07; Ord. No. 11-05, § 4, 1-26-11; Ord. No. 14-16, § 13, 6-17-14) 
Note— Formerly § 9-87.  
ARTICLE IX. - AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATORS AND STOP THE BLEED KITS 
 
Sec. 9-89. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Automated external defibrillator ("AED") means a defibrillator device that: 
(1)  Is commercially distributed in accordance with the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act; 
(2)  Is capable of recognizing the presence or absence of ventricular fibrillation, and is capable of determining without intervention by the user of the device whether defibrillation should be performed; and 
(3)  Upon determining that defibrillation should be performed, is able to deliver an electrical shock to an individual. 
Stop the Bleed kit ("SBK") is: 
(1)  Capable of stopping severe bleeding through clotting, pressure, tourniquets, and other proven effective means of stopping blood loss; and 
(2)  Upon a blood loss emergency, is able to stem blood loss rapidly to prevent massive blood loss. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 2, 7-10-19)  
Sec. 9-90. - AEDs and SBKs required. 
AEDs and SBKs required. At least one AED and SBK shall be installed in each of the following buildings, structures, or portions thereof located within the geographical boundaries of the city: 
(1)  Gymnasiums, fitness centers, athletic clubs and indoor recreational centers; 
(2)  Assembly occupancies with an occupant load of 100 or greater, including places of worship; 
(3)  All hotels, motels, and apartments and condominiums with capacity for 100 occupants or greater; 
(4)  All medical facilities, to include assisted living facilities as defined by Florida Statutes, as amended, nursing homes, ambulatory health care facilities, dentists, urgent care medical centers, doctor's offices, adult day care facilities; 
(5)  Office buildings with interior corridors and a square footage greater than 20,000 square feet; and 
(6)  Commercial and retail spaces with a square footage greater than 30,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 2, 7-10-19)  
Sec. 9-91. - Installation and operation. 
(1)  The fire chief, or designee, shall inspect all AEDs and SBKs for operation prior to being placed in service or available for use, and on an annual basis. 
(2)  AEDs and SBKs shall be: 
i.  Conspicuously located in plain view of the primary public entrance, with unobstructed access; 
ii.  Housed in a cabinet with a clear window in the door, an audible alarm signaling the opening of a door, permanently affixed to a wall, and whose top is no more than 48 inches above the floor; 
iii.  Readily accessible and immediately available when needed for on-site employees and the general public, including disabled persons; 
iv.  Placed near the elevator(s) on every floor of the building, if the building contains an elevator. If the building does not have an elevator, the automated external defibrillator shall be placed in the area of the main entrance; 
v.  AEDs shall be located on each floor such that the maximum length of travel measured from the most remote point on a floor to any automated external defibrillator, shall not exceed 250 feet; 
vi.  AEDs shall be located on each floor such that the maximum length of travel between and two automated external defibrillators shall not exceed 500 feet; 
vii.  AEDs shall be located below a visible sign having a minimum area of 70 square inches and containing the letters "AED" and the universally recognizable symbol; and 
viii.  SBKs shall be located below an SBK sticker, which shall be provided by the City. The SBK sticker may also be placed on the cabinet containing the SBK. 
(3)  AEDs shall contain two sets of adult pads and bandage scissors. 
(4)  SBKs, with the exception of large occupancy SBKs, shall minimally contain: 
a.  Two (2) commercially manufactured tourniquets; 
b.  Four (4) gloves; 
c.  One (1) scissor; 
d.  Two (2) three-inch gauze rolls; 
e.  Two (2) gauze combine pads. 
(5)  Places of occupancy that hold five hundred (500) or more persons must have a large occupancy SBK, which minimally must contain: 
a.  Eight (8) commercially manufactured tourniquets; 
b.  Eight (8) gloves; 
c.  Two (2) scissors; 
d.  Eight (8) 3-inch gauze rolls; 
e.  Eight (8) gauze combine pads. 
(6)  All AEDs and SBKs shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer's guidelines. 
(7)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the building to: 
i.  Install AEDs and SBKs. 
ii.  Maintain AEDs and SBKs in accordance with manufacturer's recommended maintenance requirements as required herein. 
(8)  If an AED or SBK is removed for repair, a replacement shall be provided immediately. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 2, 7-10-19)  
Sec. 9-92. - Fees. 
Fees for AED and SBK permits and inspections shall be set by resolution, and will be included in the fee booklet. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 2, 7-10-19)  
Sec. 9-93. - Penalties. 
It shall constitute a violation of the City Code, punishable as provided in section 1-13 of the Code, to intentionally or willfully: 
(1)  Render an AED inoperative except during such time as the AED is being serviced, tested, repaired, or recharged, except pursuant to court order; 
(2)  Obliterate the serial number on an AED for purposes of falsifying service records; 
(3)  Improperly service, recharge, repair, test, or inspect an AED; 
(4)  Use the inspection certificate and allow another person to use said inspection certificate number; and 
(5)  Hold an inspector certificate and allow another person to use said inspection certificate number. 
(6)  Maintain an expired SBK. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 2, 7-10-19)  
Sec. 9-94. - Applicability. 
The owner or, if leased, the tenant, of any existing building, structure, or portion thereof required to have an AED and SBK shall comply with this section within 36 months of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. After the effective date of this Article, the owner of any new building constructed required to have an AED and SBK shall comply with this Article. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 2, 7-10-19)  
Sec. 9-95. - Requirements and procedures. 
The following shall be the requirements and procedures for use, training, and data collection of the AED and SBK programs: 
(1)  The implementation of an AED or SBK shall occur only after a written notification is made to the fire chief or designee by the individual, entity, organization, or company acquiring an AED and SBK. The written notification must contain the facility or business name, street address, specific location of the AED or SBK, the number of employees at the facility or business, the total number of persons trained or to be trained in the use of the AEDs and SBKs, the name of manufacturer for the AED, and model number of each AED. 
It is required that prior to implementation of an AED or SBK, the individual, organization or company must provide training for appropriate use, and maintain proof of training for review on premises. The training for the AED shall consist of a class provided by a nationally-recognized organization, including, but not limited to, the American Heart Association, the American Red Cross, Emergency Care and Safety Institute and the National Safety Council, and shall follow a standardized curriculum. The standardized curriculum shall include, at a minimum: 1) signs and symptoms of sudden cardiac arrest; 2) cardiopulmonary resuscitation; and 3) proper use, maintenance, and inspection of AEDs. The training for the SBK shall consist of a class provided by a nationally recognized organization. The standardized curriculum shall include, at a minimum: 1) tourniquet application and use; and 2) dressing application and use. 
(2)  Recertification of users, maintenance, and inspection of the AED and SBK is the responsibility of the occupant and shall be done on a periodic basis, as prescribed by the manufacturer and/or certifying agency. Recertification of users shall consist of a class, which will review the techniques for using the AED and SBK; and follow a standardized curriculum. Recertification training shall be provided as in paragraph (2) above. Maintenance of the AED device and SBK shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(3)  Any person who uses an AED is required to contact the city fire rescue department by calling 9-1-1 immediately prior to, or immediately upon use of the AED (F.S. § 401.2915). 
(4)  The city fire rescue department shall conduct a quality assurance review after use of an AED or SBK, which includes gathering clinical data and information from the person that used the AED or SBK and from the AED itself. 
(5)  The owner and user of the AED or SBK shall not withhold consent for a quality assurance review by the city fire rescue department after the use of an AED or to the retrieval of clinical data from the device itself. 
(6)  The city fire rescue department shall verify the presence of the AED and SBK, and may inspect any maintenance records and documentation of training to ensure compliance with the community AED program and SBK. 
(7)  The city is not liable for any damages experienced by the AED and by the SBK, or any person or entity arising as a result of: (a) Business's use or misuse of the equipment or supplies; (b) Business's failure to provide services pertaining to the equipment or supplies; or (c) any defects in the equipment or supplies. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 2, 7-10-19)  
Sec. 9-96. - Violations. 
Violations of this article shall be subject to the imposition of penalties applicable generally to municipal ordinance violations, and in addition, persons and entities violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the code enforcement board established by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 2, 7-10-19)  
Sec. 9-97. - Immunity from civil liability provisions. 
The provisions of F.S. § 768.1325, and specifically the immunity from civil liability for any harm resulting from the use or attempted use of an AED as found in F.S. § 768.1325(3), as may be amended from time to time are hereby adopted and incorporated into this section for all purposes. 
(Ord. No. 19-19 , § 2, 7-10-19)  
Chapter 10 - HEALTH, SANITATION AND NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Local improvements special assessments procedure, § 2-266 et seq.; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 4; amusement devices, Ch. 5; animals, Ch. 6; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; open burning restrictions, § 9-2; littering into canals or waterways of the city prohibited, § 12-39; abandoned airtight containers, § 13-2; business taxes, permits and business regulations, Ch. 11; circuses, carnivals and other exhibitions, § 11-61 et seq.; peddlers and solicitors, § 11-101 et seq.; solid waste, Ch. 18; utilities, Ch. 21; buildings and building structure regulations, Ch. 22; unsafe buildings and structures, § 22-46 et seq.; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23. 
State Law reference— Public health, F.S. ch. 381 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Spraying and dusting chemicals, use restricted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to spray, dust or in any other manner use or employ within the city any of the chemicals listed below or such other chemicals manufactured which may hereafter be listed as restricted use pesticides by the state: 
Common Name 	Chemical Name 
Parathion 	O, O-diethyl O-p—nitrophenyl thiophosphate 
TEPP 	Tetraethyl phrophosphate or ethyl pyrophosphate 
HETP 	Hexaethyl tetraphosphonate 
EPN 	O—ethyl O—p-nitrophenyl benzenephosphonothioate 
OMPA 	Octa methyl phyrophosphoramide 
Systox 	O, O-diethyl O-2 (ethyl mercaptowthyl thiophosphate) 
Phorate (Thimet) 	O, O-diethyl S-(ethylthio) methyl phosphorodithioate 
Demeron (Systox) 	O, O-diethyl O (and S) -2- (ethylthio) ethyl phosphorothioate 
Di-Syston 	O, O-diethyl S-2 (ethylthio) -ethyl phosphorothioate 
Phosdrin 	2-carbomethoxy -1- methylvinyl dimethyl phosphate 
Schradan 	Octamethyl purophosphoramide 
Guthion 	O, O-dimethyl S—(4-oxo-1 2, 3 benzotriaziyl - 3 methyl) phosphorothioate 
Methyl parathion 	O, O-dimethyl O-p-nitrophenyl thiophosphate 
Endrin 	Hexachloroepoxyoctahydroendo, endodimethano naphthalene 
Potasan 	O, O-diethyl O-(4-methylumbelliferone) phosphorothioate 
 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any graduate practicing entomologist, or any person licensed by the state as an insecticide or pest control operator, or any person who has been issued and possesses a current, valid permit by the state to engage in residential pesticide spraying. 
(Code 1964, § 12-4)  
Sec. 10-2. - Sale and disposition of certain chemicals restricted; containers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or deliver to any person any of the chemicals named or described in section 10-1, provided that any such chemical may be sold to any graduate practicing entomologist or licensed pest or insecticide control operator, or to any bona fide farmer or commercial horticulturist, upon written order, in which order there is set out the purpose for which and the place at which the same is to be used. 
(b)  It shall further be unlawful for any person to sell, discard, deliver or otherwise dispose of any container in which any of the chemicals named or described in section 10-1 have been packaged or stored, without first having cleaned and decontaminated such container sufficiently to remove therefrom all of the chemicals. 
(Code 1964, § 12-5)  
Secs. 10-3—10-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SANITARY NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, Ch. 6; business taxes, permits and business regulations, Ch. 11; marine activities and ways, Ch. 12; solid waste, Ch. 18; utilities, Ch. 21; buildings and building structure regulations, Ch. 22; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23; vegetation, Ch. 25; zoning, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Sanitary nuisances, F.S. ch. 381; state rules and regulations as to matters of public health supersede all ordinances and regulations of municipalities, § 381.071. 
 
Sec. 10-26. - Prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, maintain or cause to be maintained a sanitary nuisance. A sanitary nuisance is hereby declared to be the commission of any act by any person, or the keeping, maintaining, propagation, existence or permitting of any thing, by any person, by which the life or health of any person, or the health or lives of persons, may be threatened or impaired, or by which or through which, directly or indirectly, disease may be causes, or the environment of any person rendered unclean or unwholesome by act of another or others. A sanitary nuisance is further defined as the keeping, maintaining, creating or permitting any condition which invites or is conducive to the multiplication, concentration or continued existence of rats, mice, vermin or other disease-bearing fowl or animals either inside or outside of a structure. 
(b)  A code enforcement officer of the police department, or code enforcement officer or inspector of the building department, or fire safety inspector of the fire department, shall have full power to determine and ascertain what shall constitute a sanitary nuisance detrimental to the public health and is charged with the responsibility for enforcement of this section. 
(c)  An owner of any parcel of land within the city, permitting the existence of a sanitary nuisance shall be charged utilizing the city's code enforcement process found at City Code, Chapter 2, "Administration", Article XI, "Community Standards and Code Enforcement". The code enforcement officer of the police department, or code enforcement officer or inspector of the building department, or fire safety inspector of the fire department shall cause the parcel to be cleared of such sanitary nuisance in the event the owner or occupant fails to clear the parcel within the period prescribed and the cost thereof shall be assessed against the parcel as a special assessment in the same manner as special assessments are authorized and the procedure designated in Section 2-266, et seq., for enforcing the special assessment shall be utilized. 
(Code 1964, § 12-6; Ord. No. 14-16, § 14, 6-17-14)  
Sec. 10-27. - Regulatory fee for abatement/removal of nuisances; unsanitary, unsafe conditions; unsafe structure. 
(a)  The city hereby enacts the following regulatory use fees whenever the city and/or its agents must perform on an emergency or otherwise prudent and sound basis in the interest of the general health, safety, sanitation and welfare of the city and its residents the following regulatory use fees pertaining to services to correct, alleviate or abate a sanitary nuisance as defined by this chapter, and/or nuisances as defined by the Code of Broward County, Florida which county laws regarding nuisances and general laws of the state as set forth in Florida Statutes are deemed incorporated by reference herein and enacted and adopted as part of this chapter by the city. The regulatory fee charged for abating, cleaning up, alleviating public nuisance which present a threat to the public health, safety and general welfare, by the city or its agents, including, without limitation: 
(1)  Cleaning up debris from plane crash, downed power lines, gas leaks, removal of trees from business properties and such other conditions which in the professional opinion of the city administration require repair, cleanup or abatement by the city per incident (per three-man crew for four (4) hours involvement). A fee shall be set and amended by resolution of the city commission. 
Over four hours involvement, an additional cost per hour per person as set and amended by resolution of the city commission. 
(2)  Chlorinating pools, per pool. A fee shall be set and amended by resolution of the city commission. 
(3)  Boarding up pools, per pool. A fee shall be set and amended by resolution of the city commission. 
(4)  Boarding up houses, buildings, or other structures, per house or building or other structure involved. A fee shall be set and amended by resolution of the city commission. 
(b)  The city shall bill the owner fees for these services as set and amended by resolution of the city commission. If the owner fails to pay in full the cost within 60 days, the city may, at its option, do any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Record a municipal lien in the public records of the county, securing the cost of such nuisance abatement, and if authorized, by the city administration or city commission or code enforcement board, foreclose the lien in the same manner as a mortgage; and/or 
(2)  Institute a civil action to collect the sum; and/or 
(3)  Prosecute the owner in county court and/or before the code enforcement board for a violation of this chapter and any other applicable laws; and/or 
(4)  Exercise any other right to institute such civil, legal, equitable or extraordinary action as the city deems appropriate in the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 91-15, § 6, 1-28-91; Ord. No. 14-16, § 15, 6-17-14)  
Secs. 10-28—10-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - JUNKED, WRECKED, ABANDONED PROPERTY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Business taxes, permits and business regulations, Ch. 11; boats, § 12-26 et seq.; solid waste, Ch. 18; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 20; buildings and building structure regulations, Ch. 22; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23; zoning, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Junked, wrecked, stolen, abandoned property, F.S. ch. 705. 
 
Sec. 10-46. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned property means such property as does not appear to be in active or recurring use, or to which the owner does not appear to be actively engaged, in such property's current ownership, possession and enjoyment. 
Damaged property means property which has apparent or patent or readily observable loss, injury or deterioration or which appears by such damage to be injuriously affected as to be made significantly less usable, valuable or desirable. 
Derelict property means property which appears inoperative, dilapidated, or wrecked or partially dismantled or otherwise forsaken, cast-off or thrown away. 
Enforcement officer means a certified law enforcement office, code enforcement officer, or any other officer designated by law, ordinance, or resolution of the city to enforce the provisions of this article. 
Property shall mean both personal property, which means all movable and tangible things, including, without limitation, motor and recreational vehicles, trailers, boats, machinery, appliances, furniture, fixtures and all such goods and chattels; and real property, which means lands and whatever is erected or growing upon or affixed to land. 
Property in need of repair means property which appears visibly in need of restoration and renovation in order to make it of a sound or reasonably fit state after repair. 
Public property means lands and improvements owned by the federal government, state, county, or municipalities lying within the county, and includes buildings, grounds, parks, playgrounds, streets, sidewalks, parkways, rights-of-way and other similar property. 
In enforcing this article, appropriate city personnel will take into account the applicable laws and building codes of the City of Miramar, and/or Broward County and/or the State of Florida. 
(Code 1964, § 11-17.1; Ord. No. 90-34, §§ 1(15-36), 1(15-37), 3-19-90; Ord. No. 90-64, § 1, 9-17-90)  
Sec. 10-47. - Notice. 
(a)  Whenever an enforcement officer shall ascertain that an article of abandoned property is present on public property within the city limits, the enforcement officer shall cause a notice to be placed upon such article in substantially the following form: 
"NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND ALL PERSONS INTERESTED IN THE ATTACHED PROPERTY. This property, to wit: (setting forth brief description) is unlawfully upon public property known as (setting forth brief description of location) and must be removed within seventy-two (72) hours from date of this notice, otherwise it shall be presumed to be abandoned property and will be removed and destroyed by order of (setting forth name of City of Miramar). Dated this: (setting forth date of posting of notice). Signed: (setting forth name, title, address and telephone number of enforcement officer)." 
Such notice shall be not less than eight (8) inches by ten (10) inches and shall be sufficiently weatherproofed to withstand normal exposure to the elements. In addition to posting, the enforcement officer shall give notice to the towing company showing the name and address of the owner, and it shall be the responsibility of the towing company to notify the owner of the property to comply with the current local, state and federal regulations regarding notice and storage. If, at the end of seventy-two (72) hours after posting such notice, the owner or any person interested in the abandoned article described in such notice has not removed the article from public property or shown reasonable cause for failure to do so, the towing company shall cause the article of abandoned property to be removed and placed in storage in accordance with local, state and federal regulations. At the conclusion of the required storage, if the article is not claimed and if the salvage value is above one hundred dollars ($100.00), the towing company shall pay to the city the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or ten (10) percent of the value, whichever is greater, for the administrative costs in dealing with the article. If the vehicle is claimed, the city will receive twenty five-dollars ($25.00) as an administrative fee. 
(b)  Private property. Whenever an enforcement officer shall ascertain that an article of abandoned property is present on private property within the city limits, the enforcement officer shall cause a notice to be placed upon such article in substantially the following form: 
"NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND ALL PERSONS INTERESTED IN THE ATTACHED PROPERTY. This property, to wit: (setting forth brief description) is unlawfully upon private property known as (setting forth brief description of location) and must be removed within seventy-two (72) hours from date of this notice; otherwise it shall be presumed to be abandoned property and will be removed and destroyed by order of (setting forth name of City of Miramar). Dated this: (setting forth date of posting of notice). Signed: (setting forth name, title, address and telephone number of enforcement officer)." 
Such notice shall be not less than eight (8) inches by ten (10) inches and shall be sufficiently weatherproofed to withstand normal exposure to the elements for a period of seventy-two (72) hours. In addition to posting, the enforcement officer shall give notice to the towing company showing the name and address of the owner, and it shall be the responsibility of the towing company to notify the owner of the property to comply with the current local, state and federal regulations regarding notice and storage. If, at the end of seventy-two (72) hours after posting such notice, the owner or any person interested in the abandoned article described in such notice has not removed the article and complied with the ordinance or regulation cited in the notice, the towing company shall cause the article of abandoned property to be removed and placed in storage in accordance with local, state and federal regulations. At the conclusion of the required storage, if the article is not claimed and if the salvage value is above one hundred dollars ($100.00), the towing company shall pay to the city the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or ten (10) percent of the value, whichever is greater, for the administrative costs in dealing with the article. If the vehicle is claimed, the city will receive twenty-five dollars ($25.00) as an administrative fee. 
(Ord. No. 90-34, § 1(15-37), 3-19-90)  
Sec. 10-48. - Enforcement officer immune from prosecution. 
Any enforcement officer or any person authorized by the enforcement officer shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for trespass upon real property while in the discharge of duties imposed by sections 10-46 and 10-47. 
(Ord. No. 90-34, § 1(15-38), 3-19-90)  
Sec. 10-49. - Accumulation of junk, scrap metal, scrap lumber, etc., prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit junk, scrap metal, scrap lumber, wastepaper products, discarded building materials, or any unused or abandoned vehicle, other vehicles, or abandoned parts, machinery or machinery parts or other waste materials to be in or upon any yard, garden, lawn, out-building, or premises, in the city, unless in connection with a business enterprise lawfully situated and licensed for the same. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any accumulation of any such waste materials to be in or upon any yard, lawn, garden, out-building, or premises, in the city, if the same constitutes a fire hazard, a hazard to the safety of persons or property, or an unsanitary condition. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discard or abandon any of the waste materials mentioned in subsection (a) hereof, upon premises not owned or occupied by such person, without the consent of the owner thereof or the person occupying the same. 
(d)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction be punished as provided by section 1-13. 
(e)  In addition to the penalties as provided in subsection (d) above, in the event any person owning, or the occupant of such property, permits the accumulation of the above-described materials, the building official or code enforcement officer may direct a letter by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the party or may make personal delivery to the owner or occupant of any such lot, lots or tracts advising such owner or occupant that the city will have such lot, lots or tracts cleared unless such owner or occupant does so within the period of ten (10) days from the date of the mailing of the letter. The building official or code enforcement officer shall file an affidavit containing the pertinent facts including the date of mailing of such letter in the city records. Upon filing the affidavit, the mailing or personal delivery shall constitute proper service upon the owner or occupant. The building official or code enforcement officer shall cause the lot, lots or tracts to be cleared in the event the owner or occupant fails to clear the lot or tract within the period prescribed and the cost thereof shall be assessed against the lot or tracts as a special assessment in the same manner as special assessments are authorized and the procedure designated in section 2-266 et seq., for enforcing the special assessment shall be utilized. 
(Code 1964, § 11-17)  
Secs. 10-50—10-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RODENT CONTROL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Business taxes, permits and business regulations, Ch. 11; solid waste, Ch. 18; buildings and building structure regulations, Ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Rodent control, F.S.§ 381.031. 
 
Sec. 10-66. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building shall mean any business building, nonbusiness building and multifamily building, as hereinafter defined. 
Business building shall mean any structure, whether public or private, that is adapted for occupancy for the transaction of business, for rendering of professional service, for amusement, for the display, sale or storage of goods, wares, or merchandise, or for the performance of work or labor, including hotels, apartment buildings, tenement houses, roominghouses, office buildings, public buildings, stores, theatres, markets, restaurants, grain elevators, warehouses, workshops, factories and all other outhouses, sheds, barns, and other structures used for business purposes. 
Nonbusiness building shall mean any structure, whether business or private, that is used or adapted for the use of human habitation and is not defined as a business building. 
Occupant shall mean the individual, partnership or corporation that has the use of or occupies any building, or a part or fraction thereof, whether the actual owner or tenant. In the case of a vacant building or any vacant portion of a building, the owner shall have the responsibilities of an occupant. 
Owner shall mean the actual owner of the building, whether individual, partnership or corporation, including committees and trustees, except trustees under a mortgage or deed of trust. 
Rodent eradication shall mean the elimination or extermination of rats within a building by any or all of the accepted measures, such as: poisoning, fumigation, trapping, and clubbing. 
Rodent harborage shall mean any condition which provides shelter or protection for rodents, thus favoring their multiplication and continued existence in, under, or outside of any structure. 
Rodentproofing shall mean a form of construction to prevent the ingress of rodents into buildings from the exterior, or from one (1) building or establishment to another. It consists essentially of treatment, with material impervious to rodent gnawing, of all actual or potential openings in exterior walls, ground or first floors, basements, roofs and foundations that may be reached by climbing or by burrowing. 
Rodentstoppage shall mean a method of preventing the ingress of rodents from the exterior into nonbusiness buildings, consisting essentially of closing, with material impervious to rat gnawing, all openings in floors, exterior walls, roofs, vents and stacks, and the proper screening of doors and windows within four (4) feet of the ground. 
(Code 1964, § 12-21)  
Sec. 10-67. - All buildings to be rodentproofed and freed of rodents. 
All business and nonbusiness buildings of the city shall be rodentproofed, freed of rodents and maintained in a rodentproof and rodentfree condition in accordance with established specifications and under the supervision of the building official. 
(Code 1964, § 12-22)  
Sec. 10-68. - Notification to rodentproof or rodentstop; time limitations for completion. 
Upon receipt of a written notice or order from the building official, the owner of any business building specified therein shall take immediate measures for rodentproofing such building; and upon receipt of like notice or order, the owner of any nonbusiness building shall take immediate measures for rodentstopping such buildings. Unless such rodentproofing and rodentstoppage shall be completed by the owner in the time specified in the written notice or order, in no event to be less than fifteen (15) days, or within the time to which a written extension may have been granted by the building official, then such owner shall be guilty of an offense under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 12-23)  
Sec. 10-69. - Maintenance of premises in rodentproof condition required. 
The occupants of all rodentproofed buildings are required to maintain the premises in a rodentproof condition, and to repair all breaks or leaks that may occur in the rodentproofing, unless such breaks or leaks develop as the result of natural deterioration of the building. 
(Code 1964, § 12-24)  
Sec. 10-70. - Removal of or failure to provide rodentproofing or rodentstoppage unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for the occupant, owner, contractor, public utility company, plumber or any other person to remove the rodentproofing or rodentstoppage from any building for any purpose and fail to restore the same in a satisfactory condition or to make any new openings that are not closed or sealed against the entrance of rodents. 
(Code 1964, § 12-25)  
Sec. 10-71. - Authority to close occupied business buildings providing rodent harborage. 
Whenever, in the opinion of the building official, conditions inside or under occupied business buildings provide extensive harborage for rodents, the building official is empowered, after due notification in accordance with section 10-68, to close such business buildings until such time as the conditions are abated by rodentproofing and harborage removal, including if necessary, the installation of suitable concrete floors in basements, replacement of wooden first or ground floors with concrete, or other major repairs necessary to facilitate rodent eradication. 
(Code 1964, § 12-26)  
Sec. 10-72. - Authority to require specific actions to eliminate rodent harborage. 
Whenever conditions inside or under any building provide such extensive harborage for rodents that the building official deems it necessary to eliminate such harborage, such official may require the owner to install suitable cement floors in basements or to replace wooden first or ground floors or require the owner to correct such other interior rodent harborage as may be necessary in order to facilitate the eradication of rodents in a reasonable time, and thereby to reduce the cost thereof. 
(Code 1964, § 12-27)  
Sec. 10-73. - Conditions promoting rodent harborage unlawful. 
(a)  Within the city, all garbage or refuse consisting of waste animal or vegetable matter upon which rodents may feed, and all small dead animals, shall be placed and stored until collected by the sanitation department in covered containers of a type prescribed by the building official, according to existing conditions. It is unlawful for any person to dump or place on any premises, land or waterway, any dead animals or any waste vegetable or animal matter of any kind. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, leave, dump or permit to accumulate any garbage, rubbish or trash in any building or premises in the city so that the same shall or may afford food or harborage for rodents. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate on any premises, improved or vacant, and on all open lots and alleys in the city, any lumber, boxes, barrels, bricks, stones, or similar materials that may be permitted to remain thereon, unless the same shall be placed on open racks that are elevated not less than eighteen (18) inches above the ground and evenly piled or stacked, so that these materials will not afford harborage for rodents. 
(Code 1964, § 12-28)  
Sec. 10-74. - Inspection, eradication required before demolition permit issued. 
Prior to issuance of a permit for demolition of a building, an inspection has to be made by a representative of the building official to determine if the structure is harboring rodents. If the building is infested, eradication is necessary and must be completed prior to issuance of a permit for demolition. 
(Code 1964, § 12-29) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building structure regulations, Ch. 22; unsafe buildings and structures, § 22-46 et seq.; marine structures, § 22-166 et seq.  
Sec. 10-75. - Coordination with county health department; notification. 
The city building official and the director of the county health department or their duly authorized representatives shall work in a coordinated effort to carry out the provisions of this article. If either party exercises the power provided by sections of this article, the other shall be notified in writing within seven (7) days from date of action. 
(Code 1964, § 12-30)  
Secs. 10-76—10-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - WEEDS AND DEBRIS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Open burning restrictions, § 9-2; business taxes, permits and business regulations, Ch. 11; solid waste, Ch. 18; buildings and building structure regulations, Ch. 22; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23; subdivisions, Ch. 24; vegetation, Ch. 25; trees, § 25-26 et seq.; zoning, Ch. 26. 
 
Sec. 10-91. - Throwing trash, rubbish, etc., on streets or in waters in city. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, sweep or scatter, or cause to be placed, swept, or scattered, any trash, rubbish, paper, fruit peelings, or other refuse in or upon any street, sidewalk, parkway or bank of any river, stream or waterway, alley, vacant lot, or upon any improved property, regardless of ownership, and to dump or deposit in any stream, watercourse, or pool within the city, any trash, paper, oil, vegetable and mineral matter, or other substance that will pollute or tend to pollute the waters of such stream, watercourse or pool. All trash shall be removed from the city and dumped at such place as may be designated by the city commission. 
(Code 1964, § 11-28)  
Sec. 10-92. - Excessive growth of weeds, brush and grass prohibited. 
No person owning or occupying any platted or unplatted lot or tract within three hundred (300) feet of a residentially zoned district or improved public right-of-way of the city shall allow the accumulation thereon of a growth of weeds, brush or grass of more than twelve (12) inches in height on vacant property or more than six (6) inches in height on any property containing a structure. This distance shall be measured along a straight line from the closest portion of the lot or tract to the closest portion of the residentially zoned property. For the purposes of this section, "residentially zoned district" is defined to include all areas zoned "R," "R-1," "R-1B," "R-2," "R-3," "P" and "T." On all property zoned "E" or "E-1" the maximum height shall be twelve (12) inches regardless of whether the property contains a structure. 
(Code 1964, § 11-29)  
Sec. 10-93. - Penalty; notice; assessment by city. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, whether owner or occupant of any platted lot or lots or tracts within the city to permit the growth of weeds, brush or grass upon such lot, lots or tracts to exceed twelve (12) inches in height. In addition to the penalties as provided in section 1-13, in the event any person owning, or the occupant of any such platted lot, lots, or tracts within the city upon which weeds, brush or grass have accumulated to the height of twelve (12) inches or more, the code enforcement officer may direct a letter, by certified mail, to the owner or occupant of any such lot, lots or tracts advising such owner or occupant that the city will have such lot, lots or tracts mowed and cleared unless such owner or occupant does so within a period of ten (10) days from receipt of such letter. Such letter shall include a copy of this section. 
(b)  The city shall cause such lot, lots or tracts to be cleared in the event the owner or occupant fails to clear such lot, lots or tracts within the period prescribed. A bill for the cost thereof shall be sent to the persons to whom the letter referred to in subsection (a) above was directed. If the bill is not paid within thirty (30) days after it is mailed by the city, it shall become immediately due and payable. All costs becoming due and payable shall constitute and are hereby imposed, as special assessment liens against the real property involved, and, until fully paid and discharged shall remain liens superior in rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, titles, claims in, to or against the real property involved. All delinquent costs shall bear a penalty of eight (8) percent per annum due date. Unpaid and delinquent costs and service charges together with all penalties imposed thereon, shall remain and constitute special assessment liens against the real property involved. Such special assessment liens for costs and penalties shall be enforced by any of the methods provided by F.S. ch. 86, or in the alternative foreclosure proceedings may be instituted and prosecuted under the provisions of F.S. ch. 173, where the collection and enforcement of payment thereof may be accomplished by any other method authorized by law. 
(Code 1964, § 11-30)  
Secs. 10-94—10-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - NOISE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Code enforcement board, § 2-66 et seq.; amusement devices, Ch. 5; business taxes, permits and business regulations, Ch. 11; marine activities and ways, Ch. 12; boats, § 12-26 et seq.; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 20; buildings and building structure regulations, Ch. 22; subdivisions, Ch. 24; zoning, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Automobile noise, F.S. §§ 316.293, 403.415. 
 
Sec. 10-111. - Sound devices on vehicles and aircraft. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate in the city any wagon, airplane, truck or vehicle upon which or in which there is placed any sound device whereby announcements or broadcasts are made, or music is played, unless a permit shall have been granted by the city manager, or such other person designated by the manager, of the city therefor. Any person desiring a permit shall make application to the city manager for the same, and if it shall appear to the city manager that it will be detrimental to the best interests of the public, such permit shall not be granted. The city manager or his authorized designee is hereby given the power and authority to designate, in the event any permit is granted, the conditions of such permit, and such conditions shall be imposed so that the peace and quiet of the inhabitants of the city shall not be interfered with. 
(b)  If any person should be granted a permit, in accordance with this section and shall violate the terms and conditions thereof, the city manager or his authorized designee is hereby authorized to revoke the permit, and the person shall be guilty of violation of the provisions hereof, and subject to the penalties provided by section 1-13. 
(Code 1964, § 15-12; Ord. No. 91-22, § 10, 3-4-91)  
Sec. 10-112. - Musical instruments and radios. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, without a permit from the city manager or his authorized designee, to maintain and operate in any place or on any premises in the city, any radio or other mechanical musical instrument or device of any kind whereby the sounds therefrom are cast directly upon public streets and places, and where such devices are maintained and operated for advertising purposes or for the purpose of attracting the passing public, or which are so placed and operated that sounds coming therefrom can be heard to the annoyance and inconvenience of travelers upon any street or public place or of persons in neighboring premises, provided, however, that between the hours from 11:30 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. and from 5:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. such radios or other mechanical musical instruments or devices may be maintained or operated in such a manner that the sounds therefrom may be heard not more than a distance of three hundred (300) feet therefrom. 
(Code 1964, § 15-13; Ord. No. 91-22, § 10, 3-4-91)  
Sec. 10-113. - Hours noisy outdoor amusements must close. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of or any person employed at any place where an outdoor amusement is operated, to operate or conduct such business between the hours from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. of each day, whereby noise emitting therefrom shall disturb the peace and quiet of inhabitants or occupants of any occupied building. 
(Code 1964, § 15-14)  
Sec. 10-114. - Hours loud businesses may operate. 
(a)  No person shall perform labor, work, operate or conduct any business or enterprise in the city within one thousand (1,000) feet of inhabited dwellings, apartments or hotels if the noise emitted from the operation of such business or enterprise shall disturb or is detrimental to the health, peace and quiet of surrounding residents. The provisions of this section shall not apply to businesses operating between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, which are defined as Monday through Friday. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, application may be made to the city manager or his authorized designee, who may issue a permit authorizing any business to operate during the prohibited hours, for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
(Code 1964, § 15-15; Ord. No. 91-22, § 10, 3-4-91; Ord. No. 01-18, § 2, 2-21-01) 
Cross reference— Business taxes, permits and business regulations, Ch. 11.  
Sec. 10-115. - Loud and unnecessary noises prohibited. 
The creation of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in the city is prohibited. Noises of such character, intensity and duration, as to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual, or in the disturbance of the public peace and welfare, are prohibited. 
(Code 1964, § 15-16)  
Sec. 10-116. - Acts declared loud and unnecessary. 
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises, and noises in violation of this section but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  The blowing of locomotive whistles within the corporate limits of the city after 10:00 p.m. and before 7:00 a.m. and the ringing of locomotive bells while the engines are standing still, except in case of giving necessary warning signals in conformity with all laws of the state or ordinances of the city, and then only to the extent necessary, is hereby declared a violation of this section. When necessary to give communication signals, then such signals shall be by lights or ringing of the bell only, or by such means as will not disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(2)  The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or if in motion only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation by means of any such signal device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. 
(3)  The playing of any radio, television, phonograph or any musical instrument in such manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, hospital or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(4)  Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in any hospital, dwelling, hotel or any other type of residence, or of any person in the vicinity. 
(5)  The keeping of any animal, bird or fowl which by causing frequent or long-continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity. 
(6)  The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to cause loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(7)  The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper city officials. 
(8)  To discharge into the open air the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or motor boat engine except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(Code 1964, § 15-17)  
Sec. 10-117. - When sections 10-115 and 10-116 inapplicable. 
None of the terms or prohibitions of sections 10-115 and 10-116 hereof shall be applied to or enforced against: 
(1)  Any vehicle of the city while engaged in necessary public business. 
(2)  Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets, or highways by or on behalf of the city, county or the state during the night, when the public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day. 
(3)  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character. 
(Code 1964, § 15-18)  
ARTICLE VII. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 
 
Sec. 10-118. - Findings and declaration of policy. 
It is hereby found and declared that there exist in the city structures used for residential and nonresidential use which are, or may become in the future, substandard with respect to structure, equipment or maintenance, or further, that such conditions, including but not limited to structural deterioration, lack of maintenance and appearance of exterior premises, infestation, lack of essential utilities and facilities, existence of fire hazards, inadequate provisions for light and air, unsanitary conditions and overcrowding, constitute a menace to the health, safety, welfare and reasonable comfort of the citizens and inhabitants of the city. It is further found and declared that, by reason of lack of maintenance and because of progressive deterioration, certain properties have the further effect of creating blighting conditions and initiating slums, and that if the same are not curtailed and moved, these conditions will grow and spread and will necessitate in time the expenditure of large amounts of public funds to correct and eliminate the same, and that by reason of timely regulations and restrictions as herein contained, the growth of slums and blight may be prevented and the neighborhood and property values thereby maintained, the desirability and amenities of residential and nonresidential uses and neighborhoods enhanced, and the public health, safety and welfare protected and fostered. 
(Ord. No. 91-33, § 3, 6-5-91)  
Sec. 10-119. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety and welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance, appearance, condition and occupancy of residential and nonresidential premises; to establish minimum standards governing utilities, facilities and other physical components and conditions essential to make the aforesaid facilities fit for human habitation, occupancy and use; to fix certain responsibilities and duties upon owners and operators, and distinct and separate responsibilities and duties upon occupants; to authorize and establish procedures for the inspection of residential and nonresidential premises; to fix penalties for the violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 91-33, § 4, 6-5-91)  
Sec. 10-120. - Definitions. 
The following terms, wherever used or referred to in this article, shall have the respective meanings assigned to them unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context; all definitions of the South Florida Building Code, as it may be amended from time to time, are hereby included by reference. 
Deterioration means the condition of a building or part thereof characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, peeling, rusting, or other evidence of physical decay or neglect, lack of maintenance or excessive use. 
Exposed to public view means any premises or any part thereof, or any building or any part thereof which may be lawfully viewed by the public. 
Exterior of the premises means open space on the premises outside of any building thereon. 
Extermination means the control and elimination of insects, rodents and vermin. 
Garbage (see also refuse) means putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Habitable rooms means rooms used or designed for use by one (1) or more persons for living or sleeping or cooking and eating, but not including bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, serving and storage pantries. Corridors, foyers, vestibules, screen rooms, heater rooms, boiler rooms, utility rooms and other rooms or spaces that are not used frequently or for an extended period of time or that have less than fifty (50) square feet of floor area shall not be considered as habitable rooms. 
Infestation means the presence of insects, rodents, vermin, or other pests on the premises which constitute a health hazard. 
Mixed use means any building containing one (1) or more dwelling units or rooming units and also having a portion thereof devoted to nondwelling uses or used as a hotel. 
Nuisance means: 
(1)  Any public nuisance as defined by statute or ordinance. 
(2)  Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to the health or safety of children, whether in a building, on the premises of a building, or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes, but is not limited to: abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, abandoned iceboxes, refrigerators, motor vehicles, any structurally unsound fences or structures, lumber, trash, fences, debris, or vegetation such as poison ivy, poison oak, or poison sumac, which may prove hazardous for inquisitive minors. 
(3)  Physical conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to health of persons on or near the premises where the conditions exist. 
(4)  Overcrowding of a room with occupants in violation of this article or the zoning ordinance. 
(5)  Insufficient ventilation or illumination in violation of this article or any adopted technical code. 
(6)  Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities in violation of this article or any adopted technical code. 
(7)  Unsanitary conditions or anything offensive to the senses or dangerous to health, in violation of this article or any other existing state, county or city law. 
(8)  Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the health of human beings. 
(9)  Fire hazards. 
Operator means any person who has charge, care or control of a dwelling or premises or a part thereof, whether with or without the knowledge and consent of the owner, including, if applicable, a lessee. 
Owner means any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling unit, as owner or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee, receiver, or guardian of the estate, or as a mortgagee in possession regardless of how such possession was obtained. Any person who is a lessee subletting or reassigning any part or all of any dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed to be a co-owner with the lessor and shall have joint responsibility over the portion of the premises sublet or assigned by such lessee. 
Parties in interest means all individuals, associations and corporations who have interest of record in a building and any who are in actual possession thereof. 
Premises means a lot, plot or parcel of land including the building or structures thereof and including the abutting street swale area. 
Refuse (see also garbage) means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, and similar materials. 
(Ord. No. 91-33, § 5, 6-5-91)  
Sec. 10-121. - Applicability. 
Every residential, nonresidential or mixed-use building or parcel of land shall comply with the provisions of this article, whether or not such building shall have been constructed, altered or repaired before or after the enactment of the ordinance from which this article derives and irrespective of any permits or licenses which shall have been issued for the use or occupancy of the building or premises, for the construction or repair of the building, or for the installation or repair of equipment or facilities prior to the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. No. 91-33, § 6, 6-5-91)  
Sec. 10-122. - Higher standard to prevail in case of conflict with other laws or ordinances. 
In any case where the provisions of this article impose a higher standard than set forth in any other local ordinances or under the laws of the state, then the standards as set forth herein shall prevail, but if the provisions of this article impose a lower standard than any other local ordinances or of the laws of the state, then the higher standard contained in any such other ordinances or laws shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 91-33, § 7, 6-5-91)  
Sec. 10-123. - Enforcement of and compliance with other ordinances. 
No license or permit or other certification of compliance with this article shall constitute a defense against any violation of any other local ordinance of law applicable to any structure or premises, nor shall any provision herein relieve any owner, operator or occupant from complying with any such other provision, nor any official of the city from enforcing any such other provision. 
(Ord. No. 91-33, § 8, 6-5-91)  
Sec. 10-124. - Maintenance of exterior of premises. 
The exterior of the premises and all structures thereof shall be kept free of all nuisances and any hazards to the safety of the occupant, pedestrians, and other persons utilizing the premises and free of unsanitary conditions, and any of the foregoing shall be promptly removed and abated by the owner or operator. It shall be the duty of the owner or operator to keep the premises free of hazards and unsafe or unsightly conditions which include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Refuse. Brush, weeds, broken glass, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash and debris shall not be permitted on the premises. Refuse shall not include, however, garbage, trash and debris which is containerized or otherwise in approved receptacles for appropriate collection and removal. 
(2)  Natural growth. Dead and dying trees and limbs or other natural growth which, by reason of rotting or deteriorating conditions or storm damage, constitute a hazard to persons in the vicinity thereof shall be removed. Trees shall be kept reasonably pruned and trimmed at all times to prevent such conditions. 
(3)  Overhangings. Loose and overhanging objects which, by reason of location above ground level, constitute a danger of falling on persons in the vicinity thereof. 
(4)  Ground surface hazards or unsanitary conditions. Holes, excavations, breaks, projections, obstructions and excretion of pets and other animals on paths, walks, driveways, parking lots and parking areas, and other parts of the premises which are accessible to the public. Holes and excavations shall be filled and repaired, walks and steps replaced, and other conditions removed where necessary to eliminate hazards or unsanitary conditions with reasonable dispatch upon their discovery. 
(5)  Recurring accumulations of stormwater. Adequate runoff drains shall be provided and maintained to eliminate any recurrent or excessive accumulation of stormwater. 
(6)  Sources of infestation. Sources of infestation shall be removed. 
(7)  Foundation walls. Foundation walls shall be kept structurally sound, free from defects and damage, and capable of bearing imposed loads safely. 
(8)  Exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs, screen rooms and Florida rooms. These structures shall be kept structurally sound, in good repair and free from defect. Exterior porches, landings, balconies and stairs shall be provided with banisters or railings properly designed and maintained to minimize the hazard of falling. 
(9)  Appearance of exterior of premises and structures. The exterior of the premises, the exterior of structures, and the condition of accessory structures shall be maintained so that the appearance of the premises and structures shall not constitute a blighting factor for adjoining property. Unsightly conditions such as stains, discolorations, chipped or faded paint, cracked walls, rot, mildew or any other blighting deterioration of a structure's exterior must be corrected. 
(10)  Maintenance of sidewalks and driveways. Sidewalks and driveways shall be maintained free of litter, stains, cracks, debris or obstructions of any kind. Asphalt driveway surfaces will be maintained to present a smooth, sealed and uniformly colored appearance. 
(11)  Garbage, trash, and rubbish. No rubbish, trash, garbage or other waste material shall be kept on the premises except in properly secured containers from which no odors may arise. All trash containers must be put out for pick up either on the night before or the morning of pick up, and no earlier. Containers must be retrieved and properly stored on the same day as pick up. 
(12)  Play and sports equipment. All bicycles, tricycles, scooters, skateboards, wading pools, strollers, swing sets and similar equipment shall be stored so as not to be visible from streets. Swingsets and other playground type equipment will be maintained in good repair and safe condition. 
(13)  Fences. Fences which were installed as part of the original construction of a development or structure to provide a screen or barrier abutting a right of way shall be maintained and replaced in perpetuity in the same height, color and style as the original construction or in a color and style approved by the city's community appearance board. All other fences will be maintained and replaced as needed so as to be in compliance with all applicable city ordinances and to present a uniform, consistent and well-maintained appearance. All fences not part of an established community design which are visible from the street must be natural unless the color change is otherwise approved by community development. 
(14)  Unsightly conditions. All garbage cans, mechanical equipment, building supplies and other similar items will be located or screened so as not to be visible from streets. Boats, trailers and recreational vehicles which are visible from the street must be maintained in good condition so as not to constitute a blighting factor to the community. 
(15)  Vehicle repairs. Vehicle repairs are prohibited in residential areas of the city except for repairs made to the privately owned vehicle of the owner/occupant of the property on which the repairs are taking place. All vehicle repairs allowed by this subsection will be completed within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(16)  Holiday lights and decorations. Holiday lights and decorations are permitted during the period thirty (30) days prior to and thirty (30) days after the relevant holiday. 
(Ord. No. 91-33, § 9, 6-5-91; Ord. No. 98-37, § 1, 6-3-98)  
Sec. 10-125. - Storage of commercial and industrial material. 
There shall not be stored or used at a location visible from the sidewalk, street or other public areas equipment and materials relating to commercial or industrial use unless permitted under applicable zoning and fire codes or otherwise duly adopted life safety, building or similar technical codes. 
(Ord. No. 91-33, § 10, 6-5-91)  
Sec. 10-126. - Landscaping. 
Lawns, hedges, trees, plants, ground covers and all other landscaping components shall be maintained in a healthy, neatly trimmed fashion. Dead or unhealthy portions of lawns or swales in public view must be resodded. Hedges will be trimmed to a height no greater than six (6) feet. In no case will trees, hedges or other foliage visually or physically obstruct the right-of-way. In general, all unsightly conditions must be corrected to prevent blighting factors. 
(Ord. No. 91-33, § 11, 6-5-91; Ord. No. 98-37, § 1, 6-3-98)  
Sec. 10-127. - General maintenance. 
The exterior of every structure or accessory structure (including screens, patios, fences, walls, pools and pool decks) shall be maintained in good repair. The same shall be maintained free of broken glass, loose shingles, crumbling stucco, excessive peeling paint, or other condition reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance to the end that the property itself may be preserved, safety and fire hazards eliminated, and adjoining properties protected from blighting influences. 
(Ord. No. 91-33, § 12, 6-5-91)  
Sec. 10-128. - Structural and general maintenance. 
(a)  The outside building walls shall not have any holes, loose boards, or any broken, cracked or damaged finish, which admits rain, dampness, rodents, insects or vermin. 
(b)  Every dwelling shall be so maintained as to prevent infestation. 
(c)  All parts of the premises shall be maintained so as to prevent infestation. 
(d)  All parts of the exterior of a dwelling unit shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, free of nuisance, and free from health, safety and fire hazards. 
(e)  Every roof, roof gutter, flashing, rainwater conductor and roof cornice shall be weather- and rain-tight and shall be kept in good repair. 
(Ord. No. 91-33, § 13, 6-5-91)  
Sec. 10-129. - Enforcement procedures. 
(a)  If, in the opinion of the code enforcement officer, a violation of this article exists, the code enforcement officer shall notify the owner or operator of such violation and give the owner or operator reasonable time to correct the violation, as provided in section 2-77.2 of this Code, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  If a violation is not corrected within the specified time period, the code enforcement officer may proceed in accordance with the supplemental code enforcement procedures adopted by the city and authorized by section 162.21, Florida Statutes, as amended. This section is supplemental in nature, and the city reserves its legal rights and remedies to abate the violation as a nuisance, bring a civil action, or take any other measure allowed by law. Liens arising by violations of this article which remain unpaid for six (6) months may be foreclosed by the city attorney in the manner similar to foreclosure of mortgages under laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 91-33, § 14, 6-5-91; Ord. No. 98-37, § 1, 6-3-98)  
Sec. 10-130. - Correction of condition by the city. 
(a)  If violations of this article continue after the code enforcement division of the community development department has ordered and cited the owner or operator to correct such violations, the community development director may recommend to the city manager that the violations be corrected by the city if the property owner fails to correct the violations and it is determined by the city manager that the violations present an immediate blighting influence and serious health or safety hazard to the public. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee shall give written notice to the owner of record of such real property at his/her last known address, as shown by the then current ad valorem tax rolls of the county property appraiser's office, of the specific condition constituting the violation of this article and demand that the owner cause such condition to be remedied within twenty (20) days after the mailing of such notice. The mailing of the notice shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the mailing address of the owner is not known, and the property is unoccupied, the notice may be posted upon the property in a conspicuous place, and such posting shall be deemed notice to the owner thereof. If the mailing address of the owner is known, and the property is unoccupied, notice to the occupant thereof shall be deemed and considered notice to the owner. The notice shall advise the owner that, unless the condition is remedied within twenty (20) days, the city shall take action to have the condition corrected at the owner's expense, including reasonable administrative expenses, costs, and attorney's fees. The costs of such expenses, costs, and attorney's fees shall be, and are hereby imposed as, a municipal lien against the land if not discharged by payment in full from thirty (30) days of when due. 
(c)  The property owner may, within ten (10) days after the mailing of the notice as provided above or the service or posting thereof, file a written request with the city clerk for a hearing before the city manager or his designee to show that such condition does not exist, or why the condition should not be remedied by the city at the expense of the owner of the property. Upon the receipt of such request for hearing, the city clerk shall set a date of hearing before the city manager or designee, which shall be no less than seven (7) calendar days nor more than fifteen (15) calendar days from the date when the request was made, and shall notify the property owner by mail of the date and time of such hearing. 
(d)  If the violations of this article have not been corrected within twenty (20) days after the mailing or service or posting of the notice as provided above, and in the event that there is a hearing as provided for in the preceding section, and if there is an unfavorable decision by the city manager, after notice to the property owner of the unfavorable decision of the city manager, the violation shall be remedied by the city and/or by any independent contractor acting on behalf of the city, at the expense of the property owner, such expense to include reasonable administrative expenses, filing costs, and attorney's fees, in addition to the costs of the labor and materials needed to correct the violations. In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city, the city manager and/or his designee are hereby granted the power and authority to enter onto private property for the purpose of enforcing this article. 
(e)  Upon the correction of the violation by the city, the city shall cause a lien to be filed in the public records of the county against such real property for the total sum of all costs to the city. A copy of such recorded lien shall be mailed to the owner by the city clerk at the address appearing in the then current ad valorem tax rolls of the county property appraiser's office; provided, however, that the failure or omission of the city clerk to mail such copy of the recorded lien or to otherwise notify the property owner or occupant shall in no way affect the validity of such lien or the underlying indebtedness. 
(f)  Such lien as described above shall bear interest at the highest rate allowed by law from the date when such monies became due and payable to the city, which date shall be when the city first commenced work on the subject property or incurred an obligation in connection therewith, including the obligation of administrative expenses, and such interest shall continue to accrue until payment is made; and in the event such fine shall remain unpaid for a period of six (6) months subsequent to the date upon which the same is recorded in the public records, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to advise the city manager of such outstanding lien. 
(g)  In the event that the owner or operator fails and/or omits to satisfy such lien within six (6) months from the date the same is recorded in the public records, such lien, at the direction of the city manager, may be foreclosed by the city attorney in the manner that mortgage liens are foreclosed or in such other way as provided by the laws of the state for foreclosure of municipal liens, and the city shall have the right to have assessed against such defaulting owner and/or operator, in addition to the amount set forth in such lien, all costs and expenses occasioned or necessitated by such foreclosure including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney's fees and costs of court (including costs of appeal). 
(h)  The city clerk shall designate in the notice set forth above the approximate cost to the owner or operator that will be incurred in the event the city shall be called upon to accomplish the correction of the deficiencies set forth in such notice, whether or not such work is performed by the city employees or private contractor retained by the city. Such amounts shall also include those administrative costs including, but not limited to, personnel, postage, filing fees and the like which are expended by the city in the enforcement of the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 91-33, § 15, 6-5-91)  
Chapter 11 - BUSINESS TAXES, PERMITS AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-10, § 2, adopted February 21, 2007, amended the title of Ch. 11 to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Ch. 11 was entitled, "Licenses, Permits and Business Regulations." 
Cross reference— Preferences for businesses with drug-free workplace programs, § 2-250; alarm systems, Ch. 3; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 4; amusement devices, Ch. 5; cable television, Ch. 7; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; fire prevention code, § 9-51 et seq.; smoke detectors, § 9-66 et seq.; health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 10; sanitary nuisances, § 10-26 et seq.; junked, wrecked, abandoned property, § 10-46 et seq.; rodent control, § 10-66 et seq.; weeds and debris, § 10-91 et seq.; noise regulations, § 10-111 et seq.; hours businesses may engage in noisy activity, § 10-114; marine activities and ways, Ch. 12; operation of unnumbered and unregistered boats prohibited, § 12-28; sales of merchandise prohibited within certain distance from any school, § 13-10; taxation, Ch. 19; buildings and building structure regulations, Ch. 22; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23; subdivisions, Ch. 24; zoning, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Business tax receipts, F.S. ch. 205; regulatory fees, F.S. § 166.221. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 11-1—11-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-10, § 2, adopted February 21, 2007, amended Art. II, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. II was entitled, "Occupational Licenses." See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Amusement devices, Ch. 5; taxation, Ch. 19; buildings and building structure regulations, Ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Business tax receipts, F.S. Ch. 205; exemptions, F.S. §§ 205.063, 205.064, 205.162, 205.171, 205.191, 205.192, 205.193, 205.194. 
 
Sec. 11-26. - Definitions. 
The words, terms and phrases used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in F.S. § 205.022, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(Code 1964, § 13-1; Ord. No. 07-10, § 2, 2-21-07)  
Sec. 11-27. - Required. 
(a)  The city manager or his designee shall develop administrative procedures relating to the issuance of a business tax receipt ("receipt") and designate the department responsible for implementing said procedures and issuing the appropriate receipt. Every person engaged in or managing any business, profession or occupation in the city is required to have a city receipt and shall, on or before October first annually before engaging in or managing any business, profession or occupation, register with the city, their names, profession or occupation, and their place of business. In the event that October 1 falls on a weekend or holiday, the business tax shall be due and payable on or before the first working day following October 1. No person shall engage in or manage any such business, profession or occupation until after having obtained such receipt. 
(b)  This requirement shall apply to: 
(1)  Any person who maintains a permanent business location or branch office within the city for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business within the city; 
(2)  Any person who maintains a permanent business location or branch office within the city for the privilege of engaging in or managing any profession or occupation within the city; 
(3)  Any person who utilizes their home for uses as outlined in subsection (1) or (2) above within authorized business activities. 
(4)  Any person who does not qualify under the provisions of subsection (1) or (2) above and who transacts any business or engages in any occupation or profession in interstate commerce where such tax is not prohibited by section 8 of article I of the United States Constitution. 
(c)  No receipt shall be required to engage in activities for which a temporary permit or canvassing permit is required. 
(Ord. No. 95-28, § 1, 9-28-95; Ord. No. 07-10, § 2, 2-21-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.042.  
Sec. 11-28. - Term of receipts; half year receipts; transfer of receipt. 
(a)  Receipts shall expire on the thirtieth day of September of each year. No receipt shall be issued for more than one (1) year. For each receipt obtained between October first and April first the full tax for one (1) year shall be paid, and for each receipt obtained between April first and September thirtieth, one-half (½) the full tax for one (1) year shall be paid. 
(b)  Any receipt may be transferred with the approval of the city when there is a bona fide sale and transfer of the business and the property used and employed therein as stock in trade, and not otherwise. Such transfer shall be made within thirty (30) days after such bona fide sale has taken place. If the provisions of this section are not strictly and completely complied with in every respect, the receipt pertaining to the business shall be null and void and of no further effect. Such transfer shall take effect upon payment of a transfer fee of up to ten (10) percent of the annual tax, but not less than three dollars ($3.00) nor more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00), and after presentation of evidence of the sale and the original receipt. 
(c)  Upon written request and presentation of the original receipt, any receipt may be transferred from one (1) location to another location upon payment of a transfer fee of up to ten (10) percent of the annual tax, but not less than three dollars ($3.00) nor more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. No. 95-28, § 1, 9-28-95; Ord. No. 07-10, § 2, 2-21-07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.043.  
Sec. 11-29. - Affidavit of applicant. 
(a)  No receipt shall be issued or granted to any applicant to engage in the business of selling merchandise at retail or wholesale or the practice or pursuit of any profession or occupation, coming within any of the categories mentioned and set forth in this article, until compliance with this section. The applicant shall execute an affidavit before some officer or employee of the city authorized to administer oaths, which shall set forth the following: 
(1)  The applicant's name, address and telephone number; 
(2)  The particular location in the city wherein the applicant proposes to engage in the business for which the receipt is sought; 
(3)  The date proposed to commence business; 
(4)  When the tax is based on factors such as area, capacity, average value of stock carried, number of persons, or things employed or engaged, quantity, valuation, or other contingency. 
(5)  The names and addresses of corporate officers. 
(b)  The affidavit shall be filed with the city, which should include a sworn statement as to the nature and scope of business activity to be conducted. 
(c)  On an annual basis, prior to renewal, the city will send out a questionnaire and will require all receiptholders to fill in the appropriate information in order for the city to update their files and determine the correct amount to charge as a business tax. 
(Ord. No. 95-28, § 1, 9-28-95; Ord. No. 07-10, § 2, 2-21-07)  
Sec. 11-30. - Receipt not to protect receiptholder in court proceedings. 
No receipt shall be granted until there has been full compliance with section 11-29 and no receipt which may have been granted without full and complete compliance with the provisions of this article shall be a protection to the applicant in any civil or criminal proceeding. 
(Code 1964, § 13-4; Ord. No. 07-10, § 2, 2-21-07)  
Sec. 11-31. - Penalty for violation of sections 11-29, 11-30. 
(a)  Any person convicted of violating section 11-29 or 11-30, or of making fraudulent return, shall be punished as provided by section 1-13, in the discretion of the court, and in addition they shall be penalized a sum equal to twenty-five (25) percent of any business tax avoided or evaded by and through the medium of such fraudulent return. 
(b)  Each and every day of selling or disposing of merchandise or engaging in a business or profession without making the affidavit, as required in section 11-29, and/or without compliance in full with all of the provisions of this article, shall constitute a separate and distinct violation of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 13-5; Ord. No. 07-10, § 2, 2-21-07)  
Sec. 11-32. - Penalty for delinquency. 
(a)  No person shall engage in or manage any business, profession or occupation without first obtaining from the city a receipt for each separate location in the city, and paying the amount set forth in section 11-39. Any person engaging or managing any business, occupation or profession herein mentioned, between the first day of October and the first day of November of each year without first having complied with the provisions of this article and paying the amount of business tax as provided for in this article, shall be declared delinquent. Those receipts not renewed when due and payable and considered delinquent shall be subject to a delinquency penalty of ten (10) percent for the month of October, plus an additional five (5) percent penalty for each month of delinquency thereafter until paid. However, the total delinquency penalty shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the business tax for the delinquent establishment. 
(b)  A receipt shall be required to cover each and every business advertised by sign, newspaper, magazine or otherwise; and such advertisement shall be considered evidence of conducting business advertised and shall be a sufficient predicate for conviction by the court. Such receipt shall be issued to cover each and every location of such business; and that the assessment and amount of such taxes are hereby classified and fixed, per annum unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1964, § 13-12; Ord. No. 07-10, § 2, 2-21-07)  
Sec. 11-33. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-03, § 2, adopted Jan. 27, 2016, repealed § 11-33, which pertained to interview and investigation of receipt applicants; duties; fee to defray cost of criminal history form; receipt questionnaire form and derived from Code 1964, § 13-6; Amended, Ord. No. 94-18, § 1, adopted Jan. 5, 1994; Ord. No. 95-28, § 1, adopted Sept. 28, 1995; Ord. No. 99-20, § 1, adopted Sept. 1, 1999; and Ord. No. 07-10, § 2, adopted Feb. 21, 2007.  
Sec. 11-34. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-03, § 2, adopted Jan. 27, 2016, repealed § 11-34, which pertained to grounds for denial and derived from Amended, Ord. No. 95-28, § 1, adopted Sept. 28, 1995 and Ord. No. 07-10, § 2, adopted Feb. 21, 2007.  
Sec. 11-35. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-03, § 2, adopted Jan. 27, 2016, repealed § 11-35, which pertained to appeal from denial of receipt and derived from Amended, Ord. No. 95-28, § 1, adopted Sept. 28, 1995 and Ord. No. 07-10, § 2, adopted Feb. 21, 2007.  
Sec. 11-36. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-03, § 2, adopted Jan. 27, 2016, repealed § 11-36, which pertained to revocation of receipt and derived from Code 1964, § 13-9; Amended Ord. No. 90-33, § 1, adopted March 19, 1990; Ord. No. 95-28, § 1, adopted Sept. 28, 1995; and Ord. No. 07-10, § 2, adopted Feb. 21, 2007.  
Sec. 11-37. - Receipts levied individually and distributively. 
Each provision in this article contained, and each business tax by this article imposed, is intended to be construed individually and distributively. 
(Ord. No. 07-10, § 2, 2-21-07)  
Sec. 11-38. - Duty of officers of corporations. 
It shall be the duty of all officers and agents of any corporation to see that such corporation complies with the provisions of this article. All officers or agents of any corporation required by this article to obtain a receipt which shall do business without having paid the business tax imposed and procured a receipt, in accordance with the provisions of this article, shall be subject to the penalties imposed by sections 1-13, 2-72 and 11-32 upon persons and members of firms and corporations violating this article. 
(Code 1964, § 13-11; Ord. No. 07-10, § 2, 2-21-07)  
Sec. 11-39. - Business tax schedule. 
For the purposes of this section, inventory shall mean the average selling value of annual inventory owned by the business, exclusive of excise tax. Business tax fees for the following business occupations and/or professions are hereby levied and imposed as follows, provided that no business tax or combination of business taxes for a single entity at a single business location shall exceed ninety-nine thousand two hundred twenty-five dollars ($99,225.00). 
A 
(10)  Abstract, title, title insurance, prop closing ..... $164.85 
(20)  Activity coord./directors—Recreation ..... 110.25 
(30)  Adolescent/teen recreation centers ..... 110.25 
(40)  Advertising—Products and services ..... 110.25 
(50)  Ambulance service ..... 110.25 
(60)  Amusement centers ..... 220.50 
(70)  Amusement centers 1 to 25 machines ..... 220.50 
(80)  Amusement centers 26 to 50 machines ..... 330.75 
(90)  Amusement centers 51 to 75 machines ..... 495.60 
(100)  Amusement centers 76 to 100 machines ..... 551.25 
(110)  Amusement centers over 100 machines—Each machine ..... 7.71 
(120)  Amusement machines—Distributors ..... 137.55 
(130)  Amusement machines—Each machine as accessory use ..... 33.07 
(140)  Amusement park, per machine ..... 110.25 
(150)  Amusement parks 1, ..... 110.25 
(160)  Animal grooming ..... 110.25 
(170)  Animal—Clinic/hospital ..... 110.25 
(180)  Animal—Exhibitions per day ..... 137.55 
(190)  Animal—Exhibitions per week ..... 330.75 
(200)  Animal—Kennel ..... 220.50 
(210)  Answering service ..... 110.25 
(220)  Antique shop ..... 137.55 
(230)  Apartment each unit ..... 6.61 
(240)  Archery/gun ranges ..... 110.25 
(250)  Armored car services ..... 110.25 
(260)  Astrologers/clairvoyants ..... 164.85 
(270)  Auction companies/store ..... 771.75 
(280)  Auctioneers ..... 44.10 
(290)  Auto dealer rental cars 1 to 25 ..... 110.25 
(300)  Auto dealer rental—Each additional car over 25 ..... 9.92 
(310)  Auto detailing ..... 110.25 
(320)  Auto driving school ..... 110.25 
(330)  Auto paint and body ..... 88.20 
(340)  Auto shipping agency ..... 110.25 
(350)  Auto tag agencies ..... 66.15 
(360)  Auto wrecking ..... 88.20 
B 
(370)  Bakery's—As accessory use ..... 110.25 
(380)  Bakery's—Retail ..... 110.25 
(390)  Bakery's—Wholesale ..... 110.25 
(400)  Ballrooms/dance club ..... 110.25 
(410)  Banquet/party caterers ..... 44.10 
(420)  Banquet/party caterers—As accessory use ..... 55.12 
(430)  Barber shop—For each access activity ..... 33.07 
(440)  Barber shop—Each chair over 5 chairs ..... 11.02 
(450)  Barber shop—Up to 5 chairs ..... 110.25 
(460)  Bar/lounge (w/live see night club) ..... 220.50 
(470)  Beauty shop—For each access activity ..... 55.12 
(480)  Beauty shop/nail salon over 5 operators—Each additional operator ..... 11.02 
(490)  Beauty shop/nail salon—1 to 5 technicians/operators ..... 110.25 
(500)  Bicycle, scooters, mopeds etc (sales, rental, repair) ..... 110.25 
(510)  Billiard hall—Each table ..... 16.53 
(520)  Billing service ..... 137.55 
(530)  Bingo hall ..... 275.10 
(540)  Blood banks/storage facilities ..... 220.50 
(550)  Blueprinting ..... 110.25 
(560)  Boats for sale/rental ..... 110.25 
(570)  Boiler/machine/foundries-shops ..... 154.35 
(580)  Bondsmen professional (cash) ..... 385.35 
(590)  Bondsmen professional (surety) ..... 164.85 
(600)  Bowling alley—Each lane ..... 27.56 
(610)  Broker—Cemetery ..... 137.55 
(620)  Brokerage firms—Commodities ..... 164.85 
(630)  Brokerage firms—Stocks, bonds ..... 164.85 
(640)  Brokerage firms—Yachts ..... 110.25 
(650)  Brokers mortgage loans ..... 164.85 
(660)  Brokers—Customs and others ..... 137.55 
(670)  Brokers—Futures or options ..... 137.55 
(680)  Burglar alarm/monitoring companies ..... 110.25 
(690)  Bus companies—Intrastate only ..... 137.55 
(700)  Bus companies—Per each bus ..... 55.12 
C 
(710)  Canteen wagon or cafe—Each vehicle ..... 110.25 
(720)  Car wash ..... 88.20 
(730)  Carpenter shops ..... 110.25 
(740)  Carpet and rug cleaning ..... 98.70 
(750)  Carpet installation ..... 110.25 
(760)  Carpet sales (no inventory) ..... 110.25 
(770)  Cemetery/mausoleum ..... 132.30 
(780)  Check cashing store ..... 220.50 
(790)  Chemical toilets ..... 110.25 
(800)  Child care services ..... 44.10 
(810)  Concrete mixer—Each truck ..... 44.10 
(820)  Consultants—Each ..... 164.85 
(830)  Contractors—Building ..... 132.30 
(840)  Contractors—General ..... 132.30 
(850)  Contractors—Specialty ..... 110.25 
(860)  Contractors—Sub-building ..... 110.25 
(870)  Convalescent/nursing home ..... 88.20 
(880)  Country club ..... 495.60 
(890)  Credit bureaus ..... 110.25 
D 
(900)  Data processing—Service agency ..... 137.55 
(910)  Data processing—Software development ..... 164.85 
(920)  Dealers—Secondhand firearms ..... 220.50 
(930)  Dealers—Secondhand goods/consignment ..... 137.55 
(940)  Delivery services ..... 110.25 
(950)  Delivery services—Per each vehicle ..... 22.05 
(960)  Dialysis centers ..... 220.50 
(970)  Disc jockey (see entertainment) ..... 110.25 
(980)  Dressmaking and alterations ..... 110.25 
(990)  Dry cleaning plant ..... 110.25 
(1000)  Dry cleaning plant pickup station ..... 110.25 
E 
(1010)  Electric light and power companies ..... 551.25 
(1020)  Employment agencies ..... 137.55 
(1030)  Entertainment—Mobile (clown, magician etc.) ..... 110.25 
(1040)  Escort service ..... 330.75 
(1050)  Express companies—Intrastate business only ..... 247.80 
(1060)  Exterminators ..... 137.55 
F 
(1070)  Financial institutions—Banks and trust companies ..... 275.10 
(1080)  Financial institutions—Building and loan assoc ..... 275.10 
(1090)  Financial institutions—Money lenders except banks ..... 275.10 
(1100)  Financial institutions—Mortgage loan co. ..... 220.50 
(1110)  Financial institutions—Personal finance co. ..... 275.10 
(1120)  Fire extinguisher services ..... 137.55 
(1130)  Flea market ..... 1,653.75 
(1140)  Florist ..... 110.25 
(1150)  Funeral home ..... 275.10 
(1160)  Furniture refinishers ..... 110.25 
G 
(1170)  Gas companies—Selling bottled gas ..... 110.25 
(1180)  Gas companies—Selling thru pipeline ..... 441.00 
(1190)  Golf course ..... 441.00 
(1200)  Golf-driving ranges/miniature golf ..... 132.00 
(1210)  Gravel, sand, sod, dirt—Sales ..... 110.25 
H 
(1220)  Halls for hire ..... 164.85 
(1230)  Health clubs ..... 137.55 
(1240)  Home health care services ..... 110.25 
(1250)  Hospitals up to 50 beds ..... 413.70 
(1260)  Hospitals—Each bed over 50 ..... 5.51 
(1270)  Hotels, lodging houses and motels—Per room ..... 4.41 
I 
(1280)  Ice cream vendors ..... 110.25 
(1290)  Ice cream vendors—Each additional vehicle ..... 22.26 
(1300)  Import and/or export company ..... 137.55 
(1310)  Instructional classes ..... 137.55 
(1320)  Insurance adjuster—Each ..... 66.15 
(1330)  Insurance agency office—Located in city ..... 137.55 
(1340)  Insurance agent—Each ..... 88.20 
(1350)  Insurance companies ..... 220.50 
(1360)  Insurance-title (with an office) ..... 137.55 
(1370)  Interior decorators ..... 132.30 
J 
(1380)  Janitorial ..... 137.55 
L 
(1390)  Labor union organizations ..... 275.10 
(1400)  Landscaping/gardening ..... 137.55 
(1410)  Laundries self-service ..... 55.12 
(1420)  Laundromat—Each machine ..... 5.51 
(1430)  Lawn maintenance ..... 137.55 
(1440)  Lawn maintenance—Each additional vehicle or truck ..... 22.05 
(1450)  Leasing—Equipment, trucks, tractors ..... 220.50 
(1460)  Leasing—Furniture, tools, electronics, equipment ..... 220.50 
(1470)  Limousine service ..... 220.50 
(1480)  Limousine service—Per each additional limousine ..... 22.05 
(1490)  Locksmiths ..... 137.55 
M 
(1500)  Machine shops ..... 164.85 
(1510)  Mail order businesses ..... 137.55 
(1520)  Maintenance companies ..... 137.55 
(1530)  Manufacture and manufacturing 11—25 people ..... 164.85 
(1540)  Manufacture and manufacturing 1—10 people ..... 110.25 
(1550)  Manufacture and manufacturing over 25 people ..... 220.50 
(1560)  Manufacture and manufacturing—Each truck if transporting ..... 55.12 
(1570)  Marble and granite works ..... 110.25 
(1580)  Massage salons ..... 137.55 
(1590)  Medical clinics ..... 220.50 
(1600)  Medical/dental labs ..... 220.50 
(1610)  Merchants retail stock < $6,000.00 ..... 220.50 
(1620)  Merchants retail stock > $6,000.00 
—Each additional $1,000.00 or fraction ..... 14.33 
(1630)  Merchants wholesale stock < $90,000.00 ..... 164.85 
(1640)  Merchants wholesale stock > $90,000.00 
—Each additional $1,000.00 or fraction ..... 0.82 
(1650)  Messenger service ..... 66.15 
(1660)  Messenger service—Each vehicle ..... 22.05 
(1670)  Micro film storage ..... 164.85 
(1680)  Mobile home park ..... 330.75 
(1690)  Mobile home sales ..... 164.85 
(1700)  Monuments and tombstones ..... 110.25 
(1710)  Motion picture theatre 500—1,000 seats ..... 413.70 
(1720)  Motion picture theatre— 1,000 seats ..... 495.60 
(1740)  Motion picture theatre—Candy and popcorn concession ..... 44.10 
(1750)  Moving company w/storage ..... 164.85 
(1760)  Music/recording studio ..... 132.30 
N 
(1770)  Newspaper publishers bureau agency ..... 137.55 
(1780)  Newspaper publishers daily ..... 220.50 
(1790)  Newspaper publishers newsstands—Vending machine ..... 11.03 
(1800)  Newspapers published wkly, semi-month or monthly ..... 132.30 
(1810)  Newsstands ..... 55.12 
(1820)  Night club ..... 441.00 
(1830)  Nurseries trees/plants ..... 110.25 
P 
(1840)  Packers or shippers ..... 110.25 
(1850)  Packing houses ..... 88.20 
(1860)  Parcel drop service ..... 110.25 
(1870)  Parcel/messenger deliver ..... 66.15 
(1880)  Parcel/messenger deliver per vehicle ..... 11.02 
(1890)  Parking lots—1 to 25 cars ..... 110.25 
(1900)  Parking lots—over 26 cars ..... 137.55 
(1910)  Pawnbrokers ..... 441.00 
(1920)  Peddlers—Street vendors ..... 110.25 
(1930)  Photo lab ..... 137.55 
(1940)  Photographers ..... 110.25 
(1950)  Photographers studio—Accessory use ..... 137.55 
(1960)  Photography studios ..... 110.25 
(1970)  Piano tuners ..... 44.10 
(1980)  Printing ..... 137.55 
(1990)  Private schools less than 50 pupils ..... 110.25 
(2000)  Private schools more than 50 pupils ..... 164.85 
(2010)  Production studio ..... 164.85 
(2020)  Professionals—Each ..... 132.30 
(2030)  Promoters ..... 275.10 
R 
(2040)  Real estate broker with no agents ..... 132.30 
(2041)  Real estate broker with 2—4 agents ..... 193.20 
(2042)  Real estate broker with 5—25 agents ..... 247.80 
(2043)  Real estate broker with 26—60 agents ..... 358.05 
(2044)  Real estate broker with over 60 agents ..... 578.55 
(2050)  Real estate property mgmt ..... 137.55 
(2060)  Open 
(2070)  Rental clothing/uniforms ..... 137.55 
(2080)  Rental furniture, tools, electronics, equipment ..... 137.55 
(2090)  Repair watch and jewelry ..... 110.25 
(2100)  Repair—Appliances and electronics ..... 110.25 
(2110)  Repair—Automotive ..... 137.55 
(2120)  Repair—Business machines ..... 110.25 
(2130)  Repair—Heavy equipment ..... 137.55 
(2140)  Repair—Miscellaneous ..... 110.25 
(2150)  Reproduction—Xerox photocopy ..... 110.25 
(2160)  Research laboratories ..... 164.85 
(2170)  Restaurants—0 to 25 seats ..... 110.25 
(2180)  Restaurants—101 or more ..... 330.75 
(2190)  Restaurants—26 to 100 persons ..... 220.50 
(2200)  Restaurants drive in ..... 110.25 
(2210)  Retirement adult living 1 to 25 beds ..... 164.85 
(2220)  Retirement adult living over 26 beds ..... 330.75 
(2230)  Rinks—Skating, roller ..... 220.50 
S 
(2240)  Sales office no stock ..... 110.25 
(2250)  Salesperson ..... 110.25 
(2260)  Sanitation per truck ..... 110.25 
(2270)  Secretarial service ..... 164.85 
(2280)  Security companies ..... 137.55 
(2290)  Septic tank cleaning ..... 164.85 
(2300)  Service stations/fuel—Base ..... 110.25 
(2310)  Service stations/fuel—Each additional pump ..... 5.51 
(2320)  Sign shops ..... 137.55 
(2330)  Snack bars as accessory use ..... 66.15 
(2340)  Storage 1—50 units for rent ..... 164.85 
(2350)  Storage 51—over units for rent ..... 330.75 
(2360)  Storage warehouse ..... 132.30 
(2370)  Storage—Blasting materials ..... 2,205.00 
(2380)  Swimming pool maintenance ..... 137.55 
(2390)  Swimming pool maintenance—Each truck ..... 22.05 
T 
(2400)  Tanning salons 1 to 5 units ..... 110.25 
(2410)  Tanning salons (as accessory use) ..... 55.12 
(2420)  Tanning salons—Each additional unit over 5 units ..... 11.02 
(2430)  Tattoo parlor ..... 164.85 
(2440)  Tax preparation service ..... 164.85 
(2450)  Taxicabs—1 to 3 ..... 110.25 
(2460)  Taxicabs over 3—Per each cab ..... 22.05 
(2470)  Taxidermists ..... 66.15 
(2480)  Telecommunication services ..... 110.25 
(2490)  Telemarketing sales ..... 110.25 
(2500)  Telephone companies ..... 330.75 
(2510)  Television and radio station ..... 220.50 
(2520)  Towing service (wrecking, hauling, salvage) ..... 88.20 
(2530)  Transportation private school—Each vehicle ..... 55.12 
(2540)  Travel agency ..... 137.55 
(2550)  Trucking or transport co. ..... 164.85 
(2560)  Trucking or transport co.—Per each truck ..... 44.10 
(2570)  Truck/trailer rental or leasing ..... 164.85 
(2580)  Truck/trailer rental or leasing-each vehicle ..... 22.05 
U 
(2590)  Unclassified ..... 132.30 
(2600)  Uniform service (towel, linen, diaper) ..... 137.55 
(2610)  Upholsterer ..... 110.25 
V 
(2620)  Vehicle leasing co. ..... 164.85 
(2630)  Vehicle showroom-new vehicles ..... 164.85 
(2640)  Vehicle showroom-used vehicles ..... 220.50 
(2650)  Vehicle upholstery/top shop ..... 137.55 
(2660)  Vehicles window tinting ..... 137.55 
(2670)  Vending distributor ..... 137.55 
(2680)  Vending—Each machine as accessory use ..... 33.07 
W 
(2690)  Window and house cleaning ..... 88.20 
(Ord. No. 00-45, § 2, 9-20-00; Ord. No. 07-10, § 2, 2-21-07; Ord. No. 08-22, § 2, 6-10-08; Ord. No. 14-13, § 2, 4-16-14) 
_____ 
Sec. 11-40. - Display of receipt. 
All persons to whom receipts are issued pursuant to this article shall cause the receipts to be displayed at all times in a prominent place in their business establishments. Failure to display the receipts in such manner shall constitute a violation of this section. Any person convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of such violation shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Code 1964, § 13-13; Ord. 95-22, § 1, 9-28-95; Ord. No. 07-10, § 2, 2-21-07)  
Sec. 11-41. - Well drilling, excavating and similar receipts; liability insurance required. 
Any person engaged in the business of well drilling, building, raising or moving, caisson work, conduit contractors, contractors operating cranes, derricks, power shovels, electric light and power line construction, excavation, grading or land filling, pile driving, street or road construction, paving, water main or sewer construction that applies for a receipt in the city shall prior to being granted such receipt obtain and file with the city liability insurance in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) to cover any liability for damage which may be caused underground by such occupation. 
(Code 1964, § 6-37; Amended, Ord. No. 95-28, § 1, 9-28-95; Ord. No. 07-10, § 2, 2-21-07)  
Sec. 11-42. - Unclassified categories. 
The categories listed in this section constitute and set forth the lawful, permissible businesses within the city. In the event application is made for a receipt not specifically enumerated in this section, the director of finance/support services or designee shall have the authority to determine the most nearly similar category that shall apply to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 07-10, § 2, 2-21-07)  
Sec. 11-43. - Accessory use. 
Accessory use shall be defined as those uses which are not normally and customarily conducted within the main business for which a receipt was obtained. 
(Ord. No. 95-28, § 2, 9-28-95, amended to include new sections 11-42, 11-43; Ord. No. 07-10, § 2, 2-21-07)  
Secs. 11-44—11-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS AND OTHER EXHIBITIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Amusement devices, Ch. 5; amusement devices and structures installed in compliance with this chapter, § 5-2; health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 10. 
 
Sec. 11-61. - Application; permission required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a circus, carnival, or other exhibition for public assemblage within the city without first having made application to the community development department and obtained a temporary use permit as provided for in the city's land use regulations. 
(Amended, Ord. No. 95-26, § 1, 9-28-95)  
Sec. 11-62. - Prerequisite for permit issuance. 
Permission required by this article shall be given only to organizations which have been in existence for a period of three (3) or more years and are engaged in charitable, civic, community, benevolent, religious or scholastic works or similar activities within the city. 
(Code 1964, § 13-27)  
Sec. 11-63. - Must be a nonprofit organization. 
An organization applying for permission required by this article shall furnish proof that it is a nonprofit organization which complies with section 11-62. 
(Code 1964, § 13-28)  
Sec. 11-64. - License required. 
An organization conducting a circus, carnival or other public exhibition in accordance with the provisions of this article shall obtain an occupational license from the city pursuant to section 11-39 and shall comply with all appropriate ordinances and regulations of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 13-29)  
Secs. 11-65—11-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - GARAGE SALES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building structure regulations, Ch. 22; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23; subdivision, Ch. 24; zoning, Ch. 26. 
 
Sec. 11-81. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the words "garage sale" shall be defined as any sale of used merchandise owned by the person conducting the sale or such person's immediate family. The term "garage sale" shall not include the sale of single items of personal property from a residence where such sale is advertised only. 
(Code 1964, § 16-17)  
Sec. 11-82. - Permit required for garage sales. 
No person shall hold or permit to be held a garage sale on property owned by them or in their possession without first having fully complied with the terms, conditions and provisions of this article. All persons holding a garage sale must first obtain a permit from the community development department and pay a fee to be set and amended by resolution of the city commission for the issuance of such permit. If the home contains a garage, carport or roofed porch, all merchandise must be displayed in such structure. 
(Code 1964, § 16-15; Ord. No. 14-16, § 18, 6-17-14)  
Sec. 11-83. - Restrictions. 
Any person holding a garage sale shall be permitted to post only one (1) sign to advertise such sale. Such sign shall conform with the city's requirements for residential "For Sale" signs. Garage sales shall be limited to a total of three (3) consecutive days during any six-month period.  
Secs. 11-84—11-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 10; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 20; buildings and building structure regulations, Ch. 22; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23; subdivisions, Ch. 24; zoning, Ch. 26. 
 
Sec. 11-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Canvasser or solicitor. Any individual whether resident of the city or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck, or any other type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise, and personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not the individual has, carries, or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of the sale, or whether he/she is collecting advance payments on the sales or not. 
Canvasser or solicitor shall include any person, whom, for himself/herself or for another person, firm, or corporation, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop, or any other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting and taking orders for future delivery. 
Charitable organization. A group which is or holds itself out to be benevolent, educational, voluntary health, philanthropic, humane, patriotic, religious, or eleemosynary organization, or any person who solicits or obtains contributions solicited from the public for charitable purposes. 
Charitable organizations shall be deemed to include a duly constituted religious organization or any group affiliated with and forming an integral part of that organization. 
Right-of-way canvasser or solicitor. Any person who sells or offers for sale any thing or service of any kind, or who seeks any donation of any kind, or who personally hands to or seeks to transmit by hand or receive by hand any thing or service of any kind, whether or not payment in exchange is required or requested, to any person who operates or occupies a motor vehicle of any kind, which vehicle is engaged in travel on or within any portion of any of the streets or roadways in the city, whether or not such vehicle is temporarily stopped in the travel lanes of the road. The term shall not apply to any person who merely holds or displays a sign lawfully permitted to be displayed by a person, as long as there is no entry by such person or sign into any portion of the roadway or its median. Further, this term shall not apply to official citations or notices provided pursuant to governmental authority. 
(Amended Ord. No. 95-27, § 1, 9-28-95; Ord. No. 11-02, § 2, 11-3-10)  
Sec. 11-102. - Charitable solicitation requirements 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to solicit for charitable organizations as hereinabove defined unless the charitable organization is located within the corporate limits of the city, or, unless the organization is registered and has a permit from the Department of State under the provisions of F.S. Chapter 496.  
Sec. 11-103. - Solicitor or canvasser to have permit. 
It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or canvasser, as defined in this chapter, to engage in that business within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a permit in compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 95-27, §1, 9-28-95)  
Sec. 11-104. - Permit application. 
(a)  Applicants for a permit under this chapter as a canvasser or solicitor must file with the city clerk, a sworn application in writing, and in duplicate, on a form to be furnished by the city clerk. Each person who will be soliciting or canvassing shall complete an application which shall give the following information: 
(1)  Name and description of the applicant. 
(2)  Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant; address of applicant for past five years. 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold. 
(4)  Dates when solicitation or canvassing is to occur. 
(5)  If employed, the name and address of the employee, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship. 
(6)  A photograph of the applicant, taken within sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date of filing of the application, which shall be at least two inches by two inches, show the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner, and fingerprints of the applicant. 
(b)  At the time of filing the application, a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00), shall be paid to the city clerk to cover the cost of investigation of the facts stated therein. Section (b) shall not apply to solicitors for charitable organizations nor shall any fee be charged to those solicitors.  
Sec. 11-105. - Investigation of applicant. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the application provided for in section 11-104, the city clerk shall submit the necessary data to the Florida Department of Law Enforcement to obtain a criminal background report. 
(b)  If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the city clerk shall endorse on the application his/her disapproval and his/her reasons therefor, and shall notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no permit will be issued. 
(c)  Should the city clerk find that the character of the applicant is satisfactory, he/she shall notify the applicant that a permit for solicitor or canvasser shall be issued upon payment of the prescribed applicable permit fees.  
Sec. 11-106. - Exhibition of permit. 
Each person soliciting and/or canvassing is required to display a permit at all times.  
Sec. 11-107. - Permissible hours of solicitation. 
It shall be unlawful to canvass or solicit for commercial or charitable organizations between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. within the corporate limits of the city.  
Sec. 11-108. - Restrictions. 
No person shall solicit or canvass on any sidewalk, public place or private premises or where there is a conspicuous sign bearing the words, "no trespassing," "no peddlers, solicitors or agents," "no advertisements," "no solicitation," or any other similar notice. Citizens, residents, and businesses in the city may post no-solicitation signs in a prominent place upon the premises, and the presence of such signs shall raise a presumption of a prima facie violation of this section any time there is solicitation or canvassing upon such premises. The term "no solicitation" shall be deemed to include as synonymous therewith "no trespassing," "no peddlers or agents," "no advertisements."  
Sec. 11-109. - Prohibition of right-of-way canvassers and solicitors on certain roadways. 
(a)  Findings; purpose; intent. 
(1)  The City Commission of the City of Miramar desires to adopt an ordinance restricting right-of-way canvassers and solicitors to certain streets and roadways located in the city because such canvassers and solicitors pose a danger to themselves and the public at large by interfering with the safe movement of normal vehicular traffic; and 
(2)  According to the Florida Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles 2007 Florida Traffic Crash Statistics Report, five hundred thirty (530) pedestrians were killed on Florida roadways in 2007; sixty-five (65) of those pedestrians were killed on roadways in Broward County; and 
(3)  As reported in the USDOT National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's June 2008 National Pedestrian Crash Report, the City of Miramar experienced four (4) pedestrian crash deaths in 2006 alone. 
(4)  Based upon statistics collected by the Surface Transportation Policy Project, the Miami-Fort Lauderdale area is one (1) of the most dangerous areas in the United States for pedestrians; and 
(5)  Numerous types of right-of-way canvassers and solicitors may seek to operate within the City of Miramar, including, but not limited to, children, adolescents and adults who seek to collect money for school and community activities; vendors who sell flowers, newspapers and other products; and people who seek donations or distribute written information; and 
(6)  Right-of-way canvassers and solicitors approach motorists and passengers in motor vehicles engaged in travel on roads, and are particularly susceptible and vulnerable to serious injury or death due to the speed and number of motorists who operate vehicles on busy roads within the city; and 
(7)  Roads are primarily designed for vehicular traffic and are not suited to safely accommodate right-of-way canvassers and solicitors; and 
(8)  According to a local newspaper article published in 2003, twenty-nine (29) right-of-way canvassers/solicitors have been seriously injured and at least fourteen (14) more have been killed by motor vehicles during a fifteen-year period; many of those deaths occurred while the canvasser/solicitor was sitting or standing in a median or on the side of the street (including a Sun-Sentinel newspaper vendor who was struck by a car while carrying papers on U.S. 1 and Broward Boulevard in Fort Lauderdale on July 30, 2000; a Miami Herald newspaper vendor who was standing on the median at Federal Highway and Stirling Road on May 23, 2002; and a Miami Herald newspaper vendor who was selling papers on the side of the street at Stirling Road and U.S. 441 on August 7, 2002); and 
(9)  On October 1, 2006, a local newspaper vendor was struck and killed in Miramar by a hit and run driver while standing on the median on Miramar Parkway and State Road 7, and on November 2, 2007, a Miami-Herald newspaper vendor was struck and killed by a hit and run driver while standing on the median in Northwest Miami-Dade County; and 
(10)  The presence of right-of-way canvassers and solicitors interferes with the safe movement of normal vehicular traffic; and 
(11)  The road network in the city is substantially burdened by a high volume of traffic, and road design frequently includes complex vehicle turn movements that demand a driver's strict attention; and 
(12)  It is the intention of the city commission to use the least restrictive means to advance the significant governmental interests of traffic safety and public safety and, consequently, the city staff analyzed each of the major roads within the city and determined that the roads listed in subsection (b) below present an increased and significant danger for use by distracted drivers, pedestrians and right-of-way canvassers and solicitors, and pose the greatest threat to traffic and public safety in reference to activities and use by right-of-way canvassers and solicitors, and therefore the city commission has determined that such activities and use by right-of-way vendors and solicitors shall be prohibited on the roads listed in subsection (b); and 
(13)  It is the finding of the city commission that many other alternative channels of communication (other than right-of-way canvassing and solicitation on the prohibited roadways) exist for persons who seek to exercise their First Amendment freedoms, such as, but by no means limited to, solicitation of funds or distribution of literature through the mail or at alternate locations (such as houses of worship, shopping areas and special events); the sale and/or distribution of newspapers through home or office delivery, vending machines and retail stores; and the sale of goods and services at retail stores, through the internet and from vending machines; and 
(14)  The city commission desires to preserve and protect the personal safety and quality of life of its residents and of those who use streets within the city, both pedestrians and motorists alike; and 
(15)  The city commission has reviewed the proposed regulations provided by this section and finds that such regulations accomplish the purposes intended while utilizing the least restrictive means; and 
(16)  The city commission finds that it is in the best interests of the residents of the city to adopt this section. 
(b)  Prohibited roadways. It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a right-of-way canvasser or solicitor at or within two hundred (200) feet from the lateral curb or boundary line of any intersection located on the following roadways: South State Road 7, Miramar Parkway, Pembroke Road, University Drive, Red Road and Flamingo Road. 
(c)  Chapter 316, Florida Statutes. The enforcement of this section shall not, in any way, preclude the enforcement of F.S. § 316.130(5), as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, § 2, 11-3-10)  
Sec. 11-110. - Rejection of application; appeal. 
Any person whose application has been rejected must at the same time be advised that the applicant may appeal first to the city manager and, if necessary, to the city commission at its next regular meeting, but must first advise the city clerk so that the petition may be entered on the agenda. 
(Ord. No. 95-27, § 1, 9-28-95)  
Sec. 11-111. - Expiration of permits. 
All permits issued under the terms of this article shall expire on the date specified on the permit. 
(Ord. No. 95-27, § 1, 9-28-95)  
Sec. 11-112. - Exemption. 
The following class of persons shall be exempt from the terms and provisions of this article: 
(1)  Representatives of established and recognized newspapers making regular house-to-house deliveries; 
(2)  Employees of established and recognized dairies making regular house-to-house deliveries of milk and/or dairy products; 
(3)  All persons specifically invited by the owner or tenant to come to the house to engage in selling, soliciting and/or displaying merchandise of every kind or nature.  
Sec. 11-113. - Enforcement and penalties. 
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the city to require any person seen soliciting or canvassing and who is not known by the officer to be duly permitted, to produce his solicitor's or canvasser's permit, and to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person found in violation thereof. 
Except for violations of section 11-117 of the City Code, any person who violates any terms or provisions of this article shall be prosecuted before a court of competent jurisdiction and, upon conviction of such violation before the judge of the county court, shall be subject to the penalties prescribed by section 1-13 of the City Code, within the discretion of the county judge. Each day of violation of any term or provision of this article shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. 
Any person who violates section 11-117 of the City Code shall be subject to the code enforcement provisions of Article XI of the City Code, and the penalties set forth in section 2-343 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 11-02, § 2, 11-3-10)  
Sec. 11-114. - Compliance. 
No person shall engage in house-to-house soliciting, peddling, canvassing, selling, hawking or vending without first having fully complied with terms, conditions and provisions of this article.  
Sec. 11-115. - Revocation of permit. 
Any permit issued pursuant to this article may be suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraud or misrepresentation contained in the application for permit. 
(2)  Fraud or misrepresentation made in the course of carrying on the business of soliciting or canvassing. 
(3)  Carrying or possessing a dangerous weapon without a valid permit. 
(4)  Conducting of the permitted business in such a manner as to create a public nuisance or constitute a danger to the public health, safety, welfare or morals. 
(5)  Conduct which is contrary to the provisions of this article.  
Sec. 11-116. - Badges must be worn. 
Each applicant for a permit under this article, in addition to complying with the provisions of this article, shall receive a badge containing his/her photograph and fingerprints and must wear it at all times while soliciting house-to-house in the city. This badge must be worn on the left coat lapel, or if no coat is worn, in the same area where the left coat lapel would be.  
Sec. 11-117. - Distribution of handbills. 
(a)  Throwing or depositing commercial and noncommercial handbills in public places; prohibition. No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street, or other public place within the city. Provided, however, that is shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street, or other public place within the city for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any commercial or noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it, except to the extent prohibited by section 11-109. 
(b)  Placing commercial and noncommercial handbills on vehicles; prohibition. No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any unoccupied vehicle. Provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, a commercial or noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it, except to the extent prohibited by section 11-109. 
(c)  Prohibiting distribution of handbills where properly posted; prohibition. No person shall throw, deposit, or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any private premises if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on said premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words "No Trespassing," "No Solicitors," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement," or any similar notice indicating in any manner that the occupants of said premises do not desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such premises. 
(d)  Distributing commercial and noncommercial handbills at inhabited private premises; prohibition. 
(1)  No person shall throw, deposit, or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant, or other person then present in or upon such private premises. Provided, however, that in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted, as provided in this section, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets, or other public places, except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal law or regulations. 
(2)  The provisions of this subsection (d) shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States Postal Service, nor to newspapers; except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place or upon private property. 
(Ord. No. 90-32, §§ 1, 3, 3-5-90; Ord. No. 11-02, § 2, 11-3-10)  
ARTICLE VI. - NO-FEE OPERATIONAL LICENSING OF NOT-FOR-PROFIT PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY 
 
Sec. 11-118. - No-fee operational licensing of not-for-profit places of public assembly. 
(a)  A place of public assembly operated by an not-for-profit organization qualified under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and registered pursuant to F.S. Ch. 496, shall not be occupied until it obtains an operational license from the city. 
(b)  The operator of a qualifying place of public assembly shall obtain a form from and submit an application for an operational license by contacting the department of community development. No fee shall be charged by the department. 
(c)  The director of community development or his or her designee shall notify the holder of any operational license, in writing, of the city's intent to revoke an operational license if he or she determines that the following circumstances exist: 
(1)  The city has reasonable grounds to believe that the premises are being used in a manner that is inconsistent with, or contrary to, the provisions of the zoning code or any other applicable code or statute. 
(2)  In the event of a conviction of any director of the organization holding the operational license by a court of competent jurisdiction, for the violation of any criminal statute committed in conjunction with the operation. 
(3)  It has been ascertained that the holder of the operational license falsified any information on its application. 
(4)  The holder of the operational license, or the holder's designated manager, operator, or supervisor, refuses to permit an authorized law enforcement officer or code enforcement officer to inspect the premises during normal operating hours for the purpose of investigating a complaint which has been filed against the operation. 
(d)  The notice of intended revocation of an operational license shall state the following: 
THE HOLDER OF THE OPERATIONAL LICENSE SHALL HAVE TEN (10) DAYS FROM THE DATE OF RECEIPT OF THIS NOTIFICATION EITHER TO BRING THE PREMISES INTO COMPLIANCE OR TO REQUEST A HEARING, IN WRITING, BEFORE THE CITY COMMISSION. IF THE VIOLATION IS NOT CURED OR IF NO WRITTEN REQUEST FOR A HEARING IS RECEIVED BY THE CITY OF MIRAMAR WITHIN TEN (10) DAYS OF THE DATE OF THIS NOTIFICATION BY THE CERTIFICATE HOLDER, THE OPERATIONAL LICENSE SHALL BE CONSIDERED REVOKED. 
(e)  If the holder of the operational license requests a hearing before the city commission, the operational license shall remain in effect during the pendency of the action before the city commission. 
(f)  The original of the operational license shall be posted upon the premises at all times. 
(Ord. No. 07-07, § 2, 11-29-06)  
Secs. 11-119—11-129. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT 
 
Sec. 11-130. - Findings. 
Based on the evidence and testimony presented before the city commission and on the findings incorporated in the "Adult Use Study," by the Newport News Department of Planning and Development, Newport News, Virginia (March 1996); "Adult Entertainment Business Study for Manatee County, Florida," by Manatee County Planning and Development Department (June 1987); "A Report on the Secondary Impacts of Adult Use Businesses in the City of Denver," by the Zoning Administration, Office of Planning and Development, Department of Public Safety, Department of Excise and Licenses, Assessor's Office, and in consultation with the City's Attorney's Office, Denver, Colorado (January 1998); "Report to American Center for Law and Justice on the Secondary Impacts of Sex Oriented Businesses," by Peter R. Hecht, Ph.D. of the Environmental Research Group (March 31, 1996); "Sexually Oriented Business Ordinance Revision Committee Legislative Report," Houston, Texas (January 7, 1997); Transcript of Workshop Meeting of City Council, City of Tampa, Florida, regarding "Draft Proposal of Establishing a Locational Criteria for Adult Bookstores, Adult Theatres and Special Cabarets" (July 1, 1982); "Adult Entertainment Businesses in Oklahoma City: A Survey of Real Estate Appraisers," by the Community Development Department of the City of Oklahoma City, OK (March 3, 1986); "Effects of Adult Entertainment Businesses on Residential Neighborhoods," by the Department of Planning, Research, and Development, City of El Paso, TX (Sept. 26, 1986); The "Adams County Nude Entertainment Study" by the Adam's County Sheriff's Department (1991) (Colorado); and The Metropolitan Bureau of Investigation (MBI) for the Ninth Judicial Circuit (Orlando Area); the city commission hereby finds as follows: 
(1)  Establishments may exist within the city where books, magazines, motion pictures, videos, prints, photographs, periodicals, records, novelties, and devices that depict, illustrate, describe, or relate to specified sexual activities are possessed, displayed, exhibited, distributed, and/or sold. 
(2)  Establishments exist or may exist within the city where: 
a.  The superficial tissues of one (1) person are manipulated, rubbed, stroked, kneaded, or tapped by a second person, accompanied by the display or exposure of specified anatomical areas; 
b.  Dancers, entertainers, performers, or other individuals, who, for forms of commercial gain, perform or are presented while displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas; or 
c.  Lap dancing occurs. 
(3)  The activities described in subsections (1) and (2) occur at establishments for the purpose of making a profit and, as such, are subject to regulation by the city in the interest of the health, safety, and general welfare of city residents. 
(4)  The competitive commercial exploitation of such nudity and semi-nudity is adverse to the public's interest, quality of life, tone of commerce, and total community environment. 
(5)  The commercial exploitation of nudity and semi-nudity consists of the use of nude and semi-nude entertainment in connection with or for the promotion of the sale of goods or services, and the receipt of money by the person engaging in nude or semi-nude entertainment in exchange for or as consideration for nude or semi-nude performance by such individuals. 
(6)  The commercial exploitation of nude and semi-nude acts, exhibitions, and nude entertainment occurs frequently at commercial establishments either selling or allowing consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(7)  There is a direct relationship between the consumption of alcoholic beverages and the nude and semi-nude activities mentioned above, and an increase in criminal activities, disturbances of the peace and good order of the community. The occurrence of these activities is hazardous to the health and the safety of those persons in attendance and tends to depreciate the value of adjoining property and harm the economic welfare of the community as a whole. 
(8)  The combination of the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages with the performance of nude and semi-nude acts, exhibitions and entertainment is adverse to the public's interest and the quality of life, tone of commerce, and total community environment in the city. 
(9)  To promote and preserve the public peace and good order and to safeguard the health, safety, and welfare of the community and the citizens thereof, it is necessary and advisable for the city to prohibit certain forms of nude and semi-nude acts, exhibitions, entertainment, and commercial establishments at which alcoholic beverages are, or are available to be, sold or consumed. 
(10)  To preserve the public peace and good order, and to safeguard the health, safety, and welfare of the community and residents thereof, it is necessary and advisable to regulate and restrict the conduct of owners, operators, agents, employees, entertainers, performers, patrons, spectators, and persons on the premises of the commercial establishment subject hereto. 
(11)  There is a direct relationship between the display or depiction of specified anatomical areas as defined herein and an increase in criminal activities and disturbances of the peace and good order of the community, and the occurrence of these activities is hazardous to the health and safety of those persons in attendance and tends to depreciate the value of adjoining property and harm the economic welfare of the community as a whole. These secondary effects are adverse to the public's interest and quality of life, tone of commerce, and total community environment in the city. 
(12)  When the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) take place in establishments within the city, other activities that are illegal or unhealthy tend to accompany them, concentrate around them, and be aggravated by them. Such other activities include, but are not limited to, prostitution, solicitation for prostitution, lewd and lascivious behavior, possession, distribution and transportation of obscene materials, sale or possession of controlled substances, and violent crimes against persons and property. 
(13)  When the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) are present in establishments within the city, they tend to blight neighborhoods, adversely affect neighboring businesses, lower property values, foster an atmosphere that promotes crime, and ultimately lead residents and businesses to move to other locations. 
(14)  Physical contact between employees exhibiting specified anatomical areas and customers within establishments at which the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) occur poses a threat to the health of both and may lead to the spread of communicable, infectious, and social diseases. 
(15)  To preserve and safeguard the health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the city, it is necessary and advisable for the city to regulate the conduct of owners, managers, operators, agents, employees, entertainers, performers, and customers at establishments where the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) occur. 
(16)  The potential dangers to the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the city from the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) occurring at establishments without first obtaining a license under this article are so great as to require the licensure of such establishments before they are permitted to operate. 
(17)  "Lap dancing" does not contain an element of communication, and is therefore conduct rather than expression. 
(18)  "Lap dancing" in establishments poses a threat to the health of the participants and promotes the spread of communicable, infectious, and social diseases. 
(19)  Adult entertainment establishments are frequently used for unlawful and unhealthy sexual activities, including prostitution and sexual liaisons of a casual nature. 
(20)  The concern over sexually transmitted diseases is a legitimate health concern of the city that demands reasonable regulation of adult entertainment establishments in order to protect the health and well-being of the citizens. 
(21)  The prevention of sexual contact between patrons and employees at adult dancing establishments is unrelated to the suppression of free expression, but serves to address the concerns raised in the findings contained herein. Although the dancer's erotic message may be slightly less effective from four (4) feet away, the ability to engage in the protected expression is not significantly impaired. 
(22)  Separating dancers from patrons, and prohibiting dancers and patrons from engaging in sexual fondling and caressing in adult dancing establishments, would reduce the opportunity for prostitution transactions and thus should deter prostitution. 
(23)  To preserve and safeguard the health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the city, it is necessary and advisable for the city to obtain sufficient information regarding the owners of establishments where the activities described in subsections (1) and (2) occur in order to preclude the involvement of organized crime. 
(24)  Requiring that the facilities of adult theaters be constructed of materials that are easily cleanable, that the facilities be cleaned on a regular basis, and that the employees cleaning the facilities take reasonable precautions to avoid contact with possible disease transmitting media is reasonably related to the protection of both employees and patrons from sexually transmitted diseases. 
(25)  Licensing is a legitimate, reasonable means of accountability to ensure that operators of adult entertainment establishments comply with the reasonable regulations within this article and the location requirements of the city land development code, and to ensure that operators do not knowingly allow their establishments to be used as places of illegal sexual activity or solicitation. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-131. - Purpose. 
It is the intent of the city commission in enacting this article to establish reasonable and uniform regulations, which will reduce the adverse secondary effects that adult entertainment establishments have upon the residents of the city and to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the people. A mother's breast feeding of her baby does not under any circumstances violate any provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-132. - Rules of construction. 
This article shall be construed liberally to accomplish its purpose of licensing and regulating adult entertainment establishments. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-133. - Definitions 
[For the purposes of this article the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:] 
Adult book store/adult novelty store/adult video store means an establishment having adult material as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material. Twenty (20) percent of the gross floor area of the establishment devoted to adult material shall be presumed to be a substantial or significant portion of the stock in trade. 
Adult booth means a small enclosed or partitioned area inside an adult entertainment establishment that is: 
(1)  Designed or used for the viewing of adult material by one (1) or more persons; and 
(2)  Accessible to all persons, regardless of whether a fee is charged for access. 
The term "adult booth" includes but is not limited to a "peep show" booth, or other booth used to view "adult material." The term "adult booth" does not include a foyer through which a person can enter or exit the establishment, or a rest room. 
Adult dancing establishment means an establishment where employees display or expose specified anatomical areas to others, regardless of whether the employees actually engage in dancing. 
Adult domination/submission parlor means an adult establishment specializing in bondage, sadomasochism, humiliating activities or other similar activities which depicts, describes or relates to the "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined below. 
Adult entertainment establishment means: 
(1)  An adult theater, adult bookstore/adult novelty store/adult video store, adult motel, adult domination and submission parlor, adult dancing establishment, nude entertainment establishment; or other establishment or business operated for commercial gain where an employee, operator, or owner exposes his or her specified anatomical area for viewing by patrons, including but not limited to massage establishments, whether or not licensed pursuant to F.S. Ch. 480, tanning salons, modeling studios, or lingerie studios. 
(2)  Excluded from this definition are educational institutions and schools, as defined herein, where the exposure of specified anatomical areas is associated with a curriculum or program. 
(3)  An establishment that possesses an adult entertainment license is presumed to be an adult entertainment establishment. 
Adult material means one (1) or more of the following, regardless of whether it is new or used: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other visual representations; recordings or other audio materials; and anatomically correct novelties or devices that have, as their primary or dominant theme, subject matter depicting, exhibiting, illustrating, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined below; or 
(2)  Anatomically correct instruments, novelties, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities, excluding bona fide birth control devices. 
Adult mini motion picture theater means an enclosed building (with theater style seating or adult booths) with a capacity of less than fifty (50) persons regularly used for presenting adult material, for observation by patrons therein, which activity requires the exclusion of minors under F.S. Ch. 847. 
Adult motel means a hotel, motel, boarding house or rooming house or other place of temporary lodging presenting adult material by means of closed circuit television, for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons regularly used for presenting adult material for observation by patrons therein, which activity requires the exclusion of minors under F.S. Ch. 847. 
Adult theater means an establishment operated for commercial gain that consists of an enclosed building, or a portion or part thereof used for viewing of adult material. "Adult booth," "adult mini motion picture theater," and "adult motion picture theater" are included within the definition of "adult theater." An establishment that has "adult booths" is considered to be an "adult mini motion picture theater." 
Agency means the fire department, the police department, the department of community development, building official, and any other office, division, or department so designated by the city manager, including the respective directors, employees, and agents thereof. 
Alcoholic beverage means a beverage containing more than one (1) percent of alcohol by weight, including, but not limited to, beer and wine. 
(1)  It shall be prima facie evidence that a beverage is an alcoholic beverage if proof exists that: 
a.  The beverage in question was or is known as whiskey, moonshine whiskey, shine, rum, gin, tequila, vodka, scotch, scotch whiskey, brandy, beer, malt liquor, or by other similar name or names; or 
b.  The beverage was or is contained in a bottle or can labeled as any of the above names, or a name similar thereto, and the bottle or can bears the manufacturer's insignia, name, or trademark. 
(2)  A person who, by experience in the handling of alcoholic beverages, or who by taste, smell, or drinking of such alcoholic beverages has knowledge of the alcoholic nature thereof, may testify as to his or her opinion about whether such beverage is an alcoholic beverage. 
Commercial gain means operated for pecuniary gain, which shall be presumed for an establishment that has received an occupational license. For the purpose of this article, operation for commercial or pecuniary gain shall not depend on actual profit or loss. 
Commercial establishment means a business, location, or place that conducts or allows to be conducted on its premises an activity for commercial gain. 
Conviction means a determination of guilt resulting from plea (of guilty or of no contest) or from trial, regardless of whether adjudication was withheld or whether imposition of sentence was suspended. 
Educational institution means a premises or site upon which there is an institution of learning, whether public or private, which conducts regular classes, courses of study, or both, required for accreditation by or membership in the State Department of Education of Florida, Southern Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, or the Florida Council of Independent Schools. This term also includes art galleries and museums open to the public; or special institution of learning. 
Employee means a person who works or performs in an adult entertainment establishment, irrespective of whether the person is paid a salary or wage by the owner or manager of the premises. "Employee" shall include a person who pays a form of consideration to an owner or manager of an establishment for the privilege of working, performing, or exposing his or her specified anatomical areas within the establishment. 
Encounter studio/modeling studio means an establishment offering nude or semi-nude encounter/modeling sessions, sessions between opposite or same sex adult individuals, nude dance/photo sessions, or sexual consultations, which have as their dominant or primary theme matters depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined below. 
Establishment means the site or premises on which the adult entertainment establishment is located, including the interior of the establishment, or portion thereof, upon which certain activities or operations are being conducted for commercial gain. 
Inspector means an employee of the police department, department of community development, building official, fire department, or other employees who are so designated by the city commission, who is authorized pursuant to this code to inspect licensed premises. 
Lap dance, also known as a "straddle dance," "face dance," "friction dance" or "flash dance" means the use by an employee, whether clothed or partially or totally nude, of a part of his or her body to touch, massage, rub, stroke, caress, or fondle the genital or pubic area of a person while at the establishment, or the touching of the genital or pubic area of an employee by a person while at the establishment. It shall be a "lap dance" regardless of whether the "touch" or "touching" occurs while the employee is displaying or exposing a specified anatomical area. It shall also be a "lap dance" regardless of whether the "touch" or "touching" is direct or through a medium. However, incidental touching shall not constitute lap dancing. 
Licensed premises. See "establishment." 
Licensee means a person whose application for an adult entertainment establishment has been granted and who totally or partially owns, operates, or controls the establishment. 
Massage establishment means any place of business or establishment wherein all or any one (1) or more of the following names, subjects and methods of treatment are administered or practiced: Body massage either by hand or by any mechanical or electrical apparatus or device (excluding fever therapy), applying such movements as stroking, friction, rolling, vibration, kneading, cupping, petrissage, rubbing, effleurage, or tapotement. However, nothing in this article shall be construed as applying to State of Florida licensed massage therapists, barbers, cosmetologists, manicurists, pedicurists, occupational therapists, physical therapists, midwives, practical nurses, agents, servants or employees in licensed hospitals, nursing homes or other licensed medical institutions, physicians, osteopaths, chiropractors, podiatrists, naturopathic physicians or other licensed medical practitioners, or their agents, servants or employees acting in the course of such agency, service or employment under the supervision of the licensee. Also, the term "massage establishment" shall not apply to any massage establishment wherein at least fifty (50) percent of the employees on duty full time during the hours that the establishment is open for business are State of Florida licensed massage therapists or other licensed professionals listed in the preceding sentence. 
Nude entertainment establishment means any establishment which does or does not offer alcoholic beverages for sale or consumption but does feature male or female entertainers, performing partially clothed or completely nude, displayed in a setting, section, stage or cubicle within a business, which has as its principal or incidental purpose the offering for viewing to adults of performances which have as their dominant or primary theme matters depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined below. 
Occupational licensing section means the department or agency within the city which issues occupational licenses. 
Operator means a person who engages or participates in an activity that is necessary to or that facilitates the operation of an adult entertainment establishment, including but not limited to the licensee, manager, owner, doorman, bouncer, bartender, dancer, disc jockey, sales clerk, ticket taker, movie projectionist, or supervisor. The term is not meant to include repair people, janitorial personnel or the like who are only indirectly involved in facilitating the operation of the adult entertainment establishment. 
Patron includes any natural person other than an employee, operator, or licensee, or governmental officer while performing duties pursuant to this article or other law. 
Person includes, but is not limited to, an individual, firm, association, joint venture, partnership, estate(s), trust, business trust, syndicate, fiduciary, corporation, and other similar entities. 
Principal stockholder means a person who owns or controls, legally or beneficially, five (5) percent or more of a corporation's capital stock, and includes the officers and directors. If no stockholder of a corporation owns or controls, legally or beneficially, at least five (5) percent of the capital stock, all stockholders shall be considered principal stockholders. And, if a corporation is registered with the Security and Exchange Commission, or pursuant to F.S. Ch. 517, and its stock is for sale to the general public, it shall not be considered to have principal stockholders. 
Private performance means the display or exposure of a specified anatomical area by an employee at an adult entertainment establishment to a person other than another employee, while the person is in an area within the establishment not accessible during such display to all other persons in the establishment, or while the person is in an area in which the person is totally or partially screened or partitioned during such display from the view of all persons within the establishment. 
Regulated use includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Adult bookstore/adult novelty store/adult video store; 
(2)  Adult dancing establishment; 
(3)  Adult domination/submission parlor; 
(4)  Adult mini motion picture theater; 
(5)  Adult motel; 
(6)  Adult motion picture theater; 
(7)  Encounter studio/modeling studio; 
(8)  Massage establishment; 
(9)  Nude entertainment establishment; and 
(10)  Any bookstore, video store, motion picture theater, motel/hotel, dancing establishment, massage establishment, or photo or modeling studio (a) that includes the word "adult" in its name; or (b) where an employee, operator, or owner exposes his or her specified anatomical area for viewing by patrons; or (c) that requires the exclusion of minors under F.S. Ch. 847, shall be considered a regulated use. 
Residence. For purposes of applying this spacing requirement, the term "residence" shall include any dwelling as defined by the city's code, and shall also include a mobile home in a mobile home park. It shall not include a recreational vehicle or a boat, wherever located. 
School includes premises or a site upon which there is a day care center, nursery school, pre-kindergarten, elementary school, middle school, high school, or library. 
Specified anatomical areas is defined as: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.  Human genitals and pubic region; or 
b.  Cleavage of the human buttocks; or 
c.  That portion of the human female breast encompassed within an area falling below the horizontal line one would have to draw to intersect a point immediately above the top of the areola, including the areola; this definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include a portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing apparel, provided the areola is not so exposed; and 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified criminal act shall mean: 
(1)  A criminal violation of this article; or 
(2)  A felony; or 
(3)  An offense under F.S. Ch. 794, (Sexual Battery); or 
(4)  An offense under F.S. Ch. 796, (Prostitution); or 
(5)  An offense under F.S. Ch. 800, (Lewdness; Indecent Exposure); or 
(6)  An offense under F.S. Ch. 837, (Perjury); or 
(7)  An offense under F.S. Ch. 843, (Obstructing Justice); or 
(8)  An offense under F.S. Ch. 849, (Gambling); or 
(9)  An offense under F.S. Ch. 893, (Drug Abuse Prevention and Control); or 
(10)  An offense under F.S. Ch. 895, (Racketeering; Illegal Debts); or 
(11)  An offense under F.S. Ch. 896, (Offenses Related to Financial Transactions); or 
(12)  An offense under an analogous statute of a state other than Florida, or under an analogous ordinance of another county or city. 
Specified criminal offense means: 
(1)  A conviction under F.S. § 60.05, (Nuisance Abatement); or 
(2)  A conviction under F.S. Ch. 480 (massage practice); or 
(3)  A conviction under F.S. Ch. 561 (Beverage Law; Administration) or F.S. Ch. 562 (Beverage Law; Enforcement); or 
(4)  A judgment against or conviction under F.S. Ch. 823 (Public Nuisances). 
Specified sexual activities shall be defined as: 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence; or 
(2)  Acts of human anilingus, bestiality, buggery, cunnilingus, coprophagy, coprophilia, fellatio, flagellation, masochism, masturbation, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sadism, sadomasochism, sexual intercourse or sodomy; or 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, anus, or female breast; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with the activities set forth in subsections (1)—(3). 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-134. - Regulation of obscenity subject to state law. 
It is not the intent of the city commission to legislate with respect to matters of obscenity. These matters are regulated and preempted by general law. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-135. - Regulation of massage establishments subject to state law. 
It is not the intent of the city commission to legislate, limit, or conflict with respect to matters of massage establishments that are regulated by state agency, the department of professional regulation, board of massage, and by general law, F.S. Ch. 480. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-136. - Zoning approval. 
No application for a license as provided in this article shall be approved until the appropriate provisions of the city land development code have been complied with, the required zoning approval obtained, and the respective zoning official notifies the occupational licensing section of compliance. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-137. - Penalty. 
In sections in this article where (1) no specific penalties are provided, and an act is prohibited, or declared to be unlawful, or an offense, or (2) whenever in this article the doing of an act is required or the failure to do an act is declared to be unlawful, the violation of such provision of this ordinance shall be punished as provided in F.S. Ch. 162, or its successor. Each day a violation of a provision of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense, unless otherwise provided. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-138. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  After a denial of an application for a license, or a notice of suspension or revocation of a license, the aggrieved party may file a notice of appeal with any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  In the event the notice of denial of an application for a license was grounded in whole or in part upon failure to comply with or satisfy all applicable zoning regulations, the applicant may apply for a variance in accordance with the provisions of the city land development code. However, no variances shall be granted as provided in section 713.1.7 of the Land Development Code. 
(c)  Notice: A notice required under this article shall be accomplished by sending a written notification by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the mailing address set forth on the application for the license. This mailing address shall be considered the correct mailing address, unless the occupational licensing section has been otherwise notified in writing by certified mail or return receipt requested, by the licensee of the new address. The licensee shall have the burden of proving the occupational licensing section received the new address. 
(d)  Immunity from prosecution: The city or an agency of the city shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good-faith trespass upon an adult entertainment establishment while acting within the scope of its authority under this article. 
(e)  Enforcement of this article. The city commission or state attorney may bring suit in any court of competent jurisdiction to restrain, enjoin, or otherwise present the violation of sections 11-149 through 11-168 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-139. - Adult entertainment license. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be allowed to operate without first having been issued an adult entertainment license by the occupational licensing section pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Adult entertainment licenses referred to in this article shall be licenses limited to the following classifications: 
(1)  Adult bookstore/adult novelty store/adult video store; 
(2)  Adult theater; 
(3)  Adult dancing establishment; 
(4)  Adult domination/submission parlor; 
(5)  Adult motel; 
(6)  Encounter studio/modeling studio; 
(7)  Massage establishment; 
(8)  Nude entertainment establishment; or 
(9)  Any other adult use as defined in this article. 
(c)  An adult entertainment license for a particular adult entertainment establishment shall be limited to one (1) classification of license. 
(d)  An adult entertainment establishment may not hold more than one (1) classification of adult entertainment license. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-140. - Administration review. 
The ultimate responsibility for the administration of this article is vested in the city commission. However, several agencies have been delegated responsibility pursuant to the provisions outlined in this article: 
(1)  The occupational licensing section shall be the agency responsible for issuing the official notice of the grant, denial, revocation, renewal, suspension, or cancellation of adult entertainment licenses for existing or proposed adult entertainment establishments. 
(2)  The police department is responsible for verifying information contained in an application for an adult entertainment license by means of a criminal background check, and for inspecting a proposed, licensed, or unlicensed establishment in the city in order to ascertain whether it is in compliance with applicable articles and criminal statutes, and for enforcing applicable ordinances and criminal statutes, including those provisions set forth in this article. 
(3)  The building official is responsible for inspecting a proposed establishment for which a license is being applied in order to ascertain whether it complies with or is complying with sections 11-149 and 11-151 of this article and all applicable building codes, statutes, ordinances, and regulations in effect in the city. The building official shall compare and certify that all aspects of the submitted floor plan, site plan, and certified survey accurately depict the actual structure, and comply with the provisions of this article. 
(4)  The fire department is responsible for the inspection of licensed premises or a proposed establishment to ascertain whether it complies with or is complying with sections 11-149 and 11-151 of this article and all applicable fire codes, statutes, ordinances, and regulations in effect in the city. 
(5)  The community development department responsible for ascertaining whether a proposed establishment for which a license is being sought complies with section 11-136, the applicable portions of sections 11-149 through 11-151 of this article, and all applicable zoning regulations in effect in the city, and whether a licensed establishment is complying with section 11-136, and sections 11-149 through 11-151 of this article and all applicable zoning regulations and land use laws in effect in the city. 
(6)  Any employee of the agencies referenced in subsections (2) through (5) above, who is authorized by the person in charge of the agency, shall at any reasonable hour, when the agency has reasonable cause to believe that a violation of this article may exist, have access to and shall have the right to inspect the premises of all licensees under this article for compliance with any or all of the applicable codes, statutes, ordinances, and regulations in effect in the city and within the responsibilities of their respective agencies as outlined in this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-141. - Application. 
(a)  Filing: A person desiring to operate an adult entertainment establishment shall file with the occupational licensing section a sworn license application on a standard application form supplied by the occupational licensing section. 
(b)  Contents: The application shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents: 
(1)  If the applicant is: 
a.  An individual, his or her legal name, aliases, and date of birth, driver's license number or a state or federally issued identification card number; 
b.  A partnership, the full and complete name of the partners, dates of birth, driver's license numbers or state or federally issued identification card numbers of all partners, and all aliases used by all of the partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and, if in existence, a copy of the partnership agreement; or 
c.  A corporation, the exact and complete corporate name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing, the legal names and dates of birth, driver's license numbers or state or federally issued identification card numbers of all officers, directors and principal stockholders, and all aliases used, the capacity of all officers, directors, and principal stockholders, and, if applicable, the name of the registered corporate agent, and the address of the registered office for service of process; and 
(2)  The application shall list the current local and legal domiciliary residential addresses of the principal stockholders of the corporation; for purposes of this subsection, principal stockholders are natural persons and not corporate or other legal entities; when the principal stockholder is a corporate or other legal entity, the application must trace back the ownership through layers of corporate organization to the eventual principal stockholder who is a natural person; and 
(3)  If the applicant intends to conduct business under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant shall state the establishment's fictitious name and the county of registration under F.S. § 865.09, all legal names, dates of birth, addresses and all aliases used by all interested persons; and 
(4)  Whether the applicant, or other individuals listed pursuant to paragraph (1) above, has within the five-year period immediately preceding the date of the application, ever been convicted of a specified criminal act and, if so, the specified criminal act involved, the date of conviction, and the place of conviction; and 
(5)  Whether the applicant, or other individuals listed pursuant to paragraph (1) above, has (a) had a previous license issued under this article suspended or revoked, or by court order, been required to cease operation, including the name and location of the establishment for which the license was suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the suspension or revocation, and (b) whether the applicant, or any other individuals listed pursuant to subparagraph (a), has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation whose license issued under this article has previously been suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the establishment for which the license was suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the suspension or revocation; and 
(6)  Whether the applicant, or other individuals listed pursuant to paragraph (1) above, holds other licenses under this article and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed establishments; and 
(7)  The single classification of license for which the applicant is filing and the general nature of adult use for which the applicant is seeking a license, including a statement concerning the degree to which the anticipated activities at the adult entertainment establishment meet the definitions of the enumerated adult use classifications listed section 11-133; such a characterization shall serve as an initial basis for the permitted activities allowed under the license issued as well as a basis for the fee charged; and 
(8)  The location of the proposed establishment, including a legal description of the property site, and a legal street address; and 
(9)  The names of all employees, dates of birth, and aliases used for the proposed establishment, if known, or, if currently unknown, a statement to that effect; and 
(10)  The applicant's mailing address, residential address and residential telephone number (if any); and 
(11)  A site plan and certified survey drawn to appropriate scale of the proposed establishment including, but not limited to, all property lines, rights-of-way, and the location of buildings, parking areas and spaces, curb cuts, and driveways and shall state and indicate on the survey that the distance and location requirements of the city land development code have been satisfied; and 
(12)  A floor plan drawn to appropriate scale of the proposed establishment including, but not limited to: 
a.  All windows, all doors, all entrances and exits; and 
b.  Proposed seating arrangement; and 
c.  All fixed structural interior features, including but not limited to doors, aisles, walls, stages, partitions, projection booths, admission booths, adult booths, concession booths, stands, counters, platforms, and similar structures; and 
d.  All proposed improvements or enlargements to be made, which shall be indicated and calculated in terms of percentage of increase in floor size; and 
(13)  A copy of the application for the zoning certificate of use; and 
(14)  The name, address and phone number of the person whom the building official should contact to schedule the inspection; and 
(15)  The phone number and address of the existing or proposed establishment; and 
(16)  The name, phone number and address of the manager; and 
(17)  A notarized, signed, and sworn statement that the information within the application is truthful, independently verifiable, and complete and that the photocopies of the attached driver's licenses or state or federally issued identification cards are true and correct copies of the originals. 
(c)  Copies: 
(1)  In addition to the requirement of subsection (b) above, the applicant shall supply a minimum of five (5) copies of the application, or more as may be required, to the occupational licensing section. 
(2)  An application shall not be considered complete until the application satisfies the requirements of subsection (b) and paragraph (1) above. 
(d)  Application fee: Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee to be set by resolution of the city commission to recoup the costs related to administering the licensing program. If the application for a license is approved and a license is granted, half of the application fee shall be applied as a credit towards the annual license fee required for the first year pursuant to section 11-144(f). 
(e)  Rejection of application: In the event the occupational licensing section is notified by one (1) of the agencies listed in section 11-140(2) through (5) above, that the applicant has not satisfied the application requirements for a proposed establishment, the applicant shall be notified of such fact within the time frame specified herein with a detailed list of reasons; and the application shall be denied. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-142. - Investigation of application. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application filed properly with the occupational licensing section and upon payment of the nonrefundable application fee, the occupational licensing section shall send the attached copies of the application to the police department, the fire department, building official, and community development department. Each agency shall promptly conduct an investigation of the applicant and the proposed establishment in accordance with its responsibilities outlined in sections 11-149 through 11-151. At the conclusion of its investigation, each agency shall indicate on the copy of the application whether the application satisfies each requirement of this article, and shall date and sign the application. 
(b)  An agency shall recommend denial of an application if it finds that the proposed establishment will be in violation of a provision of sections 11-149 and 11-151 of this article or of any building, fire, or zoning code, statute, ordinance or regulation. If the application fails to satisfy this article or any building, fire or zoning code, statute, ordinance or regulation, the agency shall state specifically its reasons on a separate letter attached to the copy of the application. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-143. - Administrative review. 
(a)  The agencies shall conduct and complete an investigation of the application within twenty-one (21) days of receipt of the application. If a provision of this article, any building, fire, zoning, or any other applicable code, statute, ordinance or regulation is found to be in violation, the respective agency shall notify the occupational licensing section of the violation, state the reasons, and offer suggestions for correction. Upon receipt of notice of a violation from an agency, the occupational licensing section shall wait until day twenty-one (21) for the review from the other agencies. Then, the occupational licensing section shall notify the applicant of the denial. All communications regarding approval or denial shall be issued by and through the occupational licensing section. Oral statements issued directly or independently by the review agencies shall not be deemed to create a reliance or estoppel situation as to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The occupational licensing section shall issue or deny an application for an adult entertainment license within forty (40) days from the date of the filing of a complete application. Upon the expiration of the forty-day period, the applicant may demand a license and begin operating the establishment for which a license is sought. The date of the proper filing of the application shall be the date the applicant furnishes the fully completed and sworn application, and the required number of copies. 
(c)  If the applicant has satisfied the requirements of this article, the occupational licensing section shall notify the applicant and issue the license to the applicant upon payment of the appropriate annual license fee provided in section 11-144(f), with credit as provided in section 11-141(d). 
(d)  The occupational licensing section shall deny the application upon notification by one (1) of the agencies that: 
(1)  The application violates or fails to meet the provisions of this article, any building, fire, zoning, or any other applicable code, statute, ordinance or regulation; 
(2)  The application contains material false information, or information material to the decision was omitted; failure to list an individual required to be listed, and whose listing would result in a denial, is presumed to be material false information for purposes of denial of the application; the certification that the licensee owns, possesses, operates, and exercises control over the proposed or existing adult entertainment establishment is a material representation for purposes of this section; 
(3)  The applicant, or other individuals listed pursuant to section 11-141, has a license under this article, or has had a license under this article, which has been suspended or revoked; 
(4)  The granting of the application would violate a statute or ordinance, or an order from a court of law that effectively prohibits the applicant from obtaining an adult entertainment license; or 
(5)  An applicant, or any other individual required to be listed, has been convicted of a specified criminal act; 
a.  For which: 
1.  Less than two (2) years has elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; or 
2.  Less than five (5) years has elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
3.  Less than five (5) years has elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses or a combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty-four-month period. 
b.  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant. 
c.  An applicant who has been convicted of a specified criminal act may qualify for an adult entertainment establishment license only when the time period set forth above has elapsed or if his or her civil rights have been restored. 
(e)  If a person applies for a license at a particular location within a period of one (1) year from the date of denial of a previous application for a license at the location, and there has not been an intervening change in the circumstances material to the decision regarding the former reason(s) for denial, the application shall not be accepted for consideration. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-144. - License. 
(a)  Contents. An adult entertainment license shall state on its face the name of the licensee, the business name, local residential and legal domiciliary residential address of the licensee, the name of the establishment, the street address of the establishment, the classification of the license, a twenty-four-hour working phone number, the date of issuance, and the date of expiration. 
(b)  Term. All licenses issued under this article shall be annual licenses which shall commence running on October 1, on which date they shall have been paid for, and shall expire on September 30 of the following year. If a license is issued after October 1, but prior to March 31 of the following year, the applicant shall pay the prorated license fee. If a license is issued after March 31, but prior to October 1 of the same year, the applicant shall pay one-half (½) the appropriate license fee. 
(c)  Renewal. Licenses shall be entitled to renewal annually subject to the provisions of this article. Before the October 1 expiration date, the annual license may be renewed by presenting the license for the previous year, by paying the appropriate license fee, and by updating the information supplied with the latest application or certifying that the information supplied previously remains unchanged. 
(d)  Expiration. A license shall expire for failure to obtain a renewal pursuant to this article by October 1. An expired license may be renewed no later than November 30 of the same year upon: 
(1)  The submission of an affidavit stating that the establishment has not been operated as an adult entertainment establishment from the date of expiration of the license; 
(2)  The payment of the appropriate license fee; and 
(3)  Payment of a penalty of ten (10) percent of the appropriate license fee for the month of October and, if renewed after October 31, an additional penalty of five (5) percent of the appropriate license fee for the month of November. 
(e)  Cancellation. All licenses not renewed by November 30 shall be deemed expired by the occupational licensing section unless such license is involved in litigation. The applicant may reapply for an adult entertainment license. Upon the payment of the application fee, satisfaction of the application requirements, and payment of the license fee, operation of the adult entertainment establishment may continue. 
(f)  Annual license fees. The annual license fees under this article for an adult entertainment establishment shall be set by resolution of the city commission. 
(g)  Collection of fees. The occupational licensing section shall be responsible for the collection of the application and annual license fees pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-145. - Transfer of license. 
(a)  A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another person, or thereby surrender possession, control, or operation of the licensed establishment to such other person. 
(b)  A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another location. 
(c)  An attempted transfer of a license either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void and, in that event, the license shall be deemed abandoned, and the license shall be forfeited. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-146. - Changed name. 
No licensee may change the name of an adult entertainment establishment unless and until he or she satisfies all of the following requirements: 
(1)  Provides the occupational licensing section with advance notice in writing of the proposed name change; 
(2)  Pays to the occupational licensing section a change-name fee to be set by resolution of the city commission; and 
(3)  Complies with F.S. § 865.09, the Florida Fictitious Name Statute. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-147. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Suspension: 
(1)  Violation of regulations. In the event a licensed adult entertainment establishment is operating in violation of a building, fire, or zoning code, statute, ordinance or regulation, whether federal, state, or local, or the respective requirements of sections 11-149 through 14-151 the appropriate agency shall notify promptly a code enforcement officer, who shall notify the licensee of the violation. The licensee shall have ten (10) business days in which to correct the violation. If the licensee fails to correct the violation within ten (10) business days, the agency shall notify a code enforcement officer, who shall schedule a hearing before a special master. If the special master determines that a licensed establishment is in violation of a building, fire, or zoning statute, code, ordinance, or regulation, whether federal, state, or local, or the respective general requirements of section 11-149, the code enforcement officer shall notify the occupational licensing section, which shall forthwith suspend the license and shall notify the licensee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect until the code enforcement officer notifies the occupational licensing section in writing that the violation of the provision in question has been corrected. Nothing in this section shall take away other enforcement powers of the special master or any other agency provided by the city code or statute. 
(2)  Illegal transfer. Upon the written notification by one (1) of the agencies that a licensee is engaged in a license transfer contrary to section 11-145, the occupational licensing section shall officially suspend the license and notify the licensee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect until all of the requirements of this section have been satisfied and a new license has been issued by the occupational licensing section. 
(3)  Violations of sections 11-149 through 11-168 of this article: 
a.  In the event two (2) or more convictions for violations of the rules and regulations within sections 11-149 through 11-168 of this article or of any health code, statute or regulation occur within a two-year period, the occupational licensing section shall, upon notification of the date of the second conviction, suspend the license and notify the licensee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect for a period of sixty (60) days. 
b.  In the event one (1) or more convictions for violations of the rules and regulations of Articles III and IV of this article or of any health code, statute or regulation occur within a period of two (2) years from the date of the violation from which the conviction resulted for which the license was suspended for sixty (60) days under paragraph a. above, the occupational licensing section shall, upon notification of the date of the first conviction, suspend the license again and notify the licensee of the suspension. The time during which the license was previously suspended for sixty (60) days shall not be included within the two-year period. The suspension shall remain in effect for a period of ninety (90) days. 
c.  In the event one (1) or more convictions for violations of a rule or regulation of sections 11-149 through 11-168 of this article or of any health code, statute or regulation occur within a period of two (2) years from the date of the violation from which the conviction resulted for which the license was suspended for ninety (90) days under paragraph b., the occupational licensing section shall, upon notification of the date of the first conviction, suspend the license again and notify the licensee of the suspension. The time during which the license was previously suspended for ninety (90) days shall not be included within the two-year period. The suspension shall remain in effect for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days. 
d.  The renewal of, or new application for, a license pursuant to this article shall not defeat the terms of this section. 
(4)  Effect of suspension. If a license is suspended, all operations within the adult entertainment establishment shall cease for the period of the suspension, and the license shall be suspended for the suspension period. The State of Florida, Division of Alcoholic Beverages and Tobacco, Department of Business and Professional Regulation shall be notified of the suspension, and no other person shall be allowed to operate an adult entertainment establishment at that location for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days. 
(5)  Effective date of suspension. All periods of suspension shall begin fifteen (15) calendar days after the date the occupational licensing section mails the notice of suspension to the licensee, or on the date the licensee surrenders his or her license to the occupational licensing section, whichever occurs first. 
(b)  Revocation: 
(1)  False information. In the event it is learned or found, or upon sufficient cause determined that a license was granted based upon false information, misrepresentation of fact, or mistake of fact by the licensee or his or her agent, the respective agency that has knowledge of the false information shall notify the occupational licensing section. The occupational licensing section shall notify the licensee in writing of the occupational licensing section's intent to revoke the license. The licensee shall have ten (10) days from the date of receipt of the notification to request a hearing. The hearing shall be scheduled before a special master. If the licensee does not request a hearing, the license shall be considered revoked ten (10) days after the receipt of the notification. If the licensee does request a hearing, the license shall remain in effect during the pendency of the action before a special master. 
(2)  Convictions for violations of sections 11-149 through 11-168 of this article. In the event one (1) or more convictions for violations of sections 11-149 through 11-168 of this article or of any applicable health code, statute or regulation occur within a period of two (2) years from the date of the violation from which the conviction resulted for which the license was suspended for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days pursuant to subsection (a)(4) of this section, the occupational licensing section shall forthwith revoke the license and notify the licensee of the revocation. The time during which the license was previously suspended for one hundred eighty (180) days shall not be included within the two-year period. 
(3)  Effect of revocation. If a license is revoked, the licensee shall not be allowed to obtain another adult entertainment license for a period of two (2) years, and no license shall be issued during that time period to another person for the location and premises upon which the adult entertainment establishment was situated. 
(4)  Effective date. The revocation shall take effect fifteen (15) calendar days, after the date the occupational licensing section mails the notice of revocation to the licensee, or on the date the licensee surrenders his or her license to the occupational licensing section, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-148. - Records and reports; consent. 
(a)  Each licensee shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by the occupational licensing section and the agencies to implement this article and to carry out its purpose. 
(b)  By holding a license under this article, the licensee shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this article and to the exercise by the applicable agencies of their respective responsibilities under this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-149. - General requirements. 
(a)  Each adult entertainment establishment shall, regardless of whether it is licensed, observe the following general requirements: 
(1)  Conform to all applicable building statutes, codes, ordinances, and regulations, whether federal, state, or local; and 
(2)  Conform to all applicable fire statutes, codes, ordinances, and regulations, whether federal, state, or local; and 
(3)  Confirm to all applicable health statutes, codes, ordinances, and regulations, whether federal, state, or local; and 
(4)  Conform to all applicable zoning regulations and land use laws, whether state or local, including but not limited to the location restrictions in the city land development code; and 
(5)  Keep the original of the adult entertainment license posted in a conspicuous place at the establishment at all times, which license shall be available for inspection upon request at all times by the public; and 
(6)  Opaquely cover each nonopaque area through which a person outside the establishment may otherwise see inside the establishment; and 
(7)  Maintain a continuously updated compilation of the required records. 
(b)  This article, particularly the enforcement provisions, shall not be construed to supersede the other powers and duties of the agencies listed in section 11-140. The independent powers of the agencies shall not be limited by this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-150. - Prohibition of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, or consumed in an adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  No person or employee shall expose to public view his or her specified anatomical areas, or simulation thereof, in an establishment selling, serving, or allowing the consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  No person maintaining, owning or operating an establishment selling, serving or allowing the consumption of alcoholic beverages shall allow a person or employee to expose to public view his or her specified anatomical areas, or simulation thereof, within the establishment. 
(d)  No person maintaining, owning or operating an establishment selling, serving or allowing the consumption of alcoholic beverages shall allow the exposure to public view of specified anatomical areas, or the simulation thereof, within the establishment. 
(e)  No person shall cause and no person maintaining, owning or operating an establishment selling, serving or allowing the consumption of alcoholic beverages shall allow the exposition of graphic representation, including pictures or projection of film, which depicts specified anatomical areas engaged in specified sexual activities, or other sexual acts prohibited by law, or simulation thereof, within the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-151. - Supplementary requirements. 
(a)  Adult theater. In addition to the general requirements for an adult entertainment establishment contained in sections 11-149 and 11-150 an adult theater shall, regardless of whether it is licensed, observe the following special requirements: 
(1)  If the adult theater contains a hall or auditorium area, the area shall comply with each of the following provisions: 
a.  Have individual or separate seats, not couches, benches, beds, or the like, to accommodate the maximum number of persons who may occupy the area. 
b.  Have a continuous main aisle alongside of the seating areas in order that each person seated in the areas shall be visible from the aisle at all times. 
c.  Have a sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near each entrance way to the hall or auditorium area listing the maximum number of persons who may occupy the hall or auditorium area, which number shall not exceed the number of seats within the auditorium area. 
d.  Premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one (1) foot-candle as measured at floor level. 
e.  It shall be the duty of the licensee, the owners, and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present on the premises. 
f.  Post an AIDS crisis sign visible to all patrons on the side of the door that opens and allows patrons to enter the theater. 
(2)  Furnishing of adult theaters: 
a.  Each adult theater subject to this article shall cover the floor of areas accessible to patrons with smooth and nonpermeable flooring material which can withstand frequent effective cleaning in accordance with paragraph (3)c. of this subsection (a). Carpeting of any type is prohibited. 
b.  Each adult theater subject to this article shall use smooth and non-permeable upholstery material which can withstand frequent cleaning in accordance with paragraph (3)c. of this subsection (a) to cover furniture permitted by this article for use of patrons. 
c.  Each adult theater subject to this article shall have, in areas accessible to patrons, interior wall surfaces which can withstand frequent cleaning in accordance with paragraph (3)c. of this subsection (a). 
d.  Each adult theater subject to this article shall use only those shades, blinds and vertical blinds which can withstand frequent cleaning in accordance with paragraph (3)c. of this subsection (a). Draperies are prohibited. 
(3)  Sanitation: 
a.  All areas of each adult theater subject to this article which are accessible to patrons shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. The surfaces of all floors, furniture, counter tops, shades, blinds, vertical blinds, doors and walls of areas accessible to patrons shall be cleaned in accordance with paragraph (3)c. of this subsection (a). 
b.  All floors, furniture, counter tops, shades, blinds, vertical blinds, doors and walls of areas accessible to patrons of adult theaters subject to this article shall be renovated or be replaced as needed. All furniture must be kept free from holes and rips. 
c.  Any individual cleaning or sanitizing of the areas accessible to patrons shall be accomplished a minimum of one (1) time each twenty-four (24) hours with a 1:10 bleach solution (1 part bleach to 10 parts water), mixed daily, as recommended by the U.S. Center for Disease Control as a precaution for the prevention of transmission of the HIV virus and other diseases. A copy of the approved procedure shall be kept on file at the adult theater and a copy shall be provided to each person cleaning or sanitizing the areas accessible to the patrons. Each such individual shall certify that he or she has read and understood the procedure. The signed copy shall be kept as a part of the records of the adult theater, and open for inspection by the applicable agencies. 
(b)  Adult dancing establishment. In addition to the general requirements for an adult entertainment establishment contained in sections 11-149 and 11-151(a), an adult dancing establishment shall, regardless of whether it is licensed, observe the following special requirements: 
(1)  It shall have a stage provided for the display or exposure of specified anatomical areas by an employee to a person other than another employee consisting of a permanent platform (or other similar permanent structure) raised a minimum of eighteen (18) inches above the surrounding floor and encompassing an area of at least one hundred (100) square feet; and 
(2)  The exposure by an employee of specified anatomical areas, or simulation thereof, to public view shall be restricted to the stage required in (1) above; and nonemployees or patrons shall not be allowed closer than four (4) feet to the stage edge when an employee exposes those anatomical areas; and 
(3)  An area in which a private performance occurs shall: 
a.  Have a permanently open entrance way not less than seven (7) feet wide and not less than seven (7) feet high, which entrance way will never be closed or partially closed by a curtain, door or other partition which would be capable of wholly or partially obscuring a person situated in the area; and 
b.  Have a wall-to-wall, floor-to-ceiling partition of solid construction without holes or openings, which partition may be completely or partially transparent and which partition separates the employee from the person viewing the display; and 
c.  Have, except for the entrance way, walls or partitions of solid construction without holes or openings in such walls or partitions. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-152. - Operation of establishment without valid adult entertainment license. 
It  shall be unlawful for a person to operate or participate in the operation of an adult entertainment establishment when the person knows or should know: 
(1)  That the establishment does not have an adult entertainment license for the applicable classification; or 
(2)  That the establishment has a license which is under suspension; or 
(3)  That the establishment has a license which has been revoked or canceled; or 
(4)  That the establishment has a license which has expired. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-153. - Violations of article. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to be an operator of an adult entertainment establishment which does not satisfy all of the general requirements of sections 11-149 and 11-151 of this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person to be an operator of an adult theater which does not satisfy all of the special requirements of section 11-151(a). 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a person to be an operator of an adult dancing establishment which does not satisfy all of the special requirements of section 11-151(b). 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-154. - Allowing employee to engage in prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful for an operator of an adult entertainment establishment, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, to knowingly, or with reason to know, allow an employee: 
(1)  To engage in a lap dance with a person at the establishment; or 
(2)  To contract or otherwise agree with a person to engage in a lap dance with a person at the establishment; or 
(3)  To contract or otherwise agree with a person to engage in specified sexual activity at the establishment; or 
(4)  To display or expose a specified anatomical area while simulating specified sexual activity with another person at the establishment, including with another employee; or 
(5)  To allow a person, excluding another employee, to touch a portion of the clothed or unclothed body of the employee below the neck and above the knee, excluding that part of the employee's arm below the wrist, referred to as the hand; or 
(6)  To engage in a private performance, unless such employee is in an area that complies with the special requirements of sections 11-149 through 11-151 of this article; or 
(7)  To intentionally touch the clothed or unclothed body of a person at the adult entertainment establishment, excluding another employee, at a point below the neck and above the knee of the person, excluding that part of the person's arm below the wrist, referred to as the hand; or 
(8)  To display or expose at the establishment a specified anatomical area, unless such employee is continuously positioned away from a person other than another employee, and unless such employee is in an area as described in section 11-151(b). 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-155. - Engaging in prohibited activity. 
It shall be unlawful for an employee of an adult entertainment establishment, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article: 
(1)  To engage in a lap dance with a person at the establishment; 
(2)  To contract or otherwise agree with a person to engage in a lap dance with a person at the establishment; or 
(3)  To contract or otherwise agree with a person to engage in specified sexual activity at the establishment; or 
(4)  To display or expose a specified anatomical area while simulating a specified sexual activity with another person at the establishment, including with another employee; or 
(5)  To allow a person, excluding another employee, to touch a portion of the clothed or unclothed body of the employee below the neck and above the knee, excluding that part of the employee's arm below the wrist, referred to as the hand. 
(6)  To engage in a private performance, unless such employee is in an area which complies with the special requirements set forth of sections 11-149 through 11-151 of this article; or 
(7)  To intentionally touch the clothed or unclothed body of a person at the adult entertainment establishment, excluding another employee, at a point below the neck and above the knee of the person, excluding that part of the person's arm below the wrist, referred to as the hand; or 
(8)  To display or expose at the establishment a specified anatomical area unless such employee is continuously positioned away from a person other than another employee, and unless such employee is in an area as described in section 11-151(b). 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-156. - Advertising prohibited activity. 
It shall be unlawful for an operator of an adult entertainment establishment, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, to advertise the presentation of an activity prohibited by an applicable state statute or local ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-157. - Specified criminal offense. 
It shall be a violation of this article if the licensee is convicted or is adjudged guilty of a specified criminal offense for activities that occurred at the establishment, or if it has been determined that specified criminal offenses have occurred at the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-158. - Minors prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for an operator of an adult entertainment establishment, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, to knowingly, or with reason to know, allow: 
(1)  Admittance to the establishment of a person under eighteen (18) years of age; or 
(2)  A person under eighteen (18) years of age to remain at the establishment; or 
(3)  A person under eighteen (18) years of age to purchase goods or services at the establishment; or 
(4)  A person to work at the establishment as an employee who is under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-159. - Working at establishment which does not have valid adult entertainment license. 
It shall be unlawful for a person to work in an adult entertainment establishment which he or she knows or should know is not licensed under this article, or that has a license which is suspended, revoked, canceled, or expired. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-160. - Touching of employee by nonemployee. 
It shall be unlawful for a person in an adult entertainment establishment, other than another employee, to intentionally touch the unclothed or clothed body of an employee at a point below the neck and above the knee of the employee, excluding that part of the employee's arm below the wrist, referred to as the hand. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-161. - Adult mini motion picture theaters, adult booths, and outdoor adult theaters prohibited. 
Adult mini motion picture theaters, adult booths, and adult theaters that are not located within an enclosed building are hereby prohibited within the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-162. - Use of rest rooms or dressing rooms. 
(a)  Notwithstanding a provision to the contrary, it shall not be unlawful for an employee of an adult entertainment establishment, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, to expose a specified anatomical area during the employee's bona fide use of a rest room, or during the employee's bona fide use of a dressing room, which is accessible only and restricted to employees. 
(b)  The restrictions of 11-149 through 11-168, including but not limited to, sections 11-154, 11-155, and 11-160, also apply to all rest rooms and dressing rooms. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, it shall not be deemed unlawful for a person to expose a specified anatomical area during that person's bona fide use of a rest room. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-163. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an operator of an adult entertainment establishment to allow such establishment to remain open for business, or to allow an employee to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service, between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on all days. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for an employee of an adult entertainment establishment to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service, between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on all days. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-164. - Alteration of license. 
It shall be unlawful for a person to alter or otherwise change the contents of an adult entertainment license without the written permission of the occupational licensing section. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-165. - False statement or false information in applying for license. 
It shall be unlawful for a person applying for an adult entertainment license to make a false statement that is intended to facilitate the issuance of a license, or to provide false information that is intended to facilitate the issuance of a license. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-166. - Violations subject to prosecution. 
Whoever violates any subsection of sections 11-150, 11-151, and 11-152 through 11-165 inclusive, of this article may be prosecuted by the state attorney. Upon conviction for a violation of sections 11-149 through 11-168, the prosecuting officials shall notify the occupational licensing section of the conviction, including the date of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-167. - Violation subject to civil prosecution. 
A violation of any subsection of section 11-149 of this article may be prosecuted by the city attorney, police department, the community development department, building official, and/or the code enforcement department before the special master. Upon conviction for a violation of sections 11-149 through 11-168 the prosecuting officials shall notify the occupational licensing section of the conviction, including the date of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
Sec. 11-168. - Violation of health codes. 
Upon a conviction of a violation of any health code, statute or regulation, the prosecuting officials shall notify the occupational licensing section of the conviction, including the date of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 07-05, § 3, 11-29-06)  
ARTICLE VIII. - TOWING OF VEHICLES FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 11-169. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
Chief of police means the Chief of the City of Miramar Police Department and any person designated to act on his or her behalf. 
Non-consent towing means the recovery, towing, removal, or storage of a vehicle from private property and without the authorization of the vehicle owner. 
Permit means the document, license, or certificate issued pursuant to this article which allows a tow truck operator to engage in non-consent towing from private property within the city. 
Property owner means that person who exercises dominion and control over the real property, including but not limited to the legal titleholder, lessee, resident manager, property manager, or other agent who has legal authority to bind the owner. 
Storage site means any lot, parcel or place where a vehicle is stored or kept for compensation. 
Tow means to haul, carry, pull along or otherwise transport or remove a motor vehicle from real property without the consent of the vehicle's owner or other legally authorized person in control of the vehicle. 
Tow truck means any truck or other vehicle which is used to carry, tow or otherwise transport another vehicle and which is equipped for that purpose with a boom, winch, car carrier, or similar equipment. 
Tow truck operator means any person or business owning, operating, driving or controlling a tow truck. 
(Ord. No 18-09, § 2, 7-3-18)  
Sec. 11-170. - Compliance required. 
No person shall tow or otherwise remove a vehicle from private property without the consent of the registered owner, authorized agent, operator or person in control of that vehicle without complying with the provisions of this article, the Broward County Code, and F.S. § 715.07. 
(Ord. No 18-09, § 2, 7-3-18)  
Sec. 11-171. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to the towing of vehicles which occurs by or at the direction of a law enforcement officer pursuant to ordinance or state law, or pursuant to an agreement with a public body or political subdivision. 
(Ord. No 18-09, § 2, 7-3-18)  
Sec. 11-172. - Rebates prohibited. 
No person towing or removing a vehicle from private property shall rebate, pay, or otherwise transfer money or any valuable consideration to a property owner for the privilege of towing a vehicle. 
(Ord. No 18-09, § 2, 7-3-18)  
Sec. 11-173. - "No parking" signs and notices on private property; specifications. 
The specifications for "No Parking" signage and notices for towing contained in F.S. § 715.07, are incorporated herein by reference and each property owner shall comply with the requirements of said statute prior to requesting or causing a vehicle to be towed or removed from private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No 18-09, § 2, 7-3-18)  
Sec. 11-174. - Vehicle not to be towed upon owner returning. 
A tow truck operator shall not connect, tow, or remove a vehicle and shall not charge any fee if the owner or person in custody or control of the vehicle returns to the vehicle prior to the tow truck operator having connected the vehicle to the tow truck. The term "connected" means one-half (½) of the wheel lift apparatus surrounding a tire or the winch hook being properly hooked to the vehicle in an appropriate place on the vehicle where it can safely be towed or winched. If the vehicle is already connected but not towed away, the tow truck operator may charge up to one-half (½) of the fee allowable under the law. If the owner or person in custody or control of the vehicle arrives at the scene prior to the removal or towing of the vehicle, the vehicle shall be disconnected from the tow truck, and that person shall be allowed to remove the vehicle without interference upon payment of a reasonable service fee of not more than one-half (½) of the posted rate, for which a receipt shall be given, unless that person refuses to remove the vehicle which is otherwise unlawfully parked. 
(Ord. No 18-09, § 2, 7-3-18)  
Sec. 11-175. - Requirements for towing from private property. 
(a)  Prior to towing of any vehicle, the property owner and the tow truck operator shall have executed a written agreement, which shall, at a minimum, contain the following provisions: 
(1)  The name and address of the property owner requesting the tow; 
(2)  The location and description of the property from which the vehicle(s) will be towed; 
(3)  The duration of the agreement; 
(4)  The time of day that such towing is authorized; 
(5)  The days of the week that such towing is authorized; 
(6)  An enumerated list of all fees to be charged to both the property owner and vehicle owner; 
(7)  The address and description of the location where the vehicle will be towed and stored. Said storage site must be located within a ten-mile radius of the point where the tow originates; and, 
(8)  The signature of both the property owner and the tow truck operator, certifying that each has read and is in compliance with the provisions of F.S. § 715.07, the Broward County Code, and the provisions of this article. 
The above requirement of a written agreement shall not apply to the removal of a vehicle from property appurtenant to and obviously part of a single-family residence or where the vehicle is parked in such a manner that restricts the normal operation of a business, or where a vehicle, which is parked in a public right-of-way, obstructs access to a private driveway and the property owner signs an authorization that the vehicle be removed without a posted "no parking" or "tow-away zone" sign. 
(b)  A copy of the executed agreement described in paragraph (a) above shall be filed by the tow truck operator with the city police department. Said agreement shall be nontransferable. The tow truck operator shall be responsible for advising the city police department within two (2) business days of any changes, amendments, or modifications to, or rescissions of, the agreement. 
(c)  No tow truck operator shall tow a vehicle located within the city unless the operator shall file and keep on record with the city police department a complete copy of the current rates charged for the towing and storage of a vehicle. 
(d)  Any tow truck operator towing within the city shall, within thirty (30) minutes of the completion of any tow, notify the city police department of the towing; the storage site, the time the vehicle was towed or removed; the make, model, year, color, vehicle identification number (VIN) and license plate number of the vehicle. 
(e)  Any vehicle towed shall be towed directly to the storage site owned or leased by the tow truck operator and the vehicle shall not be kept in any temporary holding or staging area. 
(f)  The tow truck operator shall accept at a minimum: cash, credit card. and debit card, with no additional charge if credit card or debit card is utilized. If payment is made with cash, the tow truck operator shall provide change to the closest whole dollar and may not condition payment on the owner having exact change. A person paying by check shall not be required to present more than one (1) form of picture identification. A tow truck operator may accept any other form of payment offered. 
(g)  A tow truck operator shall not contract or sub-contract with another tow truck operator to tow, remove or store a vehicle. The tow truck operator listed on the contract filed with the city police department must be the tow truck operator that actually performs the towing, removal and storage of the vehicle. 
(h)  Except for any property which is vacant, unimproved, and upon which no structure is constructed, the property owner or his agent shall have given an express instruction to a tow truck operator to tow a vehicle. The express instruction shall be evidenced by the physical presence of the property owner or his agent at the time of the towing, and by the written statement and signature of the property owner or his agent on the receipt to be furnished to the owner or operator of the vehicle being towed or removed that the vehicle was towed and removed based on his express instruction. An agent for a property owner shall not be an officer, agent, or employee of the tow truck operator. An express instruction shall be considered to have been given only if the instruction does not occur in advance of the actual unauthorized parking of the vehicle or if the instruction is not general in nature and is related to specific, individual, and identifiable vehicles which are already parked without authorization. The property owner shall be responsible for maintaining copies of all written authorizations required in this section for a period of six (6) months after each authorization is given. 
(i)  Each tow truck operator shall staff or monitor its telephone at all times and immediately advise any vehicle owner or authorized representative who calls by telephone prior to arriving at the storage site of the following: 
(1)  Each and every document or other item which must be produced to retrieve the vehicle; 
(2)  The exact charges as of the time of the telephone call, and the rate at which charges will accumulate thereafter; 
(3)  The acceptable method of payment; and, 
(4)  That the vehicle can be picked up within one (1) hour of request. 
(j)  The tow truck operator shall provide a written bill to the owner or operator of the vehicle detailing the charges to date. 
(k)  The tow truck operator shall provide, at the time of payment, a written receipt of all charges imposed and received from the owner or operator of a vehicle resulting from the towing of a vehicle. Said receipt shall include at a minimum: 
(1)  The date, time, and location of the tow; 
(2)  The total charges listed individually and specifically; and, 
(3)  The date and time of payment of the charges. 
(l)  The tow truck operator shall prepare and maintain a tow data sheet which shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
(1)  The name of the tow truck operator and driver performing the towing service; 
(2)  The location from which the vehicle was towed; 
(3)  The date and time the tow was initiated; 
(4)  The destination to which the vehicle was taken; 
(5)  The description of the vehicle including the make, model, year, color, vehicle identification number (VIN), and license plate number; 
(6)  The time and date the city police department was contacted by the tow truck operator; 
(7)  The description of the services rendered, including an itemized list of all charges; and, 
(8)  The date and time the vehicle was returned to the owner and the identity of that owner. 
(m)  All tow truck operators shall keep all such tow sheets on file for a period of one (1) year and shall make them available to any city police officer upon request during normal business hours. 
(n)  No tow truck operator shall tow a vehicle when there is a person occupying the vehicle. 
(o)  The tow truck operator shall take photographs of the front, back, and sides of the vehicle to be towed prior to any connection to the tow truck. The photographs shall be of sufficient detail and quality to demonstrate the condition of the vehicle and any preexisting damage to the vehicle. The photographs shall be date and time stamped and shall be maintained by the tow truck operator for a minimum period of one (1) year. Photographs shall be available for viewing the following business day. There shall be no charge for viewing the photographs. Vehicle owners shall be permitted to inspect the vehicle and take photographs of the vehicle prior to the vehicle's release from the storage site. 
(Ord. No 18-09, § 2, 7-3-18)  
Sec. 11-175.1 - Permit required for non-consent towing from private property. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a tow truck operator to engage in non-consent towing from private property unless such tow truck operator obtains and maintains a permit issued pursuant to this article. A tow truck operator conducting non-consent tows from private property in the city shall be required to obtain a permit and shall be subject to all the provisions of this article regardless of whether its principal place of business is within or outside of the city. 
(b)  The requirement for a permit described in subsection (a) of this section is a requirement separate and apart from, and in addition to, any county or municipal requirements for occupational licenses or business tax receipts. The required permit is a regulatory permit and not a revenue-generating permit or business tax. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to require that an employee of a tow truck operator obtain a separate permit provided that the employing tow truck operator possesses a valid permit. However, individual tow truck drivers working on behalf of a non-permitted tow truck operator must possess a valid permit issued in the individual's name. The practice of a tow truck operator to consider individuals as independent contractors, agents, or employees shall not be construed to allow avoidance of the requirement that the tow truck operator possess, apply for, obtain, and maintain a permit. 
(Ord. No 18-09, § 2, 7-3-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-09, § 2, adopted July 3, 2018, set out provisions intended for use as § 11-175. In order to avoid duplication of section numbers, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as 11-175.1.  
Sec. 11-176. - Issuance of permit; fees; renewal. 
(a)  A permit issued pursuant to this article shall be issued in the name of the tow truck operator listed on the application and shall not be transferable from one (1) tow truck operator to another tow truck operator. All permits shall expire on September 30 of each year following the date of original issuance. Permits shall be renewable annually. 
(b)  There shall be a permit-processing fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). The permit-processing fee can be adjusted by resolution after a public hearing. Such fee shall accompany the application and shall be nonrefundable subsequent to the filing of the application. In addition, all applicants shall be required to reimburse the city for the cost of a background investigation for each individual listed in the application at the rate charged to the city for such service. All moneys received under this section shall be deposited with the director of finance of the city and shall be used to defray the expense of providing the services described in this article. 
(c)  The chief of police is authorized to issue permits to tow truck operators that have met the standards and requirements for a permit and that are otherwise qualified for a permit. The chief of police is authorized to promulgate reasonable rules and procedures for the application, issuance and revocation of such. 
(Ord. No 18-09, § 2, 7-3-18)  
Sec. 11-177. - Permit application; approval and denial. 
(a)  Application. Every application for a new or renewal permit shall be in writing, signed and verified by the applicant and notarized, and filed with the police department. The application shall be on a form prescribed by the chief of police and shall contain information, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Full legal name of the applicant and sufficient information to identify the applicant, including but not limited to, date of birth, telephone numbers, the place of business and residence addresses, copies of all business tax receipts and licenses issued by any municipality in Broward County, and Florida driver's license number. If the applicant is a corporation, the foregoing information shall be provided for each corporate officer and director. If the applicant is a partnership, the foregoing information shall be provided for each general and limited partner; and 
(2)  Documentation demonstrating that all corporate or partnership applicants are qualified under the laws of Florida to do business under the trade name or names under which it has applied for a permit; and 
(3)  A list of all persons with any ownership interest in the company who have previously been denied a permit from the city or any other jurisdiction; and 
(4)  Verification of the business' current corporate status and fictitious name registration with the State of Florida; and 
(5)  Any trade name under which the business operates, intends to operate, or has previously operated; and 
(6)  The location and physical addresses of all places of business including storage lots and facilities; and 
(7)  A description of services proposed to be provided, including, but not limited to, days and hours of operation and types of towing and storage services to be provided; and 
(8)  Proof of insurance as required in section 11-178; and 
(9)  The signature of each individual applicant, president or vice-president of a corporation and of all the general and limited partners of a partnership having twenty-five (25) percent or greater ownership in the company; and 
(10)  A statement assuring that each tow truck is in safe operating condition and receives routine service/maintenance; and 
(11)  An agreement on the part of the applicant to abide by the provisions of this article, Broward County regulations, and state and federal laws; and 
(12)  Such additional information required by the chief of police to process the application. 
(b)  Standards for issuance or denial of a permit. The chief of police shall review each application based on the criteria of this section and consistency of the application with the public health, safety, and welfare of the city. The chief of police shall issue a permit to tow truck operators who have met the standards and requirements for a permit as provided for in this article. The chief of police shall deny any application that is incomplete or untrue in whole or in part, or which fails to satisfy the requirements of this article, or which reveals any of the following: 
(1)  That the applicant, including a corporate officer or director, or a business partner, has been convicted of, found guilty of, or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a crime, regardless of the adjudication of guilt, within the last ten (10) years involving: repossession of a motor vehicle under F.S. Ch. 493; repair of a motor vehicle under F.S. §§ 559.901—559.9221; theft of a motor vehicle under F.S. § 812.014; carjacking under F.S. § 812.133; operation of a chop shop under F.S. § 812.16; failure to maintain records of motor vehicle parts and accessories under F.S. § 860.14; airbag theft or use of fake airbags under F.S. § 860.145 or F.S. § 860.146; overcharging for repairs and parts under F.S. § 860.15; or violation of the towing or storage requirements for a motor vehicle under F.S. § 321.051, F.S. Ch. 323, F.S. § 713.78, or F.S. § 715.07. 
(2)  That any unsatisfied civil fines or penalties exist arising out of an administrative or enforcement action brought by the city or another governmental agency based upon conduct involving a violation of state or local towing regulations where such action related to public safety. 
(3)  That an applicant had a towing permit or license revoked by the city or any other jurisdiction within two (2) years of the date of application where such revocation related to public safety. 
(Ord. No 18-09, § 2, 7-3-18)  
Sec. 11-178. - Insurance required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any tow truck operator to engage in non-consent towing from private property unless the tow truck operator has filed with the police department a certificate of insurance covering the minimum insurance limits specifically set forth as follows: 
(1)  Tow truck operator agrees to maintain, on a primary basis and at its sole expense, at all times during the life of the permit the following insurance coverages, limits, including endorsements described herein. The requirements contained herein, as well as city's review or acceptance of insurance maintained by tow truck operator is not intended to and shall not in any manner limit nor qualify the liabilities or obligations of tow truck operator under this article. 
NOTE: Garage liability coverage form may satisfy the same requirement to maintain commercial general liability and business auto liability insurance. 
(2)  Tow truck operator agrees to maintain commercial general liability at a limit of liability not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) each occurrence six hundred thousand dollars ($600,000.00) general aggregate. Coverage shall not contain any endorsement(s) excluding nor limiting product/completed operations, contractual liability or cross liability/severability of interest. 
(3)  Tow truck operator agrees to maintain business automobile liability at a limit of liability not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) combined single limit. Coverage shall include liability for owned or scheduled autos, non-owned autos and hired autos. 
(4)  Tow truck operator agrees to maintain garagekeeper's legal liability at a limit not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per occurrence against comprehensive and collision/upset causes of loss at all scheduled location(s) where towed cars shall be stored in the care, custody and control of tow truck operator. Any per vehicle or per occurrence deductible shall be the tow truck operator's responsibility. 
(5)  Tow truck operator agrees to maintain "on-hook" coverage, or similar endorsement, at a limit of liability not less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per vehicle. Any per vehicle or per occurrence deductible shall be the tow truck operator's responsibility. 
(b)  Tow truck operator agrees to provide city a certificate of insurance evidencing that all coverages, limits and endorsements required herein are maintained and in full force and effect, and said certificate of insurance shall provide a minimum thirty-day endeavor to notify, when available by tow truck operator's insurer. If the tow truck operator receives a non-renewal or cancellation notice from an insurance carrier affording coverage required herein, or receives notice that coverage no longer complies with the insurance requirements herein, tow truck operator agrees to notify the city's chief of police by fax number below within five (5) business days with a copy of the non-renewal or cancellation notice, or written specifics as to which coverage is no longer in compliance. The certificate holder address shall read: 
City of Miramar 
Attn: Chief of Police 
Police Headquarters 
11765 City Hall Promenade 
Miramar, FL 33025 
Fax (954) 578-6189 
(c)  The chief of police may deny, suspend or revoke the permit for failure to obtain or maintain insurance as required by this article. 
(Ord. No 18-09, § 2, 7-3-18)  
Sec. 11-179. - Revocation, suspension and renewal; appeal. 
(a)  If, at any time, the chief of police determines that any tow truck operator has failed to comply with any applicable conditions of its permit, or is operating in a manner harmful to the public health, safety or welfare and not in compliance with the terms of this article, the chief of police may place on the city commission public hearing agenda an item to determine whether the tow truck operator's permit should be revoked. The chief of police shall prepare a report with analysis showing the compliance or non-compliance with the following criteria: 
(1)  The tow truck operator has or has not complied with all conditions imposed at the time of the issuance of the permit; or 
(2)  The tow truck operator has or has not violated provisions of this article, county ordinance or state law regulating towing; or 
(3)  The tow truck operator has or has not conducted its towing operations in compliance with the public health, safety or welfare. 
(b)  The city manager or his or her designee, on the recommendation of the chief of police, shall have the power to enter an order immediately revoking or suspending a tow truck operator's permit. 
(c)  Within thirty (30) days of the suspension of a tow truck operator's permit, as noted above, a public hearing on said revocation or suspension shall be conducted. The city commission will consider the matter de novo, and will determine whether the city manager and his/her designee was justified in revoking and/or suspending the permit. The presumption of the correctness of the decision may be overcome by the permit holder, upon a showing of competent substantial evidence that the finding of the city manager and/or his/her designee was not correct. The burden of proof will be on the applicant seeking the reinstatement of a revoked permit. 
(d)  After consideration of the matter, the city commission may revoke or suspend the permit or allow the tow truck operator to continue engaging in towing operations subject to any reasonable additional conditions deemed necessary to mitigate or eliminate the adverse effects of such operation. 
(e)  Should the tow truck operator's permit be revoked, no reapplication for a permit shall be considered within a twenty-four-month period following the date of final revocation. After the expiration of the twenty-four-month period, a new application and corresponding fee must be submitted. 
(f)  Renewal of permit. Each tow truck operator permit shall be required to be renewed no later than one (1) year following the date of initial granting of the permit. The annual renewal of any such permit shall be processed by the chief of police and reviewed based upon the criteria established for issuance of the original permit. If the chief of police approves the renewal, the permit shall be renewed upon payment of the nonrefundable annual fee in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) plus reimbursement of the costs of background investigation. The amount of the renewal fee may be modified by resolution of the city commission after a public hearing. If the chief of police denies the renewal, the permit holder shall have ten (10) days from the date of the notice of denial to appeal the decision to the city commission in accordance with subsection 11-179(g). The city commission shall use the criteria and procedure specified in subsection 11-179(a) in determining said appeal. At the time of the requested renewal, the chief of police may recommend the imposition of additional conditions upon the tow truck operator. If additional conditions are recommended by the chief of police, the renewal shall be placed on the city commission agenda for public hearing on the proposed imposition of additional conditions. If a permit is non-renewed or the commission denies an appeal of the non-renewal, the tow truck operator shall not be allowed to apply for a permit for a period of twenty-four (24) months. In the event the city non-renews, revokes, or denies a permit, the city reserves the right to contact the appropriate local or state agencies for administrative or criminal action. 
(g)  Appeal procedure. 
(1)  The tow truck operator for which a permit is non-renewed pursuant to the terms of the article, may appeal to the city commission, consistent with these provisions, any decision rendered by the chief of police to deny the renewal of a permit. Within ten (10) days of the decision, an appeal may be made in writing to the city commission and the city shall schedule a public hearing within thirty (30) days. Notice shall be given to the permit holder and a public hearing shall be held as prescribed by subsection 11-179(a). The city commission shall consider the appeal and make a decision (with reasons stated) based on the standards set forth in this article. 
(2)  Appeal of any city commission decision regarding the issuance, suspension, revocation or non-renewal of a permit shall be to the circuit court in and for Broward County, in the manner provided by state law. In accordance with state law, failure to appeal within thirty (30) days of the rendition of the decision shall result in the applicant waiving his or her right to appeal. 
(Ord. No 18-09, § 2, 7-3-18)  
Sec. 11-180. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the city's code enforcement special magistrate procedure as set forth in Chapter 2 "Administration," Article XI "Community Standards and Code Enforcement" of the City Code, as may be amended from time to time, and fines shall be assessed for violations and repeat violations pursuant to section 2-339 unless otherwise specified herein. 
(b)  A violation of this article shall result in a fine of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a first violation. A second violation of this article within five (5) years shall constitute a repeat violation, as defined in section 2-119, and shall result in a fine of not less than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). A third or subsequent violation of this article within five (5) years shall constitute a repeat violation, as defined in section 2-331, and shall result in a fine of not less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and revocation of the violator's permit to conduct towing within the city. The fines set forth herein are minimum amounts and shall not preclude higher fines based on consideration of the factors in this article and in section 2-339, or if it is determined that a violation is irreparable or irreversible. 
(c)  A violation of this article shall be presumed to be irreparable or irreversible once the subject vehicle has been towed, unless the owner of the vehicle was physically present at the time of the towing and refused to remove an unlawfully parked vehicle prior to the towing. 
(d)  Any violation found to be irreparable or irreversible shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per violation, as set forth in section 2-339 of the City Code, as may be amended from time to time. 
(e)  In addition to a fine, the city may suspend or revoke the permit of anyone convicted of violating this article on three (3) or more separate occasions. 
(Ord. No 18-09, § 2, 7-3-18)  
Sec. 11-181. - Towing victim reimbursement account. 
(a)  There is hereby created a towing victim reimbursement account for the purpose of accepting and disbursing a portion of towing fines collected by the city to pay the towing and storage charges incurred by owners of unlawfully towed vehicles. 
(b)  The towing victim reimbursement account shall be self-perpetuating from year to year unless specifically terminated by the city commission. In the event of termination, the city commission shall have sole discretion concerning the distribution of the account's assets. 
(c)  All fines and other revenue received hereunder shall be deposited into the towing victim reimbursement account, which shall be established and maintained as a separate account within the general fund of the city, and shall be expended, utilized, and disbursed only for the benefit of owners of unlawfully towed vehicles. 
(d)  Fines collected pursuant to a violation of this Article shall be deposited into the towing victim reimbursement account to assist vehicle owners with documented towing and storage charges actually paid as a result of the illegal towing of the owner's vehicle. 
(e)  Monies deposited in and credited to the towing victim reimbursement account and not expended by the close of any fiscal year shall be carried forward into the succeeding fiscal year. Excess monies at the end of the subsequent fiscal year may be administratively transferred to the city's general fund upon approval of the finance and administrative services director and the city manager. 
(f)  The city manager shall designate a person to administer the towing victim reimbursement account. Following a determination by the code enforcement special magistrate that a violation of this Article has occurred, the owner of the vehicle subject to the towing violation may apply to the code enforcement department for reimbursement of towing and storage charges on a form provided by the code enforcement department. Such application must be made no later than thirty (30) days after the final order finding the violation is entered. Upon full payment of the fine, the administrator shall determine whether the vehicle owner has provided sufficient documentation of payment of towing and/or storage charges. If the application and documentation of payment are sufficient, the administrator shall reimburse the vehicle owner for towing and storage charges up to the amount of the fine collected by the city. No monies shall be disbursed from the towing victim reimbursement account until the fine for the corresponding violation has been collected by the city and the reimbursement has been authorized by the administrator. 
(g)  A tow truck operator cited for a violation of this Article may elect to reimburse the vehicle owner's towing and storage charges prior to a hearing on the violation. In the event the violator reimburses the vehicle owner the towing and storage charges in full within fifteen (15) calendar days of the city's mailing of a notice of violation for a violation of the city code, then the fine assessed for the violation shall be reduced by the amount reimbursed. In addition, reimbursement prior to hearing shall be considered a mitigating factor in determining the amount of the fine pursuant to sections 2-339 of the City Code. A vehicle owner who receives reimbursement of towing and storage charges pursuant to this paragraph shall not be entitled to reimbursement from the towing victim reimbursement account. 
(Ord. No 18-09, § 2, 7-3-18)  
Chapter 12 - MARINE ACTIVITIES AND WAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Sanitary nuisances, § 10-26 et seq.; noise regulations, § 10-111 et seq.; business taxes, permits and business regulations, Ch. 11; marine structures, § 22-166 et seq. 
State Law reference— Bulkhead lines, F.S.§§ 253.1221, 253.128; vessels, F.S. ch. 327. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 12-1—12-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BOATS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Junked, wrecked, abandoned property, § 10-46 et seq.; noise regulations, § 10-111 et seq.; fishing from bridges prohibited, § 13-6. 
State Law reference— Vessel registration and safety, F.S. ch. 327. 
 
Sec. 12-26. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the word "boat" shall mean all watercraft of any type whatsoever operated on, or moored, docked, or anchored at any place in the canals or waters within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 7-20) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 12-27. - Jurisdiction; penalty for violation. 
All boats, and the owners, operators, or occupants thereof, shall be governed by and observe the provisions of this article. Any person violating this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by section 1-13 of this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 7-21)  
Sec. 12-28. - Operation of unnumbered boats prohibited. 
Every boat shall be registered and numbered. No person shall operate or give permission for the operation of any boat unless the boat is registered and numbered with the identifying number set forth in the certificate of registration, displayed on the stern of the boat, except as provided in section 12-29(f). 
(Code 1964, § 7-23) 
Cross reference— Business taxes, permits and business regulations, Ch. 11.  
Sec. 12-29. - Application for registration, certificate, number, decal, annual renewal; transfer; exempted boats. 
(a)  The owner of each boat required by this article to pay a registration certificate fee and secure an identification number shall file an application with the city clerk, signed by the owner, and shall establish proof of ownership of the boat satisfactory to the city clerk. 
(b)  The registration certificate shall be renewable annually during the month of February upon payment of the registration certificate fee. Each registration certificate shall state the number awarded to the boat, the name and address of the owner, the horsepower of the motor, and a description of the boat. 
(c)  The numbers shall be placed on the stern of the boat in such a position as to provide clear legibility for identification, even when afloat. If there is not sufficient freeboard to permit placing the numbers on the stern, then, and only in this event, the numbers shall be placed on the deck adjacent to the stern. The numbers shall read from left to right and shall be in block characters of good proportion, not less than three (3) inches in height. The numbers shall be of a color which will contrast with the color of the background and so maintained as to be clearly visible and legible. The registration certificate shall be available for inspection on the boat for which issued whenever such boat is in operation. 
(d)  A decal signifying the year during which the certificate is valid shall be furnished by the city clerk with each registration certificate issued. The decal shall be displayed by affixing it after the identification number. 
(e)  When the ownership of a registered boat changes, an application for a new registration certificate shall be filed in the city clerk's office by the new owner within fifteen (15) days. 
(f)  The owner of any boat that is required to be registered and numbered according to state law shall be exempt from complying with (c) above. 
(Code 1964, § 7-24) 
State Law reference— Regulation of vessels by local government, F.S.§ 327.22.  
Sec. 12-30. - Numbering system. 
(a)  The first part of the number on boats registered in this city shall be the letters MIR. 
(b)  The remainder of the boat number shall consist of not more than four (4) Arabic numerals and two (2) capital letters, in sequence, as established by the city clerk. The letters I, O, and Q shall not be used, since they may be mistaken for Roman numerals. 
(Code 1964, § 7-25)  
Sec. 12-31. - Change of interest and address. 
The owner of a boat shall furnish the city clerk with notice of the transfer of all or any part of his/her interest in a boat or of the destruction or abandonment of such boat within fifteen (15) days thereof. Any holder of a registration certificate shall notify the city clerk within fifteen (15) days of his/her address, if such address no longer conforms to that appearing on the certificate. 
(Code 1964, § 7-26)  
Sec. 12-32. - Registration certificate fee. 
The boat registration certificate fee shall be in the following amounts: 
(1)  Residents ..... $2.50 
(2)  Nonresidents ..... 10.00 
(Code 1964, § 7-27) 
Cross reference— Fees, § 2-221 et seq.  
Sec. 12-33. - Use of fee funds. 
All funds received from the boat registration certificate fee shall be used by the city for the administration of this article and for the patrol, regulation, and maintenance of the waterways in the city. 
(Code 1964, § 7-28)  
Sec. 12-34. - Speed limit; exceptions; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any boat on any canal or lake within the city limits of the city in a negligent manner, or at such a speed as to endanger life, limb or property. 
(b)  No boat shall be operated upon any waterway in the city at a rate of speed which causes waves to damage or cause damage to docks, wharves, sea walls, boats or personal property contained in boats moored or tied to docks or wharves along any canals or lakes within the city. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons in the employ of the city and performing services for the city in or about canals, waterways or lakes within the city. 
(Code 1964, § 7-30)  
Sec. 12-35. - Lights required. 
(a)  Every boat, except unpowered boats, shall carry and exhibit in all weather from sunset to sunrise the following lights when underway, and during such time, no other lights which may be mistaken for those prescribed shall be exhibited: 
(1)  A bright, white light aft to show all around the horizon raised above all structures that may obscure visibility. 
(2)  A combined lantern in the forepart of the vessel and lower than the white light aft, showing green to starboard and red to port, so fixed as to throw the light from straight ahead to two (2) points abaft the beam on their respective sides. 
(3)  Every white light prescribed by this section shall be of such character as to be visible at a distance of at least two (2) miles. Every colored light prescribed by this section shall be of such character as to be visible at a distance of at least one (1) mile. The word "visible" in this section, when applied to lights, shall mean visible on a dark night with clear atmosphere. 
(b)  Unpowered boats shall not be required to comply with (a)(2) above. 
(Code 1964, § 7-31)  
Sec. 12-36. - Water skiing and surfing prohibited. 
No owner or operator of a boat shall permit water skiing or surfing on the waterways of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 7-32)  
Sec. 12-37. - Life saving devices required. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or any person in possession of any boat or vessel within the city to allow such boat or vessel to leave its berth or to be occupied by any person without such boat or vessel being equipped with and carrying life saving devices for each person on board, which life saving device shall be of the type approved by federal rules and regulations. 
(Code 1964, § 7-33)  
Sec. 12-38. - Use for residential purposes prohibited. 
No boat shall be used for residential purposes. 
(Code 1964, § 7-34)  
Sec. 12-39. - Littering prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for persons upon boats to dump or throw garbage, trash, refuse, or debris into the canals or waterways of the city. The owners, operators, or occupants of all boats shall keep the docks, seawalls and premises adjacent to such boat in a neat orderly manner and free from garbage, trash, refuse or debris of all kinds. 
(Code 1964, § 7-35) 
Cross reference— Health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 10.  
Sec. 12-40. - Motorboats prohibited, electric motors permitted. 
No person shall operate or permit to be operated any motorboats on any waterways within the city. However, boats powered by electric motors shall be permitted. This prohibition shall apply regardless of any reference to motorboats contained in this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 7-37)  
Chapter 13 - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Assessment of court costs for law enforcement education fund, § 2-223; police, Ch. 17; sale of smoking pipes and devices to minors, Broward County Code, § 20-233; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 23. 
State Law reference— Controlled substance schedules, F.S. § 893.01; grants FL. Attorney General rulemaking authority to add new substances to Floridas' Schedules of Controlled Substances, F.S. § 893.035; drug paraphernalia, F.S. §§ 893.145—893.147. 
 
Sec. 13-1. - State misdemeanors and infractions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit, within the corporate limits of the city, any act which is or shall be recognized by the laws of the state as a misdemeanor or infraction, and the commission of such acts is hereby forbidden. 
(b)  Whosoever shall violate the provisions of this section, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by the same penalty as is therefor provided by the laws of the state, but in no case shall such penalty exceed a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Code 1964, § 15-21) 
Case law reference(s)— Adoption of state law relating to misdemeanors by city upheld, see McFarland v. Roberts, 74 So.2d 88 (Fla. 1954); also Orr v. Quigg, 135 Fla. 653, 185 So.726 and Wright v. Worth, 83 Fla. 204, 91 So.87; adoption of state law misdemeanors by reference includes laws both in existence at the time and those later adopted by the state legislature, see State v. Smith, 189 So.2d 846 (Fla. 4th D.C.A. 1966). Follows rule in Hecht v. Shaw, 112 Fla. 762, 151 So.333(1933). "... when the adopting statute makes no reference to any particular statute or part of statute by its title or otherwise, but refers to the law generally which governs a particular subject, the reference in such a case includes not only the law in force at the date of the adopting act, but also all subsequent laws on the particular subject referred to... " 
 (1) A municipality may enact an ordinance which creates an offense against municipal law for the same act that constitutes an offense against state law. Jaramillo v. City of Homestead, 322 So.2d 496 (Fla. 1975); 
 (2) A municipality by ordinance may adopt state misdemeanor statutes by specific reference or by general reference, such as that contained in an ordinance making it unlawful to commit, within city limits, any act which is or shall be recognized by the laws of the state as a misdemeanor. Id. 
 (3) An adoption by general reference of a misdemeanor statute permits subsequent amendments, revisions and repeals of the laws by the state legislature to apply to the municipal ordinances. Id. 
State Law reference— Fines and forfeitures in county court payable to municipality, F.S. § 34.191; punishment for misdemeanors, F.S. §§ 775.082, 775.083; state law misdemeanors; see Fla. Stats. general index under heading "Crimes" for listing of state law misdemeanors.  
Sec. 13-2. - Abandoned airtight containers. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to prevent deaths due to suffocation of children locked in abandoned or discarded iceboxes, refrigerators, deep-freeze lockers, clothes washers, clothes dryers, or similar airtight units from which the doors have not been removed. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person knowingly to abandon or discard or to permit to be abandoned or discarded, on premises under such person's control, any icebox, refrigerator, deep-freeze locker, clothes washer, clothes dryer, or similar airtight unit having an interior storage capacity of one and one-half (1½) cubic feet or more from which the door has not been removed. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to an icebox, refrigerator, deep-freeze locker, clothes washer, clothes dryer, or similar airtight unit which is crated or is securely locked from the outside or is in the normal use on the premises of a home or rental unit or is held for sale or use in a place of business; provided, however, that "place of business" as used herein shall not be deemed to include a junkyard or other similar establishment dealing in secondhand merchandise for sale on open unprotected premises. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any junkyard dealer or secondhand furniture dealer with unenclosed premises used for display of secondhand iceboxes, refrigerators, deep-freeze lockers, clothes washers, clothes dryers, or similar airtight units to fail to remove the doors on such secondhand units having an interior storage capacity of one and one-half (1½) cubic feet or more from which the door has not been removed. This section will not apply to any dealer who has fenced and locked such dealer's premises. 
(e)  Abandoned or discarded iceboxes, refrigerators, deep-freeze lockers, clothes washers, clothes dryers, or similar airtight units from which the doors have not been removed are declared to be an attractive nuisance to children and a menace to their health and safety when accessible to them, whether or not such children are trespassers. 
(Code 1964, § 15-1) 
Cross reference— Health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 10. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 823.07 et seq.  
Sec. 13-3. - Despoiling property. 
(a)  No person shall willfully, maliciously and without consent misuse, injure, destroy, befoul, deface or otherwise damage by any means public or private, real or personal property belonging to another. Any person committing such act will be properly charged with criminal mischief under Florida State Statute 806.13 
(b)  Any person who gives information leading to the arrest and conviction upon final appeal of any person for a violation of this section and testifies in the prosecution of the violator shall be eligible to receive a reward of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) from the city, except that no officer or employee of the city shall be eligible for such reward. 
(Code 1964, § 15-6; Ord. No. 91-15, § 7, 1-28-91; Ord. No. 92-19, § 1, 1-8-92; Ord. No. 98-36, § 1, 6-3-98) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 806.13.  
Sec. 13-3.1. - Graffiti. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Graffiti. The unlawful application of any drawing, inscription, figure or mark, of any type, upon any structure, wall, rock, bridge, building, fence, gate, roadway, tree or any other real or personal property, either privately or publicly owned. 
(2)  Aerosol spray paint. Any aerosol spray can containing any substance known as paint or containing any other opaque liquid capable of being propelled by the aerosol can. 
(3)  Broad-tipped, indelible marker. Any felt-tipped marker or similar implement which contains a fluid which is not water soluble and which has a flat or angled writing surface that is one-half (½) inch or greater. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deface or damage any real or personal property, by the act known as "graffiti." It shall be unlawful to mar, deface, damage, or destroy by writing, painting, or drawing any inscription, figure or mark of any type on the exterior or interior, including walls or appurtenances of any public or private building, telephone booth, bus bench, public way, church, synagogue, school or any other real or personal property within the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be in possession of any aerosol spray paint or broad-tipped indelible marker while on any public or private property, highway, street, alley, parkway, or anyway, except in the company of a supervising adult. If in doing so, said person warrants a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of that property, or property in the vicinity, and takes flight upon appearance of an enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself or herself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself, or the can of aerosol spray paint or broad-tipped indelible marker, the enforcement officer may act under the authority of Florida State Statute 856.021, loitering or prowling. Prior to any arrest for violation of this statute, unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, an enforcement officer shall afford the person the opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself or herself and explain his or her presence or conduct. 
(d)  Any act in violation of section (b) hereof, committed by a person under eighteen (18) years of age shall be imputed to the minor's parents or legal guardian. A parent or guardian of a minor who violates section (b) shall be liable for the payment of any civil fine and the expense of restoration of the damaged property. 
(e)  Any individual or entity owning, occupying, controlling or possessing any real or personal property which has been damaged, defaced or subject to graffiti shall be responsible for ensuring the necessary repairs, or that the graffiti has been removed, painted over or obliterated within seven (7) days after receipt of written notice. In the event that the graffiti consists of any obscene, vulgar or offensive words, symbols, drawings or sayings, the person owning, occupying, controlling or possessing any real or personal property shall be responsible for ensuring the necessary repairs, or that the graffiti has been removed, painted over or obliterated within three (3) days after receipt of written notice. If the individual or entity owning, occupying, controlling, or possessing any real or personal property fails to remove such graffiti in the time within the time required by this ordinance, the City of Miramar may remove such graffiti through its own employees or agents and bill the property owner for a minimum fee of eighty-five dollars ($85.00) plus the cost of the materials incurred in the removal. Failing payment by the owner, the city may impose a lien on the subject property to recover all costs and expenses incurred. Said lien shall be evidenced by an affidavit of the city manager stating that the provisions of this ordinance were violated, stating that the city provided notice as required herein and stating the costs incurred by the city in removing the graffiti. 
(f)  The city's police officers and code enforcement officers are hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this section, including the issuance of notice of violations and citations required under subsection (h). 
(g)  Whenever the city becomes aware of the existence of graffiti or conditions violating this section, including defacement or graffiti on structures or improvements within the city, a code enforcement officer or police officer shall give or cause to be given, written notice to the property owner and/or property owner's agent or manager to remove such graffiti. 
(h)  Notice. For purposes of all property owners, any individuals or entities owning, occupying, controlling or in possession of any real or personal property (including the structures thereon) which has been subject to defacing, damage or graffiti as defined herein, shall receive notice from the city to effectuate the necessary repair, removal or obliteration by receiving written notice delivered to the property address as identified in the city records. For purposes of this section, notices shall be provided to the alleged violator by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by hand delivery by a police officer or code enforcement officer; or by leaving the notice at the violator's usual place of residence with any person fifteen (15) years of age or older and informing such person of the contents of the notice. In addition, notice shall be provided by posting a copy of the notice at the site of the violation. The police officer or code enforcement officer shall then provide proof of posting by preparing and executing an affidavit which shall include a copy of the notice posted and the date and places of its posting. 
(i)  In addition to the right to prosecute violators in county court for a municipal ordinance violation, the city may institute a civil action against violators in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover compensatory and punitive damages to the extent permitted by law, including reasonable costs and expenses, for any damage caused to city owned property located within the city limits of Miramar and seek any other judicial relief just and proper under the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 98-36, § 1, 6-3-98)  
Sec. 13-4. - Public property; injuring, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, cut, break or destroy in any manner any building or other thing belonging to, or under the control and care of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 15-20) 
Cross reference— Utilities, Ch. 21; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23. 
State Law reference— Malicious mischief and injury to property, F.S. ch. 822.  
Sec. 13-5. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in disorderly conduct as hereinafter described. 
(b)  A person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if, with a purpose to cause a breach of the peace, public danger, disorder or nuisance or with the knowledge that he or she reasonably will create such breach of the peace, public danger, disorder, or nuisance, the person: 
(1)  Creates a disturbance of the public order by an act of violence to a person or real or personal property, or by any act which would reasonably be expected to produce violence; or 
(2)  Engages in, promotes, instigates, encourages, aids or abets fighting or violent, threatening, or tumultuous behavior, which may reasonably be expected to cause a breach of the peace; or 
(3)  Makes or causes any unreasonably loud noise; or 
(4)  Addresses profane, obscene or abusive language or threats of violence to any person present, which words have a direct tendency to create a clear and present danger of violence from such person or from other persons who may reasonably be expected to hear such words; or 
(5)  Fails or refuses to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a police officer, where three (3) or more persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the officer's presence; or 
(6)  Loiters, crowds or congregates on the public street or sidewalk so as to unreasonably obstruct or interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic or use thereof, or so as to create an unsafe condition for vehicular or pedestrian traffic or use of such sidewalk, and who fails or refuses to disperse and move on when ordered to do so by a police officer; or 
(7)  Blocks any entrance or exit to any building, both public and private, so as to create an unsafe condition for people leaving or entering such building, and who fails or refuses to disperse and move on when ordered to do so by a police officer; or 
(8)  Damages, befouls, disturbs or litters public property, or private property of another, so as to create an unsafe, unhealthy or unsanitary condition. 
(c)  Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Code 1964, § 15-7) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 877.03.  
Sec. 13-6. - Fishing from bridges. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fish from or under any bridge within the city. 
(Code 1964, § 15-9) 
Cross reference— Marine activities and ways, Ch. 12; boats, § 12-26 et seq.  
Sec. 13-7. - Use of BB guns, air- or gas-operated guns or slungshots within the city limits. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the city hereby adopts all definitions contained in F.S. § 790.001. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any BB gun, air- or gas-operated gun, slungshot or other weapon within the city. 
(Code 1964, § 15-24; Ord. No. 11-11, § 2, 9-21-11)  
Sec. 13-8. - Loitering near school, college or university property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and illegal for any person to loiter within five hundred (500) feet distance of any school within the city. Such distance shall be measured by following the shortest route of ordinary pedestrian travel along the public thoroughfare to the nearest point of the school grounds in use as part of the school facilities. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and illegal for any person to loiter upon any school, college or university grounds or within any school, college or university building within the territorial boundaries of the city. 
(c)  A person shall be deemed guilty of loitering who remains in a school, college or university building or upon the grounds thereof, not having any reason or relationship involving custody of or responsibility for a pupil or any other specific legitimate reason for being upon such premises, and not having written permission from anyone authorized to grant such permission. 
(d)  Persons violating this section shall be punished as provided by section 1-13 of this Code. 
(Code 1964, § 15-28) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 856.021.  
Sec. 13-9. - Riding vehicles across pedestrian overpasses. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride any device, motorized or propelled by human power, with the exception of a wheelchair, or to walk or ride a horse, across pedestrian overpasses. 
(Code 1964, § 15-29) 
Cross reference— Traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 20; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23; subdivisions, Ch. 24; zoning, Ch. 26.  
Sec. 13-10. - Vending near schools. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or permit the sale of merchandise or other products within one thousand (1,000) feet by air line measurement from any school measured to the nearest point of the school grounds during school hours or one (1) hour before or after school hours or during school functions or one (1) hour before or after such school functions, except by written permission of the chief of police. 
(Code 1964, § 15-30) 
Cross reference— Business taxes, permits and business regulations, Ch. 11.  
Sec. 13-11. - Disturbing the peace. 
Any person who shall willfully disturb the peace of others by violent, tumultuous or offensive conduct or carriage, or by loud and unusual noise, or by profane, obscene or offensive language, calculated to provoke a breach of the peace, or by assaulting, striking or fighting another, or shall permit any such conduct or language in or upon any house or premises owned, possessed or occupied by such person, or under such person's management or control, so that others in the vicinity are disturbed thereby, shall be punished as prescribed by section 1-13. 
(Code 1964, § 15-31) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 877.03.  
Sec. 13-12. - Sexual violator residency prohibition. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any "sexual violator," as that term is defined below, to reside within two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet of any school, day care center, public school bus stop, park or playground. 
(b)  A person who violates section 13-12(a) shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, a "sexual violator" is any person who has been convicted of any felony sexual offense in any state in the United States at any time, regardless of whether adjudication has been withheld, in which the victim of the offense was less than sixteen (16) years of age, as that term was applied and used by the state in which the person was convicted ("sexual offense"). 
(d)  The provisions of section 13-12(a) shall not prohibit a person who, prior to August 17, 2005, was registered with the State of Florida as a sexual violator, sexual offender or sexual predator and whose registration shows an address within the city, from continuing to reside at the address even if it is within two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet of any school, day care center, public school bus stop, park or playground, as long as the person continues to reside at the address shown in the registration. This exemption shall not apply if the sexual violator is convicted of a subsequent sexual offense. 
(e)  The provisions of section 13-12(a) shall not prohibit a person who is registered with the State of Florida as a sexual violator, sexual offender or sexual predator from continuing to reside at his or her registered address solely because a school, day care center, public school bus stop, park or playground is subsequently built or established within two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet of his or her registered address. 
(f)  It shall be a violation of the city's code of ordinances for a landlord or owner of residential property in the city to rent or lease a residence to a sexual violator, if the sexual violator intends to reside at the property and if the property is located within two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet of a school, day care center, public school bus stop, park or playground, unless the landlord or owner can establish that, prior to entry of a lease, he or she used reasonable due diligence and was unable to determine that the tenant is a sexual violator. Any person violating this provision is subject to the code enforcement procedures set forth in Article XI, City of Miramar Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 05-17, § 1, 8-17-05)  
Sec. 13-13. - Prohibiting the distribution, sale, offer for distribution or sale, purchase with intent to distribute or sell or public display for distribution or sale of synthetic cannabinoid herbal incense. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The city commission finds and declares that the products and synthetic substances described hereunder are commonly used as alternatives to marijuana. The city commission further finds that these synthetic substances are particularly appealing to youth, and that these synthetic substances are potentially dangerous to users in the short term and that the long term effects are not yet known. The city commission finds that the products which contain these synthetic substances often use a disclaimer that the product is "not for human consumption" to avoid regulations requiring the manufacturer to list the product's active ingredients. The city commission finds that drug designers and chemists can quickly create new synthetic drugs once federal or state law makes a particular synthetic drug illegal. As such, the city commission finds that there is a need to declare illegal the distribution, sale, offer for distribution or sale, purchase with intent to distribute or sell or public display for distribution or sale of synthetic substances that mimic illegal controlled substances that have not yet themselves been categorized as illegal controlled substances under federal or state law. The city commission further finds that it is proper and necessary for the city commission to exercise its authority to safeguard and protect the public health, safety and welfare by taking this action. 
(b)  Application. This section shall be applicable within the city to the fullest extent allowed by law. 
(c)  Conflict. Any applicable Broward County ordinance governing this subject area that is more stringent than this section or that declares illegal a substance that is not declared illegal by this section shall remain enforceable within the city. 
(d)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms apply: 
(1)  "Structurally similar" as used in this section shall mean chemical substitutions off a common chemical backbone associated with synthetic cannabinoids or synthetic cannabinoid-mimicking compounds listed in the controlled substance schedules in F.S. ch. 893, as amended, or otherwise prohibited by federal or state law. 
(2)  "Synthetic cannabinoid herbal incense" as used in this section shall mean aromatic or nonaromatic plant material containing a synthetic drug, or to which a synthetic drug has been sprayed, applied or otherwise added, that is distributed in a loose, leafy, powder or granular form or in a compressed block or blocks that can be crushed to result in a powder or granular form, and can be placed into a pipe, cigarette paper or drug paraphernalia for purposes of ingestion by smoking, inhaling or other method. 
(3)  "Synthetic drug" as used in this section shall mean any chemical or mixture of chemicals, however packaged, that is structurally similar to synthetic cannabinoids or synthetic cannabinoid-mimicking compounds listed in the controlled substance schedules in F.S. ch. 893, or otherwise prohibited by federal or state law. "Synthetic drug" also shall include any chemical or mixture of chemicals, however packaged, that mimics the effects of tetrahydrocannabinol (also known as "THC"), the main active ingredient found in marijuana. Packaging that indicates or implies that a product mimics the effects of marijuana, such as "fake weed" or "fake pot", shall create a presumption that the product mimics the effects of tetrahydrocannabinol. "Synthetic drug" shall not include any substance currently listed in the controlled substance schedules in F.S. ch. 893, or otherwise prohibited by federal or state law. 
(e)  Distribution, sale, offer for distribution or sale and purchase with intent to distribute or sell synthetic cannabinoid herbal incense prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any store owner, store manager, store purchasing agent or other person to distribute, sell, offer for distribution or sale or purchase with intent to distribute or sell any synthetic cannabinoid herbal incense as defined herein. 
(f)  Public display for distribution or sale of synthetic cannabinoid herbal incense prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any store owner, store manager, store purchasing agent or other person to publicly display for distribution or sale any synthetic cannabinoid herbal incense as defined herein. 
(g)  Affirmative defense. It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution of a violation of this section if the distribution, sale, offer for distribution or sale, public display for distribution or sale, or purchase with intent to distribute or sell of synthetic cannabinoid herbal incense is pursuant to the direction or prescription of a licensed physician or dentist authorized in the State of Florida to direct or prescribe such act. 
(h)  Seizure and destruction of synthetic cannabinoid herbal incense. Synthetic cannabinoid herbal incense prohibited herein may be seized by law enforcement officers and may be destroyed in the same manner used to destroy narcotics and contraband substances, after its use for evidentiary purposes in any judicial proceeding is no longer required. 
(i)  Injunctive relief. The city shall have the authority to seek an injunction against any person or business violating the provisions of this section. In any action seeking an injunction, the city shall be entitled to collect its enforcement expenses, including forensic costs, law enforcement costs and reasonable attorney fees and costs incurred at trial and on appeal. 
(j)  Subsequent federal or state action. If Congress or a federal agency amends federal law to include a particular substance or otherwise enacts or amends a federal law providing for criminal penalties for the prohibitions of substances set forth in this section, then upon the effective date of such enactment or amendment, the provisions of this section addressed by federal law shall no longer be deemed effective. Any violations of this section committed prior to the Congress or a federal agency enacting a federal law, as described above, may be prosecuted. 
If the Florida Legislature amends the controlled substance schedules in F.S. § 893.01, to include a particular substance or otherwise enacts or amends a state statute providing for criminal penalties for the prohibitions of substances set forth in this section, then upon the effective date of such enactment or amendment, the provisions of this section addressed by the state statute shall no longer be deemed effective. 
If the Florida Attorney General pursuant to the rulemaking authority provided in F.S. ch. 893, adds a particular substance to the controlled substance schedules in F.S. § 893.01, then upon the effective date of such enactment or amendment, the provisions of this section addressed by the rulemaking action shall no longer be deemed effective. 
Any violations of this section committed prior to the Florida Legislature enacting such a statute or the Florida Attorney General promulgating rules may be prosecuted. 
(k)  Penalty. Any store owner, store manager, store purchasing agent or other person violating any provision of this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment not to exceed sixty (60) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment for each violation. This section shall also be subject to enforcement via the Local Government Code Enforcement Act of F.S. ch. 162, pursuant to Article XI "Community Standards and Code Enforcement" of Chapter 2 "Administration" of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 13-04, § 2, 11-7-12)  
Sec. 13-14. - Prohibiting the distribution, sale, offer for distribution or sale, purchase with intent to distribute or sell or public display for distribution or sale of synthetic stimulant bath salts, synthetic cathinones, synthetic amphetamines and other synthetic stimulants that mimic illegal drugs. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The city commission finds and declares that the products and synthetic substances described hereunder are commonly used as alternatives to amphetamines, cocaine, ecstasy and other illegal drugs. The city commission further finds that these synthetic substances are particularly appealing to youth, and that these synthetic substances are potentially dangerous to users in the short term and the long term effects are not yet known. The city commission finds that the products which contain these synthetic substances often use a disclaimer that the product is "not for human consumption" to avoid regulations that require the manufacturer to list the product's active ingredients. The city commission finds that drug designers and chemists can quickly create new synthetic drugs once federal or state law makes a particular synthetic drug illegal. As such, the city commission finds that there is a need to declare illegal the distribution, sale, offer for distribution or sale, purchase with intent to distribute or sell or public display for distribution or sale of synthetic substances that mimic illegal controlled substances, even though such synthetic substances have not yet themselves been categorized as illegal controlled substances under federal or state law. The city commission further finds that it is proper and necessary for the city commission to exercise its authority to safeguard and protect the public health, safety and welfare by taking this action. 
(b)  Application. This section shall be applicable within the city to the fullest extent allowed by law. 
(c)  Conflict. Any applicable Broward County ordinance governing this subject area that is more stringent than this section or that declares illegal a substance that is not declared illegal by this section shall remain enforceable within the city. 
(d)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms apply: 
(1)  "Structurally similar" as used in this section shall mean chemical substitutions off a common chemical backbone associated with cathinone, methcathinone, amphetamine, methamphetamine, cocaine, 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine ("MDMA"), 3,4-methylenedioxymethcathinone, 3,4-methylenedioxypyrovalerone (MDPV), methylmethcathinone, methoxymethcathinone, methylethcathinone, fluoromethcathinone, BZP (benzylpiperazine), fluorophenylpiperazine, methylphenylpiperazine, chlorophenylpiperazine, methoxyphenylpiperazine, DBZP (1,4-dibenzylpiperazine), TFMPP (3-Trifluoromethylphenylpiperazine), MBDB (Methylbenzodioxolylbutanamine), 5-Hydroxy-alpha-methyltryptamine, 5-Hydroxy-N-methyltryptamine, 5-Methoxy-N-methyl-N-isopropyltryptamine, 5-Methoxy-alpha-methyltryptamine, methyltryptamine, 5-Methoxy-N,N-dimethyltryptamine, 5-Methyl-N,N-dimethyltryptamine, Tyramine (4-Hydroxyphenethylamine), 5-Methoxy-N,N-Diisopropyltryptamine, DiPT (N,N-Diisopropyltryptamine), DPT (N,N-Dipropyltryptamine), 4-Hydroxy-N,N-diisopropyltryptamine, N,N-Diallyl-5-Methoxytryptamine, DOI (4-Iodo-2,5-dimethoxyamphetamine), DOC (4-Chloro-2,5-dimethoxyamphetamine), 2C-E (4-Ethyl-2,5-dimethoxyphenethylamine), 2C-T-4 (2,5-Dimethoxy-4-isopropylthiophenethylamine), 2C-C (4-Chloro-2,5-dimethoxyphenethylamine), 2C-T (2,5-Dimethoxy-4-methylthiophenethylamine), 2C-T-2 (2,5-Dimethoxy-4-ethylthiophenethylamine), 2C-T-7 (2,5-Dimethoxy-4-(n)-propylthiophenethylamine), 2C-I (4-Iodo-2,5-dimethoxyphenethylamine), Butylone (beta-keto-N-methylbenzodioxolylpropylamine), Ethcathinone, Ethylone (3,4-methylenedioxy-N-ethylcathinone), Naphyrone (naphthylpyrovalerone), N-N-Dimethyl-3,4-methylenedioxycathinone, N-N-Diethyl-3,4-methylenedioxycathinone, 3,4-methylenedioxy-propiophenone, 2-Bromo-3,4-Methylenedioxypropiophenone, 3,4-methylenedioxy-propiophenone-2-oxime, N-Acetyl-3,4-methylenedioxycathinone, N-Acetyl-N-Methyl-3,4-Methylenedioxycathinone, N-Acetyl-N-Ethyl-3,4-Methylenedioxycathinone, Bromomethcathinone, Buphedrone (alpha-methylamino-butyrophenone), Eutylone (beta-Keto-Ethylbenzodioxolylbutanamine), Dimethylcathinone, Dimethylmethcathinone, Pentylone (beta-Keto-Methylbenzodioxolylpentanamine), (MDPPP) 3,4-Methylenedioxy-alpha pyrrolidinopropiophenone, (MDPBP) 3,4-Methylenedioxy-alpha pyrrolidinobutiophenone, Methoxy-alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (MOPPP), Methyl-alpha-pyrrolidinohexiophenone (MPHP), Benocyclidine (BCP), benzothiophenylcyclohexylpiperidine (BTCP), Fluoromethylaminobutyrophenone (F-MABP), Methoxypyrrolidinobutyrophenone (MeO-PBP), Ethyl-pyrrolidinobutyrophenone (Et-PBP), 3-Methyl-4-Methoxymethcathinone (3-Me-4-MeO-MCAT), Methylethylaminobutyrophenone (Me-EABP), Methylamino-butyrophenone (MABP), Pyrrolidinopropiophenone (PPP), Pyrrolidinobutiophenone (PBP), Pyrrolidinovalerophenone (PVP), Methyl-alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (MPPP) or related salts, isomers, and salts of isomers, listed in the controlled substance schedules in F.S. ch. 893, as amended, or otherwise prohibited by federal or state law, as such may be amended from time to time. 
(2)  "Synthetic stimulant bath salts" as used in this section shall mean any substance, whether in powder, crystal, liquid, tablet or capsule form, containing a synthetic stimulant as defined herein or to which a synthetic stimulant has been added or applied, that can be ingested by smoking, inhaling or other method, regardless of whether the substance is marketed as not for the purpose of human consumption, and regardless of how the substance is labeled, including but not limited to bath salts, insect repellant, plant food, herbs, incense, iPod cleaner, nutrient, dietary supplement or spice. 
(3)  "Synthetic stimulant" as used in this section shall mean any chemical or mixture of chemicals, however packaged, that has a stimulant effect on the central nervous system and is structurally similar to cathinone, methcathinone, amphetamine, methamphetamine, cocaine, MDMA or any other substance listed in paragraph (1) above, or related salts, isomers, and salts of isomers, as listed in the controlled substance schedules in F.S. ch. 893, as amended, or otherwise prohibited by federal or state law. "Synthetic stimulant" shall also include any chemical or mixture of chemicals, however packaged, that mimics the pharmacological effects of cathinone, methcathinone, amphetamine, methamphetamine, cocaine, MDMA or any other substance listed in paragraph (1) above, or related salts, isomers, and salts of isomers. Packaging that indicates, suggests or implies that a product mimics the pharmacological effects of cathinone, methcathinone, amphetamine, methamphetamine, cocaine, ecstasy or any other substance listed in paragraph (1) above shall create a presumption that the product mimics the effects of the substance. "Synthetic stimulant" shall not include any substance currently listed in the controlled substance schedules in F.S. ch. 893, or otherwise prohibited by federal or state law, as such may be amended from time to time. 
(e)  Distribution, sale, offer for distribution or sale and purchase with intent to distribute or sell synthetic stimulant bath salts and synthetic stimulants prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any store owner, store manager, store purchasing agent or other person to distribute, sell, offer for distribution or sale or purchase with intent to distribute or sell any synthetic stimulant bath salts as defined herein or any synthetic stimulants as defined herein. 
(f)  Public display for distribution or sale of synthetic stimulant bath salts and synthetic stimulants prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any store owner, store manager, store purchasing agent or other person to publicly display for distribution or sale any synthetic stimulant bath salts as defined herein or any synthetic stimulants as defined herein. 
(g)  Affirmative defense. It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution of a violation of this section if the distribution, sale, offer for distribution or sale, purchase with intent to distribute or sell or public display for distribution or sale of synthetic stimulant bath salts as defined herein or synthetic stimulants as defined herein is pursuant to the direction or prescription of a licensed physician or dentist authorized in the State of Florida to direct or prescribe such act. 
(h)  Seizure and destruction of synthetic stimulant bath salts and synthetic stimulants. Synthetic stimulant bath salts and synthetic stimulants prohibited herein may be seized by law enforcement officers and may be destroyed in the same manner used to destroy narcotics and contraband substances, after its use for evidentiary purposes in any judicial proceeding is no longer required. 
(i)  Injunctive relief. The city shall have the authority to seek an injunction against any person or business violating the provisions of this section. In any action seeking an injunction, the city shall be entitled to collect its enforcement expenses, including forensic costs, law enforcement costs and reasonable attorney fees and costs incurred at the trial level and on appeal. 
(j)  Subsequent federal or state action. If Congress or a federal agency amends federal law to include a particular substance or otherwise enacts or amends a federal law providing for criminal penalties for the prohibitions of substances set forth in this section, then upon the effective date of such enactment or amendment, the provisions of this section addressed by federal law shall no longer be deemed effective. Any violations of this section committed prior to Congress or a federal agency enacting a federal law may be prosecuted. 
If the Florida Legislature amends the controlled substance schedules in F.S. § 893.01, to include a particular substance or otherwise enacts, or amends a state statute providing for criminal penalties for the prohibitions of substances set forth in this section, then upon the effective date of such enactment or amendment, the provisions of this section addressed by the state statute shall no longer be deemed effective. 
If the Florida Attorney General pursuant to the rulemaking authority provided in F.S. ch. 893, adds a particular substance to the controlled substance schedules in F.S. § 893.01, then upon the effective date of such enactment or amendment, the provisions of this section addressed by the rulemaking shall no longer be deemed effective. 
Any violations of this section committed prior to the Florida Legislature enacting such a statute or the Florida Attorney General promulgating rules may be prosecuted. 
(k)  Penalty. Any store owner, store manager, store purchasing agent or other person violating any provision of this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment not to exceed sixty (60) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment for each violation. This section shall also be subject to enforcement via the Local Government Code Enforcement Act of F.S. ch. 162, pursuant to Article XI "Community Standards and Code Enforcement" of Chapter 2 "Administration" of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 13-04, § 3, 11-7-12)  
Sec. 13-15. - Sale of nicotine vaporizers or liquid nicotine to minors prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definition shall apply: 
Liquid nicotine means any liquid product composed either in whole or in part of pure nicotine which can be used with nicotine vaporizers. 
Nicotine vaporizer means any electronic or battery-operated device that can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine or other substances and includes those composed of a mouthpiece, heating element, and battery or electronic circuits that provide a vapor of liquid nicotine and/or other substances to the user. This term shall include such devices whether they are manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, an e-cigarette, an e-cigar, e-cigarillo, an e-pipe an e-hookah or under any other product name. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give or furnish a nicotine vaporizer or liquid nicotine to a person under the age of eighteen (18) years old. The buyer or recipient's identification shall be examined to confirm that the buyer or recipient is at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(c)  In order to minimize the physical accessibility to minors, it shall be unlawful for any person to offer a nicotine vaporizer or liquid nicotine in vending machines. 
(d)  Any violation of this section shall be punishable under section 1-13, City Code. 
(Ord. No. 14-12, § 2, 4-16-14)  
Sec. 13-16. - Public consumption of marijuana. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke, ingest or consume marijuana, medical marijuana, cannabis, or Low-THC cannabis as defined in the land development code or Florida Statutes, in any form in any public building, public right-of-way, or public space within the City. 
(Ord. No. 15-06, § 2, 11-24-14; Ord. No. 18-05, § 6, 11-27-17)  
Chapter 14 - COMMUNITY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-08, §§ 1—6, adopted April 17, 2013, amended Ch. 14 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 14, §§ 14-1—14-4, 14-26—14-31, pertained to parks and recreation, and derived from Code 1964, § 15A-2; Ord. No. 92-16, § 2, adopted Dec. 4, 1991; Ord. No. 94-30, § 2, adopted April 6, 1994; Ord. No. 97-33, § 1, adopted May 21, 1997; Ord. No. 01-38, § 2, adopted June 20, 2001; Ord. No. 04-22, § 2, adopted Sept. 1, 2004. 
Cross reference— Policy for naming of municipal facilities and roads, § 2-1; parks, public works and recreation department, § 2-140; parks and recreational impact fee, § 2-226; local improvements special assessments procedure, § 2-266 et seq.; animals, Ch. 6; sanitary nuisances, § 10-26 et seq.; marine activities and ways, Ch. 12; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 20; swimming pool regulations, § 22-141 et seq.; planning and development, Ch. 22.5; zoning, Ch. 26. 
 
ARTICLE I. - PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 14-1. - City-operated parks and recreation centers. 
The following parks and recreation centers are operated by the city: 
• Ansin Sports Complex 
• Beauty Park 
• Beekman Park 
• Bernard Park 
• Civic Center/Miramar Aquatic Complex 
• Country Club Ranches 
• Country Lakes Park 
• Fairway Park 
• Flamingo Estates Park 
• Forcina Field 
• Forzano Park/Vicki Coceano Youth Center 
• Frankie Avalon Park 
• Huntington Entrance Park 
• Huntington Park North 
• Huntington Park South 
• Island Park 
• Lakeshore Park 
• Linear Park North/South 
• Miramar Athletic Park 
• Miramar Isles Park 
• Miramar Regional Park 
• Miramar/Silver Lakes Sports Complex 
• Miramar/Silver Lakes Tennis Complex 
• Miramar Youth Enrichment Center 
• Monarch Lakes Park 
• Perry Park/Wellman Field 
• Progress Park 
• River Run Park 
• Shirley Branca Park 
• Sheraton Park 
• Sawyer Park 
• Silver Shores Community Center/Park 
• Sunset Lakes Community Center/Park 
• Veteran's Memorial Park 
• Vizcaya Park 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 2, 4-17-13)  
Sec. 14-2. - Rules and regulations for city-operated parks and recreation centers. 
(1)  Facility specific rules and regulations. The city manager or designee shall develop an administrative procedure for rules and regulations regarding the hours and use of each city operated park and center. Such rules and regulations shall be incorporated herein by reference and made a specific part of this section. 
(2)  Signs. At least one (1) sign shall be posted in a conspicuous place in each park and center indicating the hours of operation and rules and regulations regarding the use of the park or facility. All city park and recreation center visitors shall comply with the posted rules and regulations. 
(3)  When a park and/or recreation center is closed, no persons shall congregate or loiter upon the premises, except pursuant to a special event permit issued by the community services department. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 2, 4-17-13)  
Sec. 14-3. - Prohibited activities in city parks and recreation centers. 
(1)  No person shall in any manner deface, destroy and/or vandalize public property within a park site and/or city facility. 
(2)  A violation of this section shall result in the imposition of a fine in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days or both. In addition, any persons found guilty of this section shall remit to the city the cost of repairing any public property destroyed or vandalized, together with costs and attorney fees incurred 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 2, 4-17-13)  
Sec. 14-4. - Permit requirements. 
(1)  Except as provided in this section, all city parks and recreation centers may be used by members of the general public, without a permit, for recreational purposes consistent with the rules and nature of the public park, the safety of the public and of public park property, the City Code and the Comprehensive Plan. 
(2)  Permits are required for certain activities so that park personnel can limit or eliminate activities that would tend to damage the park, or that are likely to create an atmosphere which would discourage use of the park for its intended purpose, or which, if not limited, would allow monopolizing of a park or some facilities in a park by one group to the exclusion of other groups or individuals. A permit application form shall be completed by the applicant and subject to approval by appropriate city officials prior to the issuance of any permit referred to by this article. 
(3)  Permits are required for the following activities at city parks and recreation centers: 
(a)  Use of picnic pavilions; 
(b)  Use of private cooking and fire-igniting equipment; 
(c)  Use of community buildings; 
(d)  Use of baseball, cricket, football, soccer or softball fields; 
(e)  Use of a track and field facility; 
(f)  Any event, meeting, activity, gathering, or group of persons, having a common purpose, design or goal upon any public facility, public right-of-way or public park that is attended by or anticipated to be attended by fifty (50) or more persons; 
(g)  Use of any electrical or electronic device or equipment that would require outdoor auxiliary power; 
(h)  Use or display of movies, TV or commercial photography; 
(i)  Any exhibit, music or dramatic performance, fair, concert, play, radio or television broadcast, other than a news transmission, in such a manner that interferes with the use and enjoyment by another Person; 
(j)  Erection of a tent, canopy, stand, bandstand, stage or other temporary structure; 
(k)  The consumption or sale of alcoholic beverages; 
(l)  Any other activity, not sponsored by the city, substantially similar to those listed in paragraphs (3)(a) through (j) that is reasonably anticipated to obstruct or prevent the general public from using a park in whole or in part; and 
(m)  Instructional classes and programs. 
(4)  No person shall conduct or proceed with any activity requiring a permit under subsection (3), except in accordance with a valid permit issued by the community services department. 
(5)  No person in any city park or recreation center shall refuse or fail to produce and exhibit any permit such person claims to have upon the request of any law enforcement officer or other authorized park employee who wishes to inspect the permit for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(6)  In addition to obtaining a permit for activities set forth in subsection (3) above, the city may require an applicant to enter into an agreement with the city prior to conducting the specified activities in city parks or recreation centers. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 2, 4-17-13)  
Sec. 14-5. - Permit conditions. 
The following rules and conditions shall apply to permits issued pursuant to this article: 
(1)  Permits are issued on a first come, first served basis. 
(2)  Permits are nontransferable, and are good only on the date(s) specified on the permit. 
(3)  The permittee shall be held responsible for the conduct of the entire group and any invitees of the group. 
(4)  The permittee shall observe, obey and comply with the rules and regulations established by this article, as well as all applicable city, county, state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(5)  The permittee shall assume all risk in the use of the facility and shall be solely responsible and answerable in damages for all accidents and injury to person or property related to such use. 
(6)  A security deposit may be required for certain activities when the permit is granted. The security deposit will be returned upon inspection by park personnel verifying that the facility has not been damaged and has been properly cleaned up. 
(7)  Special conditions related to the various types of facilities are printed on the permit forms. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 2, 4-17-13)  
Sec. 14-6. - Alcoholic beverages. 
The following requirements shall apply to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages within city-operated parks and recreation centers: 
(1)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold by persons operating under a concession from the city, subject to the regulation and control of the parks and recreation department director in accordance with applicable law. Sale shall be by the individual drink only and individual drinks sold by the concession may be consumed only upon the premises of the park or recreation center in which such concession is located. Sale of beer and wine in unopened containers or glass bottles is prohibited. 
(2)  In addition to the authorized consumption of alcoholic beverages sold by a concession pursuant to subsection (1) above, alcoholic beverages may be consumed at authorized functions in city parks and recreation centers which occur in connection with the rental of such premises, provided that the proposed provision and consumption of alcoholic beverages is disclosed and approved by the city pursuant an agreement with the city, or a temporary use permit approval pursuant to Section 505 of the City's Land Development Code, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 13-09, § 3, 5-15-13)  
Sec. 14-7. - Pet restrictions in city parks and recreation centers. 
No animals or pets of any kind are permitted in city parks and recreation centers, except: 
(1)  In areas specifically designated for pet use by the posting of a sign; 
(2)  Service animals in a working capacity used by a person with a disability in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (a companion or therapeutic animal is not a service animal); or 
(3)  Upon prior written approval of the community services director. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 2, 4-17-13)  
Sec. 14-8. - Commercial photography restrictions in city parks and recreation centers. 
The use of city parks and recreation centers for movies, television or commercial photography shall comply with the City Code, shall require prior written approval from the city and shall be subject to prior payment of the applicable fees to the city. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 2, 4-17-13)  
Sec. 14-9. - Private non-profit youth serving sports organizations. 
The city commission may establish, by resolution, policies and procedures for city sponsorship of private non-profit youth serving sports organizations, and use of parks and recreation centers by private non-profit youth serving sports organizations. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 2, 4-17-13)  
Sec. 14-10. - Penalties and enforcement. 
Any person who violates the provisions of this article may be removed from the premises of the park and/or recreation center and/or be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation of this chapter. In addition, any person who violates this article shall remit to the city the cost of repairing any public property destroyed, removed or vandalized, together with costs and attorney fees incurred in the enforcement of this article.  
ARTICLE II. - PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD 
 
Sec. 14-20. - Created. 
There is hereby created and established in the city a parks and recreation advisory board. The principal function of this advisory board is to advise and make recommendations to the city commission on matters concerning recreational, athletic and special event activities. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 2, 4-17-13)  
Sec. 14-21. - Duties generally. 
The parks and recreation advisory board shall have the responsibility to: 
(1)  Stimulate greater public awareness and appreciation of the importance of recreation, athletics and special events in the city; 
(2)  Encourage and facilitate opportunities for city residents to participate in recreational, athletic and special event activities; 
(3)  Promote the development of community and civic organizations sponsoring recreational, athletic and special event activities; 
(4)  Encourage greater and more efficient use of public and private resources for development and support of recreational, athletic and special event activities; 
(5)  Survey and assess the needs of recreational, athletic and special event programs; 
(6)  Provide recommendations relative to park development programs. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 2, 4-17-13)  
Sec. 14-22. - Membership; term of office; vacancies; officers. 
(1)  Board members. The parks and recreation advisory board shall consist of eleven (11) regular members. Each city commissioner and the mayor shall have two (2) appointees. In the event that one (1) or more commission seats are vacant, board appointments that would normally be made by commissioners filling these vacant seats may be made by a majority vote of the remaining commissioners. Any board member so appointed shall serve until replaced by the commissioner(s) filling the vacant seat(s). The eleventh regular member shall be appointed on an at-large basis by the city commission by majority vote. In appointing members to the board the following guidelines should be considered: 
(a)  Expressed interest in recreation, athletics and special events and a commitment to those values. 
(b)  Evidence of a commitment to serve on the board and act in the best interests on behalf of the citizens of Miramar. 
(c)  Good judgment and the ability to inspire and work well with others. 
(d)  Availability to attend meetings, workshops and other special functions. 
(2)  Length of term. All board members shall serve at the will and pleasure of the member of the commission who appointed them. The term of each appointee shall expire with the term of the commission member by whom they were appointed or at the will and pleasure of the appointing commissioner. At-large appointees will serve at the will and pleasure of the city commission. Provided, however, that the terms of all at-large appointees shall expire four (4) years after appointment or when the commission so desires, whichever is sooner. 
(3)  Vacancies. Vacancies in the membership of the parks and recreation advisory board shall be filled by the city commission, in the manner provided by law, for the unexpired term of the member affected. It shall be the duty of the chairperson of the parks and recreation advisory board to notify the city manager within ten (10) days after the vacancy occurs for appropriate action as set out herein. 
(4)  Officers. The members of the advisory board shall select a member to serve as chairperson of the board and a member to serve as vice-chairperson during the board's meeting in April of each year. The vice-chairperson shall perform the duties of the chairperson in the chairperson's absence. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 2, 4-17-13)  
Sec. 14-23. - By-laws. 
The by-laws of the parks and recreation advisory board set forth the purpose, duties and rules and regulations pertaining to the board's organization and operation. Members of the board shall comply with the bylaws. Amendments to the bylaws may only be effective upon approval, by resolution, of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 2, 4-17-13)  
Sec. 14-24. - No compensation. 
Members of the parks and recreation advisory board shall serve without compensation, except that they may be reimbursed, subject to prior approval by the city commission, for expenses incurred during the performance of their duties pursuant to Chapter 112, Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 2, 4-17-13)  
Sec. 14-25. - Members required to vote; conflicts of interest as grounds for disqualification. 
(a)  All members of the parks and recreation advisory board shall be required to vote on matters coming before the board, subject to the provisions of F.S. § 286.012. 
(b)  No member of the parks and recreation advisory board shall appear before the city commission, advisory planning board or parks and recreation advisory board as an agent or attorney for any other person or special interest group. Any member that violates this section shall be removed from the parks and recreation advisory board and shall be disqualified from future service on the board for a minimum period of two (2) years. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 2, 4-17-13)  
Sec. 14-26. - Quorum; voting requirements. 
(1)  Quorum. A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of a majority of currently appointed members. 
(2)  Voting. Each item or motion before the parks and recreation advisory board shall require the affirmative vote of at least a majority of the currently appointed board members present and constituting the quorum at a meeting. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 2, 4-17-13)  
Sec. 14-27. - Wall of honor; recommendations; requirements. 
(1)  Application review. The parks and recreation advisory board shall review applications submitted to the parks and recreation department for inclusion of individuals who have made significant contributions to society on Miramar's Wall of Honor located at Beauty Park and Progress Park. 
(2)  Recommendation to city commission. The parks and recreation advisory board may recommend to the city commission those applications that meet the requirements of this section for inclusion of the proposed individual on the Wall of Honor. 
(3)  City commission approval required. Individuals shall not be included on the Wall of Honor unless such inclusion is approved by a majority vote of the city commission at a public meeting. 
(4)  Recommendation requirements. In order to be considered for inclusion on the Wall of Honor, the individual must meet one of the following requirements: 
(a)  The individual made a significant contribution to the City of Miramar. Contributions may include significant volunteer service to the city in any area of city operations (i.e., volunteering in any organization that directly benefits the city, such as a civic group, sports groups, school activities, or any operation within the city government). The volunteer hours may be accrued over a period of years or may be limited in scope to one specific time frame and/or one project. The significance of the volunteering must include a recognizable contribution to the city, including contributions by city employees, elected officials, businesses or individuals; 
(b)  The individual made a significant contribution to another United States governmental entity. Contributions made by Miramar residents, either current or past, that benefit other governmental entities may also be eligible. This contribution may consist of volunteering in any organization that directly benefits a government entity, such as a civic group, sports groups, school activities, or any operation within the United States government. The volunteer hours may be accrued over a period of years or may be limited in scope to one specific time frame and/or one project. Nominees may include contributions by government employees who go beyond their job requirements, elected officials, businesses or individuals. 
(c)  The individual received a significant honor or award for his/her contribution(s). This award or honor must be made by an officially recognized body; or 
(d)  The individual made a significant contribution to society. This contribution must be nationally or locally recognized. 
(5)  Areas of contribution. The following areas of contribution shall be considered by the parks and recreation advisory board when determining whether a Wall of Honor application shall be submitted to the city commission for consideration: 
(a)  Academic. Academic excellence or significant contributions to either the education of children or adults. These areas must be officially recognized. The academic activities should be within the City of Miramar; however, activities outside of the city may be considered if the contribution has far reaching effects. 
(b)  Civic. Any area of civic contribution, except activities which are political in nature. The civic activities should be within the City of Miramar; however, activities outside of the city may be considered if the contribution has far reaching effects. 
(c)  Social. Any area of contribution benefiting the health and welfare or social well-being of the community. The social activities should be within the City of Miramar; however, activities outside of the city may be considered if the contribution has far reaching effects. 
(d)  Cultural. In the area of cultural contributions and the arts and humanities. The cultural activities should be within the City of Miramar; however, activities outside of the city may be considered if the contribution has far reaching effects. 
(e)  Athletic. Any area of athletic contribution, either as an athlete or supporter of athletic activities. The athletic activities should be within the City of Miramar; however, activities outside of the city may be considered if the contribution has far reaching effects. 
(f)  Environmental. Any area of environmental contribution which promotes the local or global environment. The environmental activities should be within the City of Miramar; however, activities outside of the city may be considered if the contribution has far reaching effects. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 2, 4-17-13)  
Secs. 14-28, 14-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CULTURAL AFFAIRS DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 14-30. - Cultural affairs department; purpose. 
The cultural affairs department is hereby established to engage, educate and celebrate cultural diversity through programming at the Miramar Cultural Center ArtsPark that brings the community together and enlist citizens from every walk of life to promote the center and to develop opportunities that strategically enlist the Miramar Cultural Center ArtsPark facility in various vitalization and economic development initiatives that promote the city and its assets. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 3, 4-17-13)  
Secs. 14-31—14-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CULTURAL CENTER ARTSPARK ADVISORY BOARD 
 
Sec. 14-40. - Creation. 
The Cultural Center ArtsPark Advisory Board is hereby created and established. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 4, 4-17-13)  
Sec. 14-41. - Purpose. 
The Cultural Center ArtsPark Advisory Board shall act in an advisory capacity to the city commission in matters relating to the Cultural Center/ArtsPark at the Town Center Complex ("ArtsPark"). The actions, decisions and recommendations of the board are advisory only and shall not be final or binding on the city commission. The board shall provide recommendations to city staff regarding cultural arts programming at ArtsPark and shall act as a liaison between the city commission and the community for the effective utilization of ArtsPark. The duties and purpose of the board include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Assist and advise the city commission in an effort to address the arts and cultural needs of the city; 
(2)  Recommend events and programming at ArtsPark in furtherance of the goals and plans; 
(3)  Assist in ensuring that the events and programming at ArtsPark address the needs of the community; 
(4)  Assist in the development of cooperative opportunities with community organizations for the benefit of ArtsPark; and 
(5)  Provide recommendations regarding proposed facility modifications and overall programming at ArtsPark, marketing programs, resident producing organizations and needed facility improvements. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 4, 4-17-13)  
Sec. 14-42. - Composition. 
The Cultural Center ArtsPark Advisory Board shall consist of six (6) members. Five (5) of the members shall be appointed by the city commission in accordance with section 2-54 of the City Code. In the event that one (1) or more commission seats are vacant, board appointments that would normally be made by commissioners filling these vacant seats may be made by a majority vote of the remaining commissioners. Any board member so appointed shall serve until replaced by the commissioner(s) filling the vacant seat(s). Notwithstanding the provisions of section 2-54(c), the additional member shall include an ex-officio non-voting representative from either Broward County's Cultural Division or the Broward County Cultural Council. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 4, 4-17-13)  
Sec. 14-43. - Membership. 
(a)  Residency. The five (5) voting members of the Cultural Center/ArtsPark Advisory Board shall be residents of the city and shall have demonstrated interest and experience in arts and cultural activities. 
(b)  Term of members. The length of service of the five voting board members shall be in accordance with section 2-54 of the City Code. 
(c)  Officers. The members of the board shall elect a chairperson and vice chairperson annually in April. 
(d)  Attendance of members. Board members shall be governed by the attendance requirements proscribed pursuant to section 2-51 of the City Code. 
(e)  Recommendation. Board members shall not recommend their own personal artistic creation or cultural exhibit for display or performance. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 4, 4-17-13)  
Sec. 14-44. - Assistance to the board. 
The city clerk or designee shall serve as clerk to the board and shall be responsible for providing the items necessary for conducting meetings and for recording and preparation of the minutes of the meetings. The city attorney or designee shall serve as the attorney for the board. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 4, 4-17-13)  
Sec. 14-45. - Quorum; voting. 
A majority of the currently appointed voting members of the Cultural Center ArtsPark Advisory Board shall constitute a quorum. A majority plus one of the currently appointed voting members present at a meeting is empowered to exercise all the rights and perform all the duties of the board, and no vacancy on the board shall impair the right of the quorum to act.  
Sec. 14-46. - Limitations. 
The board shall not have the power to contract with any person or entity, or pledge any revenues or monies appropriated to it by the mayor and city commission as collateral. The board shall not have budgetary powers of city funds. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 4, 4-17-13)  
Sec. 14-47. - Meetings, committees. 
The Cultural Center ArtsPark Advisory Board shall attempt to hold at least one (1) meeting every month, and may hold such other meetings as it deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 4, 4-17-13)  
Sec. 14-48. - Funding. 
The city commission shall appropriate funds at its discretion to the board for expenses necessary in the conduct of its work. The board, upon the approval of the city commission, may accept grants or other monetary and physical assistance to aid in its work. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 4, 4-17-13)  
Sec. 14-49. - Compensation. 
The members of the board shall serve without compensation for the performance of their duties in office, except that they may be reimbursed, subject to prior approval by the city commission, pursuant to Chapter 112, Florida Statutes, for expenses incurred during the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 4, 4-17-13)  
Sec. 14-50. - Bylaws. 
The bylaws of the Cultural Center ArtsPark Advisory Board set forth additional rules and regulations pertaining to the board's organization and operation. Members of the board shall comply with the bylaws. Amendments to the bylaws may only be effective upon approval, by resolution, of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 4, 4-17-13)  
Secs. 14-51—14-54. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SOCIAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 14-55. - Social Services Department; purpose. 
(1)  The Social Services Department is hereby established for the development of comprehensive human services policies and plans; to act as coordinator and advocate for social needs and concerns of the city's population; and for the administration, coordination, planning and operation of city programs and functions relating to human problems and needs, including without limitation children, those person who are aged, disabled, unemployed and underemployed, homeless, low-income, have special needs or are otherwise disadvantaged. 
(2)  The mission of the Social Services Department is to improve and enhance the quality of life for individuals of all ages by providing comprehensive social service programming and support. 
(3)  The department seeks to enhance the quality of life and promote self-reliance, growth and development of city citizens and residents. The department shall strive to provide resources and services to remove barriers to meeting fundamental human needs and to improve public policies. 
(4)  This section shall not be construed to create, establish or designate any particular individual class or group of persons who will and should be especially protected or benefited or entitled to any benefits or services. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 5, 4-17-13)  
Sec. 14-56. - Application for services. 
Any person interested in participating in any of the Social Services Department's programs shall submit an application to the Social Services Department. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 5, 4-17-13)  
Secs. 14-57—14-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - EDUCATION ADVISORY BOARD 
 
Sec. 14-60. - Creation. 
The education advisory board is hereby created and established. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 6, 4-17-13)  
Sec. 14-61. - Purpose. 
The education advisory board shall act in an advisory capacity to the city commission in matters relating to educational issues that will impact the quality of education for the residents, or will impact educational facilities located within the city. The actions, decisions and recommendations of the board shall not be final or binding on the city commission, but shall be advisory only. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 6, 4-17-13)  
Sec. 14-62. - Composition. 
The education advisory board shall consist of nine (9) members as follows: 
Three (3) members from the Everglades High School Innovation Zone and three (3) members from the Miramar High School Innovation Zone, each Innovation Zone member must be a member of either the PTA or the School Advisory Forum; 
One (1) from a private or charter school in Miramar; 
One (1) from a college or university; and 
One (1) from the business community in Miramar. 
All appointments shall be "at large." 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 6, 4-17-13)  
Sec. 14-63. - Membership. 
(1)  Residency. Residency shall not be required, but each member shall demonstrate a particular interest in the City of Miramar educational issues. 
(2)  Term of members. The length of service of the voting board members shall be in accordance with section 2-54 of the City Code. 
(3)  Officers. The members of the board shall elect a chairperson and vice chairperson annually in April. 
(4)  Attendance of members. Board members shall be governed by the attendance requirements proscribed pursuant to section 2-51 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 6, 4-17-13)  
Sec. 14-64. - By-laws. 
The by-laws of the education advisory board set forth the purpose, duties and rules and regulations pertaining to the board's organization and operation. Members of the board shall comply with the bylaws. Amendments to the bylaws shall only take effect upon approval, by resolution, of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 6, 4-17-13)  
Sec. 14-65. - Compensation. 
Members of the education advisory board shall serve without compensation for the performance of their duties in office, except that they may be reimbursed, subject to prior approval by the city commission, pursuant to Chapter 112, Florida Statutes, for expenses incurred during the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 6, 4-17-13)  
Sec. 14-66. - Quorum; voting. 
(1)  Quorum. A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of a majority of currently appointed members. 
(2)  Voting. Each item or motion before the education advisory board shall require the affirmative vote of at least a majority of the currently appointed board members present and constituting the quorum at a meeting. 
(Ord. No. 13-08, § 6, 4-17-13)  
Chapter 15 - PENSIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; fire department, § 9-26 et seq.; police, Ch. 17. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 15-1—15-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SOCIAL SECURITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Officers, employees, divisions and departments, § 2-106 et seq. 
 
Sec. 15-26. - Participation by city officers and employees. 
It shall be the policy and purpose of the city to extend effective as of January 1, 1958, to the employees and officials thereof, not excluded by law, nor excepted herein, the benefits of the system of Old Age and Survivors' Insurance as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act and amendments thereto, and by F.S. ch. 650, and to cover by such plan all services which constitute employment as defined in F.S. § 650.02, performed in the employ of the city by employees and officials thereof. 
(Code 1964, § 19-1)  
Sec. 15-27. - Exclusion of persons subject to other retirement systems. 
There is hereby excluded from this article any authority to include in any agreement entered into under this article any service, position, employee or official now covered by or eligible to be covered by an existing retirement system. 
(Code 1964, § 19-2)  
Sec. 15-28. - Withholding from salaries. 
Withholdings from salaries, wages, or other compensation of employees and officials for the purpose provided in section 15-26 are hereby authorized to be made, and shall be made, in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the state agency designated by such laws or regulations to receive such amounts. 
(Code 1964, § 19-4)  
Sec. 15-29. - City contributions. 
There shall be appropriated from available funds, derived from the general fund of the city, such amounts, at such times as may be required to pay promptly the contributions and assessments required of the city as employed by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, which shall be paid over to the lawfully designated state agency at the times and in the manner provided by law and regulation. 
(Code 1964, § 19-5)  
Sec. 15-30. - Records and reports. 
The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall adhere to the regulations of the state agency. 
(Code 1964, § 19-6)  
Sec. 15-31. - Adoption of terms of federal act. 
The city does hereby adopt the terms, conditions, requirements, reservations, benefits, privileges, and other conditions thereunto appertaining, of Title II of the Social Security Act as amended, for and on behalf of all officers and employees of its departments and agencies to be covered under the agreement. 
(Code 1964, § 19-7)  
Sec. 15-32. - Custodian of funds and records. 
The director of support services is hereby designated the custodian of all sums withheld from the compensation of officers and employees and the appropriated funds for the contribution of the city, and the director of support services is hereby made the withholding and reporting agent and charged with the duty of maintaining personnel records for the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 19-8)  
Secs. 15-33—15-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIREFIGHTERS' PENSION PLAN AND TRUST FUND[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-47, § 1, adopted Sept. 20, 2000, repealed former Art. III, which pertained to the Firefighters' Pension Plan and Trust Fund. Section 2 of said ordinance enacted provisions designated as a new Art. III to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Fire department, § 9-26 et seq.; tax levy on property insurance businesses, § 19-27. 
State Law reference— Municipal firefighters pension trust funds, F.S. ch. 175. 
 
Sec. 15-76. - Retirement plan established; name; operative date. 
(a)  A retirement plan is hereby established and placed under the exclusive administration and management of a board of trustees for the purpose of providing retirement benefits pursuant to the provisions of this article and for defraying the reasonable expenses of the retirement plan. 
(b)  The retirement plan established by this article shall be known as the City of Miramar Firefighters Retirement Plan. 
(c)  The retirement plan shall have an effective date of October 1, 1999. 
(Ord. No. 00-47, § 2, 9-20-00)  
Sec. 15-77. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases as used in this article shall have the following meanings: 
Accumulated contributions shall mean the sum of all amounts deducted from a member's compensation or picked up on behalf of a member, together with regular interest. 
Active membership shall mean membership in the retirement plan as an employee. 
Actuarial equivalent shall mean a benefit having the same present value as the benefit it replaces. 
And shall have a conjunctive meaning. 
Beneficiary shall mean any natural person, other than a retired member, receiving a retirement allowance or other benefit from the retirement plan. A retired member shall be referred to as a retiree. A member's trust, which is a trust beneficiary as described below, may only be a beneficiary of the DROP and Share Account. 
Benefit shall mean a retirement allowance or other payment provided by the retirement plan. 
Board or board of trustees shall mean the board of trustees of the retirement plan. 
City shall mean the City of Miramar, Florida. 
Credited service shall mean membership credit upon which a member's eligibility to receive benefits under the retirement plan is based or upon which the amount of such benefits is to be determined. 
Disability shall mean the permanent and total incapacity to perform regular and continuous duties as a firefighter for the City of Miramar. The term regular and continuous as used in this definition shall not require that a firefighter be able to perform all of the duties set forth in the job description, but shall mean the ability to perform work within the classification of firefighter for which a position has been made available by the city, consistent with the physical or mental health of the member. 
Early service retirement shall mean a member's withdrawal from service under circumstances permitting the payment of a retirement benefit before such member is eligible for normal service retirement. 
Earnable compensation shall mean a member's fixed monthly compensation, including pick-up contributions for all straight time hours worked. Earnable compensation shall also include the following: incentive pay received by employees assigned to a permanent, non-shift, forty (40) work hour week position; dive team assignment pay; fire inspector assignment pay; pay to an employee assigned to work in any capacity not regularly part of the unit member's position (i.e. Public information officer or any position which is not a promotion); pay received by employees as rescue pay; pay received by employees assigned to the fire life safety bureau and effective for payments made after 12/31/08, as provided for by Internal Revenue Code § 414(u)(7), this definition of compensation shall include any differential wage payment from the employer to a member as a result of the member's absence from employment while serving in qualified military service. Compensation in excess of the limitation set forthin Section 401(a)(17) of the Internal Revenue Code shall be disregarded. The limitation on compensation for eligible employees shall be not less than the amount which was allowed to be taken into account under the plan in effect on July 1, 1993. For this purpose, an eligible employee is an individual who was a member of the retirement system before September 30, 1996. 
Employee shall mean a firefighter presently employed by the city. A firefighter who is reclassified, due to disability; as a city employee outside of the fire service shall have membership rights in the retirement plan applicable to that new class of employees. 
Final monthly compensation shall mean a member's average monthly rate of earnable compensation from the city during the three (3) consecutive years of employment which is greater than the total of any other three (3) consecutive years; provided that if a member has been employed for fewer than three (3) years, such average shall be taken over the period of actual employment. 
Firefighter shall mean any person for whom contributions to the retirement plan as required by this article who is certified as a firefighter as a condition of employment in accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 633.35, and whose duty it is to extinguish fires, to protect life and to protect property. The term "firefighter" includes all certified, supervisory, and command personnel whose duties include, in whole or in part, the supervision, training, guidance, and management responsibilities of full-time firefighters, part-time firefighters, or auxiliary firefighters but does not include part-time firefighters or auxiliary firefighters. 
Fund shall mean the City of Miramar Firefighters Retirement Fund. 
May shall mean a permissive term. 
Member shall mean a firefighter actively employed by the city for whom contributions to the retirement plan are made as required by this ordinance , but the fire chief may elect not to participate in the system by submitting written notice to the board of trustees. 
Option shall mean one (1) of several choices available to members with respect to the manner in which a retirement allowance may be paid. 
Pension shall mean a series of periodic payments, usually for life with ten (10) years of pension benefits guaranteed (or an optional form of payout), payable in monthly installments. 
Pick-up amounts shall mean employer contributions derived from a member's earnable compensation through a reduction in the member's earnable compensation. 
Plan year shall mean the period from October 1 through September 30 of the following year. 
Retirement shall mean a member's withdrawal from active membership with a retirement benefit granted to the member pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
Retirement allowance shall mean a pension provided by the retirement plan. 
Retirement plan shall mean the City of Miramar Firefighter's Retirement Plan. 
Service shall mean active service as an employee. 
Service retirement shall mean a member's retirement from active service under circumstances permitting payment of a retirement allowance without reduction because of age or length of service and without special qualifications such as disability. Service retirement shall be considered normal retirement. 
Trust beneficiary shall mean a trust that is properly named as a beneficiary by a member under the retirement plan. The trust beneficiary may only be a beneficiary of the DROP and Share Account. 
Trustee shall mean a member of the board of trustees of the retirement plan. 
Vested benefit shall mean an immediate or deferred benefit to which a member has gained a non-forfeitable right under the provisions of this article. 
Minimum vesting shall mean ten (10) years of credited service before the member is entitled to retirement benefits except for service-incurred disability retirement income or service incurred death benefits. 
(Ord. No. 00-47, § 2, 9-20-00; Ord. No. 04-23, § 2, 9-1-04; Ord. No. 10-05, § 2, 2-17-10; Ord. No. 19-11 , § 1, 1-16-19)  
Sec. 15-78. - Administration of the retirement plan. 
(a)  The sole and exclusive administration of, and the responsibility for, the proper effective operation of the retirement plan and for making the provisions of this article is vested in a board of trustees. 
(b)  The board of trustees shall consist of five (5) persons; two (2) of whom shall be legal residents of the City of Miramar and who shall be appointed by the city commission. Two (2) members of the board of trustees shall be firefighters elected by a majority of the firefighters who are active members of the plan. A fifth member of the board shall be chosen by a majority of the other four (4) trustees, and such person's name shall be submitted to the city commission for appointment. The city commission shall appoint the fifth member selected by the other four (4) trustees as a ministerial duty. 
(c)  Effective for elections and appointments occurring after the effective date of this article, all trustees shall serve a term of four (4) years. If a vacancy shall occur prior to the expiration of a member's term, a replacement member shall be chosen in the same manner as the person who has left office. A replacement trustee shall serve a full term measured from the date of replacement. All trustees shall serve until their replacements are selected. 
(d)  The board of trustees shall prescribe a uniform election procedure for the selection of the active member trustees. 
(e)  All trustees shall serve without compensation, but they shall be reimbursed from the fund for all necessary expenses authorized by the board, including, but not limited to reimbursement for leave time used for educational conferences approved by the board. The board shall be permitted to prescribe uniform rules for reimbursement for travel expenditures. The trustees shall not receive any compensation as such, but may receive expenses and per diem as provided by Florida law. 
(f)  The board of trustees shall select by majority vote a chair and secretary who shall execute all documents on behalf of the board. 
(g)  A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business and shall have full power to act under the terms of the plan. Three (3) concurring votes shall be required of the board to take action. 
(h)  The board shall keep minutes of all meetings and a record of any action taken by the board shall be kept in written form and maintained by the board. 
(i)  The board of trustees shall have the authority to make such uniform rules and regulations and to take such action as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of the plan and all decisions of the board of trustees, made in good faith, shall be final, binding and conclusive on all parties. 
(j)  The board of trustees shall be deemed the named fiduciary of the plan and shall discharge its responsibilities solely in the interest of the members and beneficiaries of the plan for the exclusive purpose of providing benefits to the members and their beneficiaries and to defray the reasonable expenses of the plan. The trustees shall exercise those fiduciary responsibilities with the care, skill, prudence and diligence under the circumstances then prevailing that a prudent person acting in a like capacity and familiar with such matters would use in the conduct of an enterprise of a similar character and with similar aims. 
(k)  The board of trustees shall have the following administrative duties: 
(1)  To maintain such records as are necessary for calculating and distributing retirement benefits: 
(2)  To maintain such records as are necessary for financial accounting and reporting of retirement plan funds; 
(3)  To maintain such records as are necessary for actuarial evaluation of the retirement plan, including investigations into the mortality, service and compensation experience of its members and beneficiaries; 
(4)  To compile such other administrative or investment information as is necessary for the management of the retirement plan; 
(5)  To process, certify and/or respond to all correspondence, bills and statements received by the retirement plan, as well as all applications submitted to the board for retirement benefits; 
(6)  To establish and maintain communication with city departments and other agencies of government as is necessary for the management of the retirement plan, including preparing, filing and distributing such reports and information as are required by law to be prepared, filed or distributed on behalf of the retirement plan; 
(7)  To determine all questions relating to and process all applications for eligibility, participation and benefits; 
(8)  To distribute at regular intervals to employees, a comprehensive summary plan description and periodic reports regarding the financial and actuarial status of the plan; 
(9)  To retain and compensate such professional and technical experience as is necessary to fulfill its fiduciary responsibilities; 
(10)  To make recommendations regarding changes in the provisions of the plan; 
(11)  To assure the prompt deposit of all member contributions, city contributions, Chapter 175 monies, and investment earnings; 
(12)  To establish a uniform set of rules and regulations for the management of the trust; 
(13)  To take such other action as the trustees shall deem, in their sole and exclusive discretion, as being necessary for the efficient management of the plan. 
(l)  The board shall have the authority to retain its own legal counsel, accountants, actuaries and other professional advisors to assist the board in the performance of its duties. The board may act without independent investigation upon the professional advice of the advisors so retained. 
(m)  The board is authorized to prosecute or defend actions, claims or proceedings of any nature or kind for the protection of the fund assets or for the protection of the board in the performance of its duties. 
(n)  Neither the board nor any of its individual members shall have any personal liability for any action taken in good faith. The trustees individually and the board as a whole shall be entitled to the protections in F.S. § 768.28. The trustees shall also be authorized to purchase from the assets of the fund, errors and omission insurance to protect the trustees in the performance of their duties. Such insurance shall not provide protection against a trustee's fraud, intentional misrepresentation, willful misconduct or gross negligence. 
(o)  No trustee shall be responsible at his or her own expense, to take legal action to correct the misconduct of any other member of the board of trustees. A trustee shall have an affirmative obligation, however, to publicly reveal any misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance by a co-trustee, and upon making such revelation in a public meeting, shall be relieved further individual responsibility of the actions of that co-trustee. 
(p)  The board shall have the authority to provide for a pre-entry physical exam to determine the existence of pre-existing conditions. The medical provider performing the examination shall retain the records of the exam until such time as the member shall apply for a disability retirement. No medical condition revealed in the pre-entry physical shall be grounds for denying membership in the plan provided, however, that any condition of health determined to exist at the time of entry into the plan may not be the source of a service-connected disability retirement. In the event that the pre-entry physical exam shall reveal a medical condition which, in the opinion of the medical provider, warrants immediate medical attention, the medical provider shall be authorized to communicate directly with the member to advise as to the existence of the condition and to recommend a course of treatment. 
(Ord. No. 00-47, § 2, 9-20-00; Ord. No. 04-23, § 3, 9-1-04; Ord. No. 10-05, § 3, 2-17-10)  
Sec. 15-79. - Contributions. 
(a)  The city shall pick-up, rather than deduct from each member's pay, beginning with the date of employment, eight (8) percent of the member's earnable compensation. Beginning the first full payroll period after October 1, 2004, the city shall pick-up, rather than deduct from each member's pay, an amount which is determined by the fund's actuary to be the member's contribution. This rate of contribution shall be equal to eight and forty-seven one hundredths (8.47) percent of a member's earnable compensation plus any additional amount necessary to continue to render the cost of the deferred retirement option plan set forth in section 15-92 cost neutral to the city. The monies so picked-up shall be deposited in the fund on a bi-monthly basis. An account record shall be maintained continuously for each member. Pick-up contributions shall continue until death, disability or termination of service, whichever shall occur first. Contributions shall remain in the fund unless withdrawn as provided in the plan. No member shall have the option to choose to receive the contributed amounts directly instead of having them paid by the city directly to the plan. All such pick-up contributions by the city shall be deemed and be considered as part of the member's accumulated contributions and subject to all provisions of the plan pertaining to accumulated contributions of members. The intent of this provision is to comply with Section 414(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code. For the purpose of accruing and calculating pension benefits, Social Security benefits, overtime compensation, percentage increases to base pay, supplemental percentage payments for particular assignments, education, experience, longevity, years of service, payroll steps, licensure or training, and for paying Social Security taxes, and for such other purposes except as specified in this plan, the amount of employee contributions "picked-up" or paid by the city will be added to the amount distributed on a current basis in order to determine total wages, salary, pay or compensation. 
(b)  All benefits payable under this plan are in lieu of a refund of accumulated contributions. In any event, however, each member shall be guaranteed the payment of benefits at least equal in total amount to the member's accumulated contributions. 
(c)  Any monies received or receivable by reason of the laws of the State of Florida for the express purpose of funding or paying for retirement benefits for firefighters shall be deposited into the fund within five (5) business days of receipt by the city. Effective October 1, 2015, for all Chapter 175 money received beginning in calendar year 2016, and annually thereafter, except for money received in 2018, all Chapter 175 money received annually up to $1,124,210.00 will be used to fund the Chapter 175 share accounts provided for in Section 15-93 of this plan. Any Chapter 175 money received in excess of $1,124,210.00 in any calendar year will be divided equally with the city. The member's fifty (50) percent of the excess will be used to fund the Chapter 175 share account in Section 15-93 and the city's fifty (50) percent of the excess will be used to reduce the unfunded liability of the plan. The city's excess Chapter 175 money will be added to the fund in addition to the city's actuarially determined annual contribution. For the Chapter 175 money received in 2018 only, $900,000.00 of the funds received will be used as a one-time offset of the City's contribution for the contribution due for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2019. After this allocation in 2018, all future Chapter 175 money received shall be allocated to the Chapter 175 share accounts as stated in this paragraph for the Chapter 175 money received in 2016 and thereafter, notwithstanding the one-time 2018 offset. 
(d)  The city shall contribute to the retirement plan an amount which when combined with member contributions and investment return, will be sufficient to maintain the plan on a sound actuarial basis. 
(e)  Expenses, charges and fees attributable to the management of the plan shall be paid from the fund. 
(f)  The city shall have no right, title or interest in the fund or in any part thereof, and no contribution made thereto shall revert to the city, except such part of the fund, if any, which remains therein after the satisfaction of all liabilities to persons entitled to benefits under the plan. 
(g)  The board of trustees shall be responsible, pursuant to Florida law, for the adoption of an actuarial valuation to be used in making funding decisions for the plan. The board of trustees shall retain the services of an enrolled actuary who shall advise the board on the reasonable and appropriate actuarial assumptions and cost methods to be used in the valuation of the plan. The valuation recommended by the board's actuary shall be forwarded to the city manager, or his designee, to review the reasonableness and appropriateness of the assumptions and cost methods. If the city manager or his designee has a different opinion as to the reasonableness and appropriateness, the city manager or designee shall confer with the actuary for the board in an effort to concur. If the two (2) individuals cannot agree, they may select an independent actuary who shall assist the board's actuary and the city manager or his designee in reaching a mutually acceptable solution and, if the individuals cannot concur, the independent actuary may propose an alternative solution to assist in resolving any such actuarial difference of opinion. The valuation shall be developed in accordance with accepted standards of actuarial practice, based on the board actuary's best estimate of anticipated future experience of the plan. The valuation adopted by the board shall, in accordance with state law, be submitted to the division of retirement. Pursuant to F.S. § 175.061(1), the board is solely responsible for the administration of the trust fund. 
(Ord. No. 00-47, § 2, 9-20-00; Ord. No. 04-23, § 4, 9-1-04; Ord. No. 16-14, § 1, 8-17-16; Ord. No. 19-16 , § 2, 5-1-19)  
Sec. 15-80. - Fund management and investments. 
(a)  The plan is hereby established, pursuant to authority granted in the City Charter, as an irrevocable trust fund into which shall be deposited all of the assets of the plan of every kind and description. 
(b)  The actual custody and supervision of the fund shall be vested in the board. All assets of the plan may be commingled, provided that accurate records are maintained at all times reflecting the financial composition of the fund, including accurate accounts regarding the following: 
(1)  Current amounts of accumulated contributions of members, both on an individual and aggregate basis; 
(2)  Receipts and disbursements; 
(3)  Benefits payments; 
(4)  All contributions from the city; 
(5)  All contributions from the State of Florida pursuant to Chapter 175; 
(6)  All interest, dividends, gains and losses from investment; 
(7)  Such other entries as may be required for a clear, complete financial report of the status of the fund. 
(c)  The board shall establish a written investment policy, with the advice and counsel of such advisors as the board deems necessary, and said investment policy shall set forth the types of securities and other types of investments into which shall be placed the assets of the fund. The policy shall further set forth appropriate limitations on those investments, including, but not limited to, anticipated rate of return, quality of investment, class of investment and acceptable risk. The board shall have the authority to invest and reinvest the assets of the plan in such securities or property, real or personal, as the board deems appropriate, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Bonds, notes, or other obligations of the United States or any of its agencies, or those guaranteed by the United States or for which the credit of the United States is pledged for the payment of the principal and interest or dividends thereof; 
(2)  Time or savings accounts or certificates of deposit in a national bank, a state bank insured by the Bank Insurance Fund, or a savings, building and loan association insured by the Savings Association Insurance Fund which is administered by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or a state or federal chartered credit union whose share accounts are insured by the National Credit Union Share Insurance Fund. 
(3)  Notes secured by first mortgages on real property insured or guaranteed by the Federal Housing Administration or the Veterans Administration; 
(4)  Interest-bearing obligations with a fixed maturity of any corporation organized under the laws of the United States, any state or organized territory of the United States and the District of Columbia; provided that such obligations are rated by at least two (2) nationally recognized ratings services in any one (1) of the three (3) highest classifications approved by the comptroller of the currency for the investment of funds of national banks or, if only one (1) nationally recognized ratings service shall rate such obligations, such ratings service must have rated such obligation in any one (1) of the three (3) highest rating classifications as set forth in this subsection; 
(5)  Bonds issued by the State of Israel; 
(6)  Real estate, which may be in the form of commingled ownership and financial institutional futures, listed options, stock index futures, which may be used under specific instruction of managers; 
(7)  Common stock, preferred stock and interest-bearing obligations of corporations having an option to convert into common stock issued by a corporation. Investment in foreign securities shall be limited to twenty-five (25) percent of the total fund, on a market-value basis. 
(8)  Index funds and collective investment funds. 
(9)  Any other investment permitted by law. 
(d)  The board may determine the percentage of each type of investment to be held without regard to the limitations set forth in F.S. Ch. 175. 
(e)  The board shall be authorized to retain one (1) or more money managers for the management of property held in the plan, and the board shall convey property of the plan to such money managers for investment and reinvestment in accordance with the terms of this article and the investment policies established by the board. Any such money manager contracting with the board for the investment of its assets shall be deemed a fiduciary of the plan. 
(f)  The board shall have a continuing duty to observe and evaluate the performance of any money manager retained by the board. The board shall, in selecting a money manager or other investment counsel, exercise all judgment and care in the circumstances then prevailing which persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs. 
(g)  The board shall require that any money manager or other agent who has custody or control of any property of the plan to keep accurate and detailed accounts of all investments, receipts, disbursements and other transactions pertaining to such trust property, and the board shall further require that all accounts, books and records pertaining thereto be open for inspecting and audit at all reasonable times by the city, the board or the designees. 
(h)  The board shall also keep accurate and detailed accounts of all investments, receipts, disbursements or other transactions pertaining to the trust property and all accounts, books and records pertaining thereto shall be open to inspection and audit at all reasonable times by the city or its designees. 
(i)  Notwithstanding anything else in this subsection and as provided in F.S. § 215.473, the board of trustees must identify and publicly report any direct or indirect holdings it may have in any scrutinized company, as defined in that section. Beginning January 1, 2010, the board must proceed to sell, redeem, divest, or withdraw all publicly traded securities it may have directly in that company. The divesture of any such security must be completed by September 30, 2010. The board and its named officers or investment advisors may not be deemed to have breached their fiduciary duty in any action taken to dispose of any such security, and the board shall have satisfactorily discharged the fiduciary duties of loyalty, prudence, and sole and exclusive benefit to the participants of the pension fund and their beneficiaries if the actions it takes are consistent with the duties imposed by F.S. § 215.473, as provided for in F.S. § 175.071(8) and the manner of the disposition, if any, is reasonable as to the means chosen. For purposes of determining which companies are scrutinized companies, the board may utilize the list of scrutinized companies as developed by the Florida State Board of Administration. No person may bring any civil, criminal, or administrative action against the board of trustees or any employee, officer, director, or advisor of such pension fund based upon the divesture of any security pursuant to this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 00-47, § 2, 9-20-00; Ord. No. 04-23, § 5, 9-1-04; Ord. No. 10-05, § 4, 2-17-10)  
Sec. 15-81. - Service retirement benefits: cost of living adjustments. 
(a)  A member may retire on the first day of the month coincident with or next following the earlier of: the date upon which the member completes twenty-five (25) years of credited service, regardless of age; or the date upon which the member attains age fifty-five (55) with ten (10) years of credited service. There shall be no mandatory retirement age. 
(b)  A normal retirement benefit shall be determined by multiplying three (3) percent of final monthly compensation by the number of years of credited service. The normal form of payment shall be for life, with one hundred twenty (120) payments guaranteed. The amount provided in this section shall not exceed any limitation established by state or federal law, and shall not exceed eighty (80) percent of final monthly compensation. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the minimum benefit provided under this Plan shall meet the requirement of F.S. Ch. 175. 
(c)  A service retirement benefit shall be payable on the first day of each month. The benefit shall commence on the first day of the month coincident with or next following the member's actual retirement and shall continue until the death of the member. In the event that a member shall retire in the middle of the month, the retirement benefit shall commence on the first day of the following month, but the member shall receive credit for the partial month preceding the actual date that payment commenced. 
(d)  Early retirement shall be available to a member on the first day of the month coincident with or next following attainment of age fifty (50) and a completion of ten (10) years of credited service. 
(e)  A member electing early retirement may receive either a deferred payment or an immediate payment under the following formula: 
(1)  A deferred payment shall commence on the normal retirement date of the member. This shall mean the date upon which the member attains age fifty-five (55) with ten (10) years of credited service. A deferred payment shall be determined in the same manner as a normal retirement, except that final monthly compensation and credited service shall be based upon the early retirement date. 
(2)  An immediate retirement benefit may commence on the first day of the month coincident with or next following the date of early retirement. The benefit shall be determined for normal retirement and then actuarially reduced for the number of actual years and months at which the starting date of the benefit precedes the normal retirement date. The normal retirement date shall be the date upon which the member would have attained age fifty-five (55) with ten (10) years of credited service. The actuarial reduction factor applied to the benefit shall be three (3) percent for each year by which the starting date of the benefit precedes the normal retirement date. 
(f)  The payment of the early retirement income shall be subject to the same conditions as normal retirement income. 
(g)  In the event a member elects early retirement, the benefit formula in effect on the early retirement date shall be applicable to the member. 
(h)  A member entitled to a normal or early service retirement benefit shall have the right at any time prior to the date upon which the first payment is received to elect to have the benefit payable under one (1) of the options provided in this plan. A member shall be permitted to revoke any such election and to elect a new option at any time prior to the receipt of the first payment. Each retirement option shall be the actuarial equivalent of the other retirement options available. The present value of payments to a retiring member must be equal to at least fifty (50) percent of the total value of payments to a retiring member and designated beneficiary. Election of the retirement option shall be on a form prescribed by the board. 
(1)  Life annuity. A member may elect to receive an enhanced annuity payable for life. There shall be no guaranteed payment in excess of the accumulated contributions of the member, which contributions shall be paid to the member's estate or designated beneficiary should the member die prior to receiving payments equal to said contributions. 
(2)  Joint and last survivor option. A member may elect to receive a benefit for life and to have the benefit (or a designated fraction of the benefit) continued after the member's death and during the lifetime of a designated survivor. The member may elect to receive the payment of a benefit of one hundred (100) percent, seventy-five (75) percent, sixty-six and two-thirds (66 2/3 ) percent or fifty (50) percent of the member's monthly retirement allowance to be paid at the members death to his or her joint designated survivor named by the member at the time of or prior to retirement. The reduced retirement benefit shall be the actuarial equivalent of the amount of the retirement compensation otherwise payable to the member. A designated survivor may be any natural person, but need not be the spouse of the member. In the event that the designated survivor dies, or in the case of a spouse, the marriage is dissolved, before the member's benefit payments begin, this options shall be canceled automatically and a retirement income shall be payable to the member as if the election had never been made. A member may, at that time, elect a life annuity or a ten-year certain and life thereafter benefit. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a retired member may change his or her designation of joint annuitant or beneficiary up to two (2) times as provided in F.S. § 175.333 without the approval of the board of trustees or the current joint annuitant or beneficiary. The retiree is not required to provide proof of the good health of the joint annuitant or beneficiary being removed, and the joint annuitant or beneficiary being removed need not be living. Any retired member who desires to change his or her joint annuitant or beneficiary shall file with the board of trustees a notarized notice of such change. Upon receipt of a completed change of joint annuitant form or such other notice, the board of trustees shall adjust the member's monthly benefit by the application of actuarial tables and calculations developed to ensure that the benefit paid is the actuarial equivalent of the present value of the member's current benefit and there is no impact to the plan. 
(3)  Ten-year certain and life thereafter. Unless a member elects to receive the optional forms of benefit provided in paragraphs (1), (2) or (4), a member shall receive an unreduced life annuity with one hundred twenty (120) guaranteed payments. If the member shall die prior to receiving one hundred twenty (120) payments, the remaining benefits shall be paid to the beneficiary designated by the member. In the event that no beneficiary has been designated, the member's estate shall be the recipient of the remaining balance of payments. This shall be the normal form of retirement. 
(4)  Other options. The board may, by uniform rule, establish any other optional form of payment, which is the actuarial equivalent of any other form of retirement provided for in this plan, or which optional form of payment is cost neutral to the plan, except a lump sum payment of the present value of the member's accrued benefit. However, the board, in its sole discretion, may make a lump sum distribution which is the actuarial equivalent of the monthly benefit if the lump sum is less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(i)  It is the intention of the city that the purchasing power of a retirement benefit be preserved to maintain a retiree's purchasing power of seventy-five (75) percent of its value on the date of retirement. The board shall annually determine, in consultation with the actuary, a cost of living adjustment utilizing the cost of living index for urban areas maintained by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the United States Department of Labor. In no event shall the annual cost of living benefit be less than three (3) percent per year. The three (3) percent minimum adjustment shall apply to members of the plan who were employed by the city as firefighters on or after October 1, 1999 and survivors of such members. Effective October 1, 2009, retirees, survivors and separated, vested members who terminated before October 1, 1999 shall be entitled to receive the cost-of-living adjustment on a prospective basis only based upon the October 1, 2009 value of their retirement benefit. 
The cost of living adjustment shall be paid in January. 
(Ord. No. 00-47, § 2, 9-20-00; Ord. No. 04-23, § 6, 9-1-04; Ord. No. 08-10, § 2, 2-20-08; Ord. No. 10-05, §§ 5, 6, 2-17-10)  
Sec. 15-82. - Buyback for military or prior firefighter service. 
(a)  Any member of the plan who is employed by the city prior to entry into military service and who takes a leave of absence for the purpose of entering into voluntary or involuntary military service in the armed forces of the United States and thereafter re-enters the employ of the city as a firefighter within one (1) year of the date of release from active military service, shall be entitled to up to five (5) years of service credits for the period of absence provided the member has served that time in the military. Effective January 1, 2007, participants who die or become disabled while serving on active duty military service which intervenes the participant's employment shall be entitled to the rights of this subsection even though such participant was not reemployed by the city. Participants who die or become disabled while on active duty military service shall be treated as though re-employed the day before the participant became disabled or died, was credited with the service they would have been entitled to under this section, and then either died a non-duty death while employed or became disabled from a non-duty disability. 
(b)  Any vested member who has served on active military duty but is ineligible to claim credit for service under subsection 15-82(a) may receive credit for a maximum of four (4) years of military service time, provided that for each year being purchased the member pays to the pension plan the contributions that the member would have paid had the member been employed for that period of time, based upon the employee's starting salary at the time of employment. See city code subsection 15-84(e). 
(c)  Any member of the plan who was employed by the city as a firefighter and received a refund of contributions shall be entitled to purchase the prior service credit upon re-entering the employ of the city as a firefighter. Such service shall be purchased by contributing the amount of refunded contributions plus interest at a rate of five and one half (5½) percent per annum. 
(d)  Any vested member of the plan who was employed as a firefighter with another state, local or federal agency, shall be entitled to purchase up to four (4) years of service credit provided that for each year being purchased, the member pays to the plan the full actuarial cost of the buyback utilizing the member's current salary at the time of the buyback. 
(e)  A member who is receiving, or will receive the pension benefit for prior service in any other pension plan supported by public funds except military service, may not use that service for this pension plan. A member who is receiving, or who will receive any other pension in which other service was used by the employee in that other pension plan shall not be eligible for prior service buyback as provided in this section. 
(f)  The contribution for military or prior service buyback required of the employee may be made in one (1) lump sum or may be made by payroll deductions in installments for a period of time not to exceed the number of years being purchased. An employee making installment payments shall complete all required payments prior to payment of any benefit under this section. If installment payments are not completed at the time an employee retires, the employee shall not receive military or prior service credit for the remaining period for which payments were not made. An employee making installment payments shall pay interest at a rate of five and one-half (5½) percent per annum. 
(g)  Members may purchase more than one (1) type of prior service, however, the total number of years purchased by any member from all sources cannot exceed five (5) including military and permissive service. However, this limit does not include prior service as a city firefighter. A rehired member may purchase all years of service previously served with the city Fire Department for which he or she received a refund of contributions. 
(h)  Permissive service credit. 
(1)  Permissive service credit expressed as enhanced multiplier: Upon vesting, members shall be permitted to make an irrevocable purchase of permissive service credit, applied as an increased benefit accrual factor ("multiplier"), as set forth below. The increased multiplier may be purchased in one (1) percent increments in an amount not to exceed twenty (20) percent of average monthly earnings. The eighty (80) percent maximum benefit cap shall remain in place notwithstanding the purchase of permissive service credit. For example, a participant who otherwise would have retired with a thirty (30) percent multiplier after ten (10) years of service will receive an increased multiplier of fifty (50) percent after purchasing a twenty (20) percent multiplier increase. A participant who otherwise would have retired with a forty-five (45) percent benefit after fifteen (15) years will receive an increased multiplier of sixty-five (65) percent after purchasing a twenty (20) percent multiplier increase. 
(2)  Permissive service credit expressed as an earlier retirement date: Additionally, vested members shall be permitted to purchase permissive service credit expressed as an earlier normal retirement date. For example, a participant will be permitted to buy down their normal retirement date from "twenty-five and out" to as early as a "twenty and out" benefit commencement date. A participant selecting this option will not accrue a higher multiplier, but will be permitted to begin receiving an unreduced benefit with fewer years of actual service. 
(3)  Permissive service credit expressed as an earlier retirement date and as an enhanced multiplier: Vested members shall be permitted to purchase permissive service credit expressed as both an earlier normal retirement date and an enhanced multiplier, as permitted by subsections (a) and (b). 
(4)  Payment for permissive service credit: Permissive service credit shall not be granted until the participant has paid to the pension fund the actuarial cost of the purchase, as determined by the actuary for the plan. The board shall have rulemaking authority to implement the provisions of this section. The cost of such permissive service credit purchase shall be determined as the increase in the actuarial present value of the member's benefits before and after the purchase. The total benefits actually paid from the plan to the participant or their beneficiaries after the permissive service credit purchase shall be guaranteed to be not less than the total amount of contributions that the Participant has made, including permissive service credit purchase contributions. The contribution by the participant of the actuarially determined cost of the permissive service may be made in one (1) lump sum or may be made by payroll deductions in installments for a period not to exceed five (5) years. A member electing to make installment payments shall be charged interest based on the pension fund's actuarially assumed rate of return. 
(Ord. No. 00-47, § 2, 9-20-00; Ord. No. 04-23, § 7, 9-1-04; Ord. No. 08-10, § 3, 2-20-08; Ord. No. 10-05, § 7, 2-17-10; Ord. No. 16-14, § 2, 8-17-16)  
Sec. 15-83. - Disability. 
(a)  A member shall be disabled under the terms of the plan if the member has suffered an illness, injury or disease which renders the member permanently and totally incapacitated, physically or mentally, from regular and continuous duty as firefighter. Disability shall not be determined based solely on the fact that a member cannot perform all of the duties of a firefighter as set forth in the job description. The definition of disability shall be applied to an individual who because of illness, injury, or disease, cannot perform any job in the fire department which is within the member's physical or mental capabilities and further provided that a vacancy exists which will be made available by the city. The city shall be required to accommodate disabled workers in accordance with state and federal law and shall not withhold assignment to vacant positions on the basis that a member is not capable of performing all of the tasks of a firefighter. A disability benefit cannot be based on a condition which pre-existed membership in the plan unless the cause of the disability would reasonably be expected to give rise to a disability in a person without the pre-existing condition. 
(b)  A member shall be eligible for a service-incurred disability retirement from the entry date into the plan. A service-incurred disability retirement shall mean that the disability arose as a result of an act occurring, or presumed by law to have occurred, in the performance of service with the city. 
(c)  A member shall be eligible for a non-service incurred disability retirement upon the completion of ten (10) years of credited service. A non-service incurred disability shall be an illness, injury, or disease, which did not occur as a result of an act in the performance of service with the city. 
(d)  The service-incurred disability benefit shall be paid in equal monthly installments in an amount equal to sixty-six and two-thirds (66 2/3 ) percent of the member's final monthly compensation as of the date of disability retirement, together with any additional accrued benefits in excess of sixty-six and two-thirds (66 2/3 ) percent which have been earned by the member as the result of additional service. Upon written election of a member, a service-incurred disability may be paid under any of the optional forms set forth in section 15-81(h). 
(e)  Effective September 1, 2004, the non-service incurred disability benefit shall be paid on a monthly basis in an amount equal to three (3) percent of final monthly compensation, multiplied by the number of years of credited service, but shall not be less than thirty (30) percent of average monthly compensation. Upon the written election of a member, a non-service incurred disability may be paid under any of the optional forms set forth in section 15-81(h). 
(f)  Disability benefits shall be paid on the first day of each month. No benefit shall be paid until the board of trustees has actually considered and voted upon entitlement to disability. 
(g)  Disability retirement income shall continue until the death of the member, or recovery from disability and return to active fire service. At the option of the member, a conversion of a service-incurred disability retirement may be made to a normal service retirement with credited service for all years of disability based on the salary applicable at time of disability. This election may be made for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days after the member reaches normal retirement age and receives written notice of the right of election from the plan. In the event of the death of a member who is retired on a disability benefit and has not received one hundred twenty (120) payments, the remaining unpaid benefits shall be paid to a designated beneficiary selected by the member and communicated to the board on the form prescribed by the board. In the event that there is no designated beneficiary, the remaining unpaid benefits shall be paid to the estate of the deceased member. During the period of disability, member contributions shall be suspended unless the member is receiving a pay supplement in addition to disability benefits provided under the Florida Workers' Compensation Act. In such event, there shall be a member contribution from that amount representing the supplemental pay. In the event a member's disability is converted to a service retirement as set forth in this section, the member shall be accorded credited service for the period of disability. 
(h)  The board of trustees shall have the continuing right to require disabled members to submit to a medical examination to determine that the member remains disabled. In order for a member to be deemed recovered, the medical board must recommend to the board of trustees that the member has sufficiently recovered to again engage in the duties of a firefighter and that the city has certified that it has a position within the fire service available for the member consistent with the member's medical condition. 
(i)  Upon finding that a member is no longer disabled, the member shall return to work for the city at the same rank and position previously occupied and shall be placed into the appropriate step in the pay plan which the member would have occupied but for the disability. The member shall again become an active member of the plan. If the member declines reemployment with the city, the member shall be deemed to have terminated employment on the date that the disability commenced. In such event, the member may receive a return of contributions unless, prior to that date, the member has received disability benefits equal to or greater than the amount of the accumulated contributions, with interest at the rate of five and one-half (5½) percent. If the member declines re-employment within the city, the member shall be deemed to have terminated employment on the date that the disability benefit commenced. 
(j)  No member shall be eligible to receive disability benefits from the retirement plan during any period of time that the member is receiving a salary from the city for performance of firefighter duties. This section shall not apply to the receipt of workers' compensation benefits. 
(k)  Application for disability retirement shall be made on a form prescribed by the board of trustees. The member shall execute such medical releases as are necessary to permit the board of trustees to review the medical records needed to determine the question of disability and to discuss said records at a public meeting. Upon receipt of an application for disability, the board shall appoint a medical committee to be composed of not less than one (1) nor more than three (3) licensed physicians. The applicant for disability shall be required to submit to examination by the medical committee. The medical committee shall report its findings to the board of the trustees which shall include a determination, to the extent reasonably possible, the origin of the disability, whether the disability is permanent, and whether the disability is total. In making that determination, the medical committee shall be bound by the definition of disability set forth in this plan. 
(l)  Upon receipt of the report of the medical committee, the trustees shall schedule a public hearing at which time the board shall review all reports of the medical committee, together with any such documentary evidence as the applicant may wish to submit. The board shall conduct a preliminary determination as to whether the member is permanently and totally disabled based upon the written documentation presented. If the board does not grant the application based on the written documentation, it shall inform the member in writing of the reasons for the denial of the application. The member may, within thirty (30) days of receipt of the board's preliminary denial, request a full evidentiary hearing before the board. Said hearing will be conducted consistent with the principles of due process and the rules of evidence generally applicable to administrative proceedings shall apply. The board shall have the power to issue subpoenas compelling the attendance of witnesses. At said hearing the applicant may present such oral and written evidence as the applicant deems necessary to establish its burden of proof. The board may appoint special counsel as an advocate to cross-examine witnesses and to offer argument in opposition to the application. The attorney for the board shall not serve both as advocate and as advisor to the board in the same proceeding. The applicant and the board shall have the right to examine and cross-examine all witnesses. The decision of the board shall be based solely upon the evidence presented and the law applicable to this plan. Following the conclusion of the hearing, the board shall render an opinion in writing setting forth the reasons for the grant or denial of the benefit. In the event that the disability benefit is denied, the applicant shall have the right to judicial review by complaint for common law certiorari in the Circuit Court of Broward County. 
(m)  The board of trustees may prescribe rules of procedure to implement the provisions of this plan relating to the conduct of disability hearings. 
(n)  No member shall be granted a disability pension upon a determination by the board that the disability resulted from: 
(1)  Excessive and habitual use of drugs, intoxicants or narcotics; 
(2)  Injury or disease sustained while willfully and illegally participating in fights, riots, civil insurrections or while committing a crime; 
(3)  Injury or disease sustained while serving in the armed forces. This exclusion does not affect members who have become disabled as a result of intervening military service under the Federal Heroes Earnings Assistance and Relief Tax Act of 2008 (H.R. 6081; P.L. 110-245); or 
(4)  Injury or disease sustained after the termination of employment. 
(Ord. No. 00-47, § 2, 9-20-00; Ord. No. 04-23, § 8, 9-1-04; Ord. No. 10-05, § 8, 2-17-10)  
Sec. 15-84. - Vesting and termination. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, all rights to benefits under this plan shall terminate when a member's employment terminates for any reason other than normal service retirement, early service retirement, or disability retirement. Any member who completes ten (10) years of credited service and whose contributions remain in the plan has a vested right to accrued benefits from the plan. No member who has completed less than ten (10) years of credited service shall have a vested interest in any accrued benefit. 
(b)  A member who shall leave the service of the city prior to eligibility for normal service retirement or early service retirement, but who has completed ten (10) years of creditable service shall be entitled to receive retirement benefits commencing at the regular normal service retirement date. Such benefits will be based on final monthly compensation and credited service as of the date of termination. 
(c)  Every member shall have the right to elect to receive, in lieu of all benefits under the plan, a return of the member's accumulated contributions, with interest, at the rate of five and one-half (5½) percent. 
(d)  A member who elects a lump sum return of contributions releases and discharges the City of Miramar and the retirement plan from the right to any other benefits from the plan. 
(e)  If a member who has terminated service prior to retirement re-enters the fire service of the city, the member will be entitled to reinstate the credited service that the member had on the date of termination in lieu of the benefits to which the member became entitled at time of separation. If, at the time of separation, the member withdrew the member's accumulated contributions, credited service can only be restored by repaying to the pension plan an amount equal to the accumulated contributions plus five and one-half (5½) percent interest from the date the contributions were withdrawn. 
(Ord. No. 00-47, § 2, 9-20-00)  
Sec. 15-85. - Death benefits. 
(a)  In the event of the death of a member from non-duty related causes prior to vesting, the member's designated beneficiary shall be paid from the fund an amount equal to the member's accumulated contributions, unless the member meets the criteria set forth in subsections (c) or (d), below. 
(b)  Duty related death. 
(1)  In the event of a member's death which the board determines to be duty related, or presumed by law to have occurred in the line of duty, the member shall be presumed to have completed twenty-five (25) years of credited service and there shall be payable to the member's surviving spouse or surviving minor children a death benefit in an amount equal to the value of a one hundred (100) percent joint and survivor annuity, utilizing the member's salary at time of death. The board may, in its discretion, pay the benefit in another form if the board deems it to be in the best interest of the surviving spouse or surviving minor children. The actuarial value of the other form of benefit shall be the actuarial equivalent of the one hundred (100) percent joint and survivor option. 
(2)  If the member has minor children, who are not also the children of the surviving spouse, the death benefit shall be divided with fifty (50) percent of the benefit being paid to the surviving spouse, and the remaining fifty (50) percent divided among the minor children. As each minor child reaches the age of majority, the remaining minor child(ren) shall receive an increased share of the survivorship benefit. 
(3)  Should the surviving spouse die prior to the surviving spouse's child(ren) with the deceased member reaching the age of majority, marriage or adoption, then the surviving children of the surviving spouse shall each be entitled to a pro rata share of the surviving spouse's benefit until the child reaches the age of majority, is adopted or married. 
(4)  This line of duty death benefit shall only apply to a member with a surviving spouse, or surviving minor children. 
(5)  In the event a vested member who dies in the line of duty does not leave a surviving spouse or surviving minor children, then a death benefit shall be paid from the fund of the beneficiary. The amount of the benefit shall be computed as though the member had retired on the date of death and had chosen the one hundred (100) percent joint and survivor option. The board may, in its discretion, pay the benefit in another form if the board deems it to be in the best interest of the beneficiary. The actuarial value of any other form of benefit may not exceed the actuarial value of the one hundred (100) percent joint and survivor option. 
(c)  In the event that the member was vested, but died from non-duty related causes before actual retirement, a death benefit shall be paid from the fund to the beneficiary. The amount of the benefit shall be computed as though themember had retired on the date of death and had chosen the one hundred (100) percent joint and survivor option. The board may, in its discretion, pay the benefit in another form if the board deems it to be in the best interest of the beneficiary. The actuarial value of any other form of benefit may not exceed the actuarial value of the one hundred (100) percent joint and survivor option. 
(d)  In the event that a non-vested member dies from non-duty related causes and has sufficient accumulated sick, comp or vacation time to reach ten (10) years of credited service, it shall be presumed that the member completed ten (10) years of credited service and the member's unused leave accounts shall be reduced accordingly. Payment shall be as set forth in subsection (c) above. 
(e)  In the event of the death of a retiree, death benefits, if any, shall be paid in accordance with the optional form of benefit chosen at the time of retirement. 
(Ord. No. 00-47, § 2, 9-20-00; Ord. No. 04-23, § 9, 9-1-04; Ord. No. 08-10, § 4, 2-20-08)  
Sec. 15-86. - Compliance with the Internal Revenue Code. 
(a)  It is the intention of the city and of the board that the plan remain at all times a qualified plan, as that term is defined under the Internal Revenue Code. 
(b)  No member's annual benefit shall exceed the amounts permitted in Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(c)  In no event may a member's retirement benefit be delayed beyond the later of April 1st following the calendar year in which the member attains age seventy and one-half (70½), or April 1st of the year following the calendar year in which the member retires. 
When a distribution of the participant's entire interest is not made in a lump sum, the distribution will be made in or more of the following ways: over the life of the participant; over the life of the participant and designated beneficiary; over a period certain not extending beyond the life expectancy of the participant; or over a period certain not extending beyond the joint life and last survivor expectancy of the participant and a designated beneficiary. 
(d)  If the distribution has commenced before the participant's death, the remaining interest will be distributed at least as rapidly as under the method of distribution being used as of the date of the participant's death. 
The method of distribution, if the participant dies before distribution is commenced, must satisfy the following requirements: 
(1)  Any remaining portion of the participant's interest that is not payable to a beneficiary designated by the participant will be distributed within five (5) years after the participant's death; 
(2)  Any portion of the participant's interest that is payable to a beneficiary designated by the participant will be distributed either: (i) within five (5) years after the participant's death; or (ii) over the life of the beneficiary, or over a period certain not extending beyond the life expectancy of the beneficiary, commencing not later than the end of the calendar year following the calendar year in which the participant died (or, if a designated beneficiary is the participant's surviving spouse, commencing not later than the end of the calendar year following the calendar year in which the participant would have attained age seventy and one-half (70½)). 
(e)  Direct transfers of eligible distributions shall be made as follows: 
(1)  General. This subsection applies to distributions made on or after January 1, 1993. Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this subsection, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the board, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution made directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover. 
(2)  Definitions. 
a.  Eligible rollover distribution. An eligible rollover distribution is any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of a distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include: any distribution that is one (1) of a series of a substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten (10) years or more; any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code; and the portion of any distribution that is not includable in gross income. 
b.  Eligible retirement plan. An eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account described in Section 408(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, an Individual Retirement Annuity described in Section 408(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, an Annuity Plan described in Section 403(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, or a qualified trust described in Section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code that accepts a distributee's eligible rollover distribution. However, in the case of an eligible rollover distribution to a surviving spouse, an eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account or individual retirement annuity. 
c.  Distributee. A distributee includes an employee or former employee. In addition, the employee's or former employee's surviving spouse is a distributee with regard to the interest of the spouse. 
d.  Direct rollover. A direct rollover is a payment by the plan to the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee. 
(f)  Rollover from qualified plans. 
(1)  A member may roll over all or a part of his or her interest in another qualified plan to the fund, provided all of the following requirements are met: 
a.  Some or all of the amount distributed from the other plan is rolled over to this plan no later than the 60th day after distribution was made from the plan, or if distributions are made in installments, no later than the 60th day after the last distribution was made. 
b.  The rollover is made in cash. 
c.  The member certifies that the distribution is eligible for a rollover. 
d.  Any amount which the trustees accept as a rollover to the fund shall, along with any earning allocated to them, be fully vested at all times. 
(2)  A rollover may also be made to this plan from an individual retirement account qualified under Section 408 of the Internal Revenue Code when the individual retirement account was merely used as a conduit for funds from another qualified pan and the rollover is made in accordance with the rule provided in paragraph (1) above. Amounts rolled over may be segregated from other fund assets. The trustees shall separately account for gains, losses, and administrative expenses of these rollovers. In addition, the fund may accept the direct transfer of a member's benefits from another qualified retirement plan or an Internal Revenue Code Section 457 plan. The fund shall account for direct transfers in the same manner as a rollover and shall obtain certification from the member that the amounts are eligible for a rollover or direct transfer to the fund. 
(Ord. No. 00-47, § 2, 9-20-00; Ord. No. 04-23, § 10, 9-1-04)  
Sec. 15-87. - Amendment or termination of the system. 
(a)  It is the intention of the city and the board that this pension plan shall constitute an irrevocable trust and no portion of the assets may revert to the employer until all other obligations of the plan, including the payment to the last surviving member and beneficiary has been paid. No amendment shall result in members receiving lower benefits than those in effect on the date the member commenced service with the city. 
(b)  In the event of termination or partial termination of the plan, each participant's accrued pension benefit shall become nonforfeitable (one hundred (100) percent vested). If the plan is terminated, the board shall inform the city if additional assets are required, in which event the city shall continue to financially support the plan until all nonforfeitable benefits have been funded. At such time, the funds shall be appropriated and distributed in accordance with the provisions of F.S. Ch. 175. The actuarial single-sum value may not be less than the employee's accumulated contributions to the plan, with interest, if provided by the plan, less the value of any plan benefits previously paid to the employee. 
(Ord. No. 00-47, § 2, 9-20-00; Ord. No. 10-05, § 9, 2-17-10)  
Sec. 15-88. - Distribution of marital interests in the plan. 
(a)  In the event that the board is served with a domestic relations order or other legal process purporting to require the payment of any portion of a member's benefit to another person as a result of a dissolution of marriage, the board shall cause such order to be reviewed to determine compliance with the provisions of the plan. 
(b)  The board of trustees shall be authorized to intervene in any such dissolution of marriage proceeding to ensure that such domestic relations order is otherwise consistent with the distribution of an interest in a public employees retirement plan under state law. 
(c)  Any cost associated with the modification or correction of such domestic relations orders shall be the responsibility of the plan member and payment of any such cost shall be a condition precedent to the receipt of benefits from the plan. 
(Ord. No. 00-47, § 2, 9-20-00)  
Sec. 15-89. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  The present or future right of a person to money in the pension fund or to a retirement allowance, an optional allowance, a death benefit, the return of contributions, or any other right accrued or accruing under the provisions of this plan shall not be assignable and shall not be subject to execution, garnishment, attachment, the operation of bankruptcy or insolvency law or any other process of law whatsoever, except with respect to alimony, child support or medical payments to a former spouse or minor child. 
Upon written request by the retiree, the board of trustees may authorize the plan administrator to withhold from the monthly retirement payment funds necessary to: 
(1)  Pay for benefits being received through the city; 
(2)  Pay the certified bargaining agent; or 
(3)  To pay for premiums for accident, health and long-term care insurance for the retiree's spouse and dependants. A retirement plan does not incur liability for participation in this permissive program if its actions are taken in good faith pursuant to F.S. § 175.061(7). 
(b)  The board shall have the power to examine into the facts upon which any pension has been granted under any prior or existing law or which may be granted in the future or obtained erroneously, fraudulently, or illegally for any reason. The board is empowered to purge the pension rolls of any person who has been granted a pension under a prior or existing law, or who is hereafter granted a benefit under this article if the granting of that pension is found to be erroneous, fraudulent, or illegal for any reason; and to reclassify any pensioner who has under any prior or existing law or who may under this article be erroneously, improperly or illegally classified. 
(c)  Should any change or error in retirement system records be discovered or result in any member or beneficiary receiving from the retirement plan more or less than he or she would have been entitled to receive had the records been correct, the board shall have the power to correct such error and, as far as possible, adjust the payments in such a manner that the actuarial equivalent of a benefit to which such member or beneficiary was correctly entitled shall be paid. 
(d)  If any member or beneficiary is a minor or is under any other legal disability, the board of trustees shall have the power to withhold payment of benefits until the board is presented with proof satisfactory to the board of the appointment of a guardian. If the board becomes aware that any member or beneficiary is incapable of personally receiving and giving a valid receipt for any payment due under the plan, the board shall cause notice to be given to that participant or beneficiary of a hearing to determine whether said benefits should continue to be paid until the appointment of a guardian. During the pendency of any such hearing, however, the board may continue to pay benefits to the member or beneficiary and that such payment shall be a complete discharge of any liability under the plan for such payment. 
(Ord. No. 00-47, § 2, 9-20-00; Ord. No. 10-05, § 10, 2-17-10)  
Sec. 15-90. - Post retirement supplement. 
(a)  A post retirement supplement is hereby established. 
(b)  Members retiring after October 1, 1999, shall receive a supplemental monthly payment. The monthly supplement shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) if paid in the year 1999. This monthly supplement shall be adjusted for medical inflation in the year 2001 and each year thereafter by increasing the one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) by one (1) percent more than the cost-of-living increase for urban areas as determined by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
(Ord. No. 00-47, § 2, 9-20-00)  
Sec. 15-91. - Utilization of Chapter 175 monies. 
(a)  The city shall continue participation in the Chapter 175 insurance premium tax rebate program. 
(b)  All Chapter 175 monies shall be used in accordance with law. 
(c)  The board, by administrative rule, may implement the provisions of this section.  
Sec. 15-92. - Deferred retirement option plan ("DROP"). 
(a)  Eligibility. 
(1)  Any active member of the retirement system may participate in the DROP upon becoming eligible for an unreduced service retirement. 
(2)  The maximum DROP participation period shall be five (5) years commencing at the DROP entry date, however, that DROP participation period shall decline by one (1) month for each month that the active member does not enter the DROP beyond the member's eligibility for an unreduced service retirement until the expiration of a sixty (60) month period beginning at the eligibility date. An active member may enter the DROP after attainment of age fifty-five (55) and completion of ten (10) years of service, without reduction of the maximum participation period, as long as the member enters the DROP no later than the completion of twenty-five (25) years of service. Additionally, members who are eligible for coordination of benefits under section 15-132 of this plan may enter the DROP without reduction of the maximum participation period as long as the member enters the DROP no later than the completion of twenty-five (25) years of service in this plan. 
(3)  Notwithstanding paragraph (2), any member who is eligible for normal retirement as of October 1, 2003, may elect to participate in the DROP for the full five-year period. This option is limited to only those members who are eligible for normal retirement on October 1, 2003 and from that date to September 1, 2004. However, the sixty-month period for participation in the DROP will begin to run as of September 1, 2004. 
(b)  Election to participate. A member electing DROP participation shall execute such forms as the board of trustees shall require. The DROP election shall be effective on the first day of the month following the date of election. Applications must be filed with the board not less than five (5) business days prior to the effective date. 
(c)  Limitations on participation. 
(1)  DROP election shall be irrevocable following deposit of the first payment into the member's account. 
(2)  A member may participate in the DROP only once. After DROP participation commences, a member may not rejoin the retirement system as an active member nor shall the member be eligible to receive disability or pre-retirement death benefits from the system. 
(3)  A member shall continue to receive all other benefits guaranteed active members under any collective bargaining agreement or applicable city policy, unless otherwise addressed in this plan. 
(d)  Contributions. Upon DROP commencement, the member contributions shall be reduced to four (4) percent as provided in section 15-79(a) and shall be matched by the plan. The DROP shall remain cost neutral to the city at all times. Contributions will be credited to each individual member's DROP account. 
(e)  Benefit calculation. 
(1)  Upon commencement of DROP participation, a member's active participation in the system shall cease. The normal service retirement shall be calculated using the member's average of compensation and credited service as of the date of DROP participation. No further service shall be credited to a member. Members in the DROP are eligible for the cost-of-living (COLA) adjustment and monthly subsidy, which shall be credited to the member's DROP account. 
(2)  Accrual of vacation, holiday, personal and sick leave will continue during DROP participation in accordance with the collective bargaining agreement or applicable city policy. 
(f)  Payments to the DROP account. 
(1)  Upon DROP commencement, the member shall have the option to have the city pay a lump-sum contribution of the member's unused vacation, compensatory, personal and sick leave into the individual member's DROP account, as per the guidelines in the collective bargaining agreement or choose to have payout deposited to the member's DROP account upon termination. These transfers will be made in accordance with the policy adopted by the board. 
(2)  Payments shall be made monthly to a member's DROP account in the amount which would be paid had the member separated from the city and commenced normal retirement. 
(g)  DROP earnings. 
(1)  Members who enter the DROP on or after October 1, 2012, and who are not eligible for normal retirement on October 1, 2012, shall have their DROP accounts credited quarterly with the interest earned or lost at a rate equal to the fund's actual investment return, net of investment expenses. However, the annual rate credited shall be capped at eight (8) percent and have a zero (0) percent floor. 
(2)  Members who entered the DROP prior to October 1, 2012, and/or who are eligible for normal retirement on October 1, 2012, shall continue to have two (2) options as to how their DROP contributions will be invested. At the time of application to the DROP, these unit members shall make an irrevocable election of one (1) of the following options: 
i.  To have their DROP accounts credited/debited quarterly with the interest earned/lost at a rate equal to the fund's actual investment return, net of investment expenses; or 
ii.  To have their DROP accounts credited at the then prevailing assumption rate minus one hundred fifty (150) basis points. 
(3)  If a member stays beyond the end of DROP eligibility, no interest shall be paid on any DROP account after termination of DROP eligibility and there shall be no future DROP deposits. No member shall receive DROP payment until actually separated from city employment. 
(4)  There shall be no fee charged for DROP administration. 
(h)  DROP payout. 
(1)  Upon termination of employment for any reason, DROP participation shall cease and any future retirement benefits shall be paid directly to the member, or in the case of death to the designated beneficiary. 
(2)  Payment shall be made from the DROP account no earlier than thirty (30) days after the separation from the city. Payment shall be made: 
a.  In a lump-sum. 
b.  In annual installments in equal monthly installments. 
c.  In equal monthly installments. 
d.  To rollover to another qualified plan. 
e.  In any combination of rollover, lump-sum and periodic payments. 
(3)  The board of trustees may accelerate or alter any payment schedule as may be required to comply with the provisions of IRC Sections 401(a)(9) and 415. 
(4)  No DROP payment may be made in a manner inconsistent with state or federal law. 
(i)  Promotions. Members shall be eligible for promotion during DROP participation; provided, however, that no such promotion shall affect the benefit rate calculated upon DROP commencement. 
(j)  Death/disability during DROP . 
(1)  Death of DROP Participant. 
(A)  If a DROP Participant dies with a DROP balance in the Pension Fund, then the entire balance of the DROP account shall be converted to the name of the beneficiary designated on a form provided by the board of trustees. If the designated beneficiary is the surviving spouse, the account may remain with the fund until the latest period specified under Internal Revenue Code Section 401(a)(9) and the regulations thereunder. 
If a DROP Participant fails to designate a beneficiary, or if the beneficiary predeceases the DROP Participant, the entire balance shall be converted, in the following order, to the name or names of: (i) The DROP Participant's surviving children on a pro rata basis; (ii) If no children are alive, the DROP Participant's spouse; (iii) If no spouse is alive, the DROP Participant's surviving parents on a pro rata basis; or (iv) If none are alive, the estate of the DROP Participant. The assets held in the name of a non-spouse beneficiary must be distributed within 5 years of the death of the participant. Accounts which are converted to the names of the beneficiaries shall have the right to name a successor beneficiary. 
This option is not available to a trust beneficiary. If the beneficiary is a trust, see (B) below. 
(B)  Lump Sum Option. Should a DROP Participant die during DROP participation, the DROP account proceeds shall be distributed to the named beneficiary, including a trust beneficiary, in a lump-sum amount. If no beneficiary is named or alive, the DROP account proceeds shall be deemed as part of the member's estate as if he/she had retired on the day prior to death. The DROP Participant's monthly benefit shall be distributed according to the form of benefit that the DROP Participant chose upon entering the DROP. 
(2)  Should a member become disabled during DROP participation, the member's DROP participation shall cease and said member shall be entitled to DROP proceeds and begin receiving his retirement benefit as outlined within this program. DROP participants are not eligible for disability benefits. 
(k)  Benefit amounts not guaranteed. All benefits payable under this DROP program shall be paid solely from DROP assets. Neither the city nor the board of trustees shall have any duty to pay the member, except as set forth in this program. No rate of return on DROP assets is guaranteed and by their participation, members consent to the terms of this program and discharge the city and board of trustees from any and all liability, except as set forth in this program. 
(Ord. No. 04-23, § 11, 9-1-04; Ord. No. 10-05, § 11, 2-17-10; Ord. No. 14-03, § 2, 11-18-13; Ord. No. 16-14, § 3, 8-17-16; Ord. No. 19-11 , § 2, 1-16-19)  
Sec. 15-93. - Chapter 175 share account. 
(a)  A separate individual member account shall be established and maintained in each actively employed member's name effective October 1, 2009. 
(1)  Upon establishing the share accounts, Members shall be credited with a pro-rata share of the excess of 175 money over the 1999 frozen amount plus any additional amounts used to meet the minimum benefits that accumulated since 1999 as required by F.S. § 175.35(i). The pro-rata balances shall be determined as provide for by the collective bargaining agreement. Effective October 1, 2015, for all Chapter 175 money received beginning in calendar year 2016, and annually thereafter, except for money received in 2018, all Chapter 175 money received annually up to $1,124,210.00 will be used to fund the Chapter 175 share accounts provided for in this Section 15-93. Any Chapter 175 money received in excess of $1,124,210.00 in any calendar year will be divided equally with the city. The member's fifty (50) percent of the excess will be used to fund the Chapter 175 share account in Section 15-93 and the city's fifty (50) percent of the excess will be used to reduce the unfunded liability of the plan. The city's excess Chapter 175 money will be added to the fund in addition to the city's actuarially determined annual contribution. In fiscal year 2018-2019, this allocation will be changed for one-time as provided in Section 15-93(b)(1) below. 
(2)  Retirees and vested individual former members, who were employed for at least one (1) year on September 30, 1999 and thereafter shall also receive a pro-rata share of the excess of Chapter 175 money over the 1999 frozen amount plus any additional amounts used to meet the minimum benefits that accumulated since 1999 as required by F.S. § 175.35(i). The shares will be allocated to the individual former members including retirees as provided for by the collective bargaining agreement. Individual former members who did not vest in a retirement benefit are not entitled to a share account allocation nor a distribution. 
(b)  Share account funding. 
(1)  Chapter 175 Moneys. Each individual actively employed member account shall be credited with the moneys received from F.S. Ch. 175, tax revenues in excess of the frozen amount plus any additional amount necessary to fund the minimum benefits as required by F.S. § 175.35(1). Effective October 1, 2015, for all Chapter 175 money received beginning in calendar year 2016, and annually thereafter, except for money received in 2018, all Chapter 175 Money received annually up to $1,124,210.00 will be used to fund the Chapter 175 share accounts provided for in this Section 15-93. Any Chapter 175 Money received in excess of $1,124,210.00 in any calendar year will be divided equally with the city. The member's fifty (50) percent of the excess will be used to fund the Chapter 175 share account in Section 15-93 and the city's fifty (50) percent of the excess will be used to reduce the unfunded liability of the plan. For the Chapter 175 money received in 2018 only, $900,000.00 of the funds received will be used as a one-time offset of the City's contribution for the contribution due for the fiscal year ending September 30, 2019. After this allocation in 2018, all future Chapter 175 money received shall be allocated to the Chapter 175 share accounts as stated in this paragraph for the Chapter 175 money received in 2016 and thereafter, notwithstanding the one-time 2018 offset. 
(2)  Forfeitures. In addition, any forfeitures as provided in paragraph (e) shall be credited to the individual actively employed member accounts in accordance with the formula set forth in paragraph (c). 
(c)  Annual allocation of accounts. 
(1)  175 Moneys shall be credited to each individual actively employed member account in an amount directly proportionate to the number of pay periods for which the actively employed member worked as compared to the total number of pay periods years of credited service for all actively employed members. 
(2)  At the end of each fiscal quarter, each individual actively employed member account shall be adjusted to reflect the earnings resulting from investments. 
(3)  Members who are eligible for normal retirement on October 1, 2012, and/or entered the DROP prior to October 1, 2012, have the option to select between two (2) methods to credit investment earnings to their account. Thereafter, the method may be changed each year effective October 1, however, the method must be elected during the month of August on a form provided by the trustees. The initial investment election period shall be during the month of December, 2009, for the investment period from January 1, 2010, to September 30, 2010. The methods are: 
a.  Member accounts shall be credited/debited quarterly with the interest earned/lost at a rate equal to the fund's actual investment return, net of investment expenses, subject to costs fees and expenses of administration of the share accounts, which shall be debited from the individual accounts on a proportionate basis in accordance with the procedure developed by the board of trustees. 
b.  A fixed annual rate that is equal to the then prevailing actuarial funding assumption rate minus one hundred fifty (150) basis points. 
(4)  Members who enter the DROP on or after October 1, 2012, and who are not eligible for normal retirement on October 1, 2012, shall have their accounts credited quarterly with the interest earned or lost at a rate equal to the fund's actual investment return, net of investment expenses. However, the annual rate credited shall be capped at eight (8) percent and have a zero (0) percent floor. 
(d)  Eligibility for benefits. Any actively employed member who terminates employment with the city, upon application filed with the board, shall be entitled to one hundred (100) percent of the value of his or her individual actively employed member account, provided the actively employed member is eligible to receive a pension under this plan. 
(e)  Forfeitures. Any actively employed member who has less than ten (10) years of credited service or who is not eligible for payment of benefits after termination of employment with the city shall forfeit his or her individual actively employed member account. The amounts credited to said individual actively employed member account shall be redistributed to the remaining individual actively employed member accounts in the same manner as F.S. Ch. 175, tax revenues are credited (i.e., based on pay periods). 
(f)  Payment of benefits. 
(1)  The normal form of benefit payment shall be a lump sum payment of the entire balance of the actively employed member's individual actively employed member account or upon the written election of the actively employed member, on a form provided by the board, and payment shall be made: 
a.  Over three (3) years in annual installments; or 
b.  In monthly installments over the lifetime of the actively employed member or until the entire balance is exhausted. The monthly amount paid shall be determined by the fund's actuary in accordance with selections made by the actively employed member on a form provided by the board of trustees. 
(2)  Members who have retired and are receiving retirement benefits may elect to begin to receive payment upon termination of employment or defer payment of the share account until the latest day as provided by Internal Revenue Code Section 401(a)(9) and the regulations thereunder. 
(3)  Any form of payment selected by a firefighter must comply with the minimum distribution requirements of Section 401(A)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(g)  (1)  Death of actively employed member. If an actively employed member dies and is eligible for benefits from the individual actively employed member account, the entire balance of the individual actively employed member account shall be converted to the name of the beneficiary designated on a form provided by the board of trustees. The entire balance shall be paid out in a lump sum to the beneficiary, at the discretion of the beneficiary. If the designated beneficiary is the surviving spouse, the account may remain with the fund until the latest period specified under Internal Revenue Code Section 401(a)(9) and the regulations thereunder. These individual accounts shall not be eligible for any further shares of the Chapter 175 moneys but shall be credited with interest. If an actively employed member fails to designate a beneficiary, or if the beneficiary predeceases the actively employed member, the entire balance shall be converted, in the following order, to the name or names of: 
(A)  The actively employed member's surviving children on a pro rata basis; 
(B)  If no children are alive, the actively employed member's spouse; 
(C)  If no spouse is alive, the actively employed member's surviving parents on a pro rata basis; or 
(D)  If none are alive, the estate of the actively employed member. 
The assets held in the name of a non-spouse beneficiary must be distributed within 5 years of the death of the participant. The accounts which are converted to the names of the beneficiaries shall have the right to name a successor beneficiary. 
This option is not available to a trust beneficiary. If the beneficiary is a trust, see (B) below. 
(2)  Lump Sum Option. Should an actively employed member die, the Share account proceeds shall be distributed to the named beneficiary, including a trust beneficiary, in a lump-sum amount. If no beneficiary is named or alive, the Share account proceeds shall be deemed as part of the member's estate as if he/she had retired on the day prior to death. 
(Ord. No. 10-05, § 12, 2-17-10; Ord. No. 14-03, § 3, 11-18-13; Ord. No. 16-14, § 4, 8-17-16; Ord. No. 19-11 , § 3, 1-16-19; Ord. No. 19-16 , § 2, 5-1-19)  
Secs. 15-94—15-131. - Reserved.  
Sec. 15-132. - Coordination of benefits. 
This plan will coordinate benefits with the Miramar general employees, police and ICMA pension plans (hereinafter, "city sponsored plans"). In the event that a participant of this plan has earned a minimum of ten (10) years of aggregate service in one (1) or more city sponsored plans, including this plan, the participant shall be eligible for coordination of benefits from the city sponsored plans, to the extent of any service credit used to determine eligibility for benefits in such plans. Upon the commencement of a service retirement, the participant shall receive payment from this plan in an amount equal to the accrued benefit based on credited service accrued while a participant is in this plan. In addition, the participant shall also be eligible for payment from any city sponsored plans, as appropriate, of a benefit equal to the years of credited service in that plan based upon the average salary in effect at the time the participant terminated service with the city and at a formula rate in effect when the participant terminated membership in that plan. The benefits in the applicable city sponsored plan shall be available even though the participant shall not have otherwise vested under the terms of that plan. 
In the event a participant of this plan shall transfer from this plan to another city sponsored plan, and the participant shall have accrued a total of ten (10) or more years of aggregate credited service in one (1) or more city sponsored plans, including this plan, the participant shall, upon retirement from such plan, be deemed vested in this plan and eligible to receive benefits accrued in this plan based upon aggregate years of service with the city, with benefits accrued in this plan based on credited service in this plan, average salary in effect at the time of retirement and the formula rate in effect when the participant transferred from this plan. This benefit shall be available even though the participant shall not have otherwise achieved a vested benefit in this plan; provided, however, that the participant, upon termination in this plan, kept his/her contributions on deposit in this plan. 
(Ord. No. 01-22, § 1, 2-21-01)  
Secs. 15-133—15-165. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - POLICE OFFICERS' RETIREMENT PLAN AND TRUST FUND[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Police, ch. 17; tax levy on casualty insurance businesses, § 19-26. 
State Law reference— Municipal police officers retirement trust funds, F.S. ch. 185. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 15-166. - Definitions. 
As used in article, unless otherwise defined or required by the context, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings indicated: 
Accumulated contributions means a member's own contributions plus interest credited thereto, if any. 
Actuarial equivalence or actuarially equivalent means that any benefit payable under the terms of this plan in a form other than the normal form of benefit shall have the same actuarial present value on the date payment commences as the normal form of benefit. For purposes of establishing the actuarial present value of any form of payment other than a lump sum distribution, all future payments shall be discounted for interest and mortality by using seven (7) percent interest and the 1983 Group Annuity Mortality Table for Males, with ages set ahead five (5) years in the case of disability retirees. In the case of a lump sum distribution, the actuarial present value shall be determined on the basis of the same mortality rates as just described and the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation's interest rates for terminating single employer plans which rates are in effect: 
(1)  Ninety (90) days prior to the member's date of termination if distribution is made within six (6) months of such date of termination, or 
(2)  Ninety (90) days prior to the distribution date if distribution is made later than six (6) months after the member's date of termination. 
Average monthly earnings means one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) of the average annual compensation of the five (5) best years of the last ten (10) years of creditable service prior to retirement, termination or death; provided, however, that if a member shall have been employed for fewer than ten (10) years, such average shall be taken only over the period of his/her actual employment. Effective October 1, 2006, average monthly earnings for members who retire or enter the DROP on or after October 1, 2006, shall mean one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) of the average annual compensation of the three (3) best years of the last ten (10) years of creditable service prior to retirement, termination or death. Average monthly earnings for Tier Two members shall be based on one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) of the average annual compensation of the five (5) best years of the last ten (10) years of creditable service prior to retirement, termination or death; provided, however, that if a Tier Two members shall have been employed for fewer than ten (10) years, such average shall be taken only over the period of his/her actual employment. 
Beneficiary means the person entitled to receive benefits under this article at the death of a member, who has been designated in writing by the member and filed with the board. If no such designation is in effect at the time of death of the member, or if no person so designated is living at that time, or if no provision for an alternate or contingent beneficiary is otherwise provided for, or if no such alternate or contingent beneficiary is living at such time, the beneficiary shall be the member's estate. 
Board means the board of trustees, which shall administer and manage the plan provided for in this article and serve as trustee of the fund. 
Credited service means uninterrupted service (expressed as years and completed months), from the date a member last entered employment, until the date his or her employment shall be terminated by death, disability, retirement, resignation, or discharge; provided however, the credited service of any member shall not be deemed to be interrupted by reason of: 
(1)  Temporary layoff; 
(2)  Paid vacation; 
(3)  Any authorized leave of absence. 
Time spent in compulsory military service for the United States by a member shall be credited provided he or she reenters the service of the city as a police officer within forty (40) days after the date of release from such military service. No credit for benefits or vesting shall be allowed for any period of time due to leave of absence in excess of one (1) year. All members similarly situated in similar circumstances shall be treated alike pursuant to uniform, nondiscriminatory rules and policies established by the board of trustees. 
Earnings means a member's basic rate of pay from the city, exclusive of all overtime pay, bonuses, commissions and any other extraordinary compensation; effective October 1, 2001 earnings shall include up to one hundred (100) hours of overtime per year. All such adjustments shall be initially funded with premium tax revenue required to be used for this purpose under F.S. Ch. 185, and any cost thereafter shall be paid as provided by law. The pension board shall have the authority to adopt administrative rules regarding the treatment of overtime. Effective October 1, 2002 earnings shall include up to three hundred (300) hours of overtime per year. 
Initial effective date means October 11, 1965. 
Member means a police officer, as defined in this section, who fulfills the prescribed participation requirements. However, the police chief may elect not to participate in this plan by submitting written notice to the board of trustees. 
Ordinance means Ordinance Number 80-21, codified in this article as amended by Ordinance No. 87-11, and any subsequent ordinances, setting forth the provisions of the retirement plan and trust. 
Plan means the City of Miramar Retirement Plan as contained herein and all amendments thereto. 
Police officer means any duly appointed and enrolled police officer who is employed full-time by the city; the police chief may not be included in this definition, for purposes of this chapter. 
Spouse shall mean the lawful wife or husband or a member. 
Tier One means the defined benefit pension program for police officers hired prior to the effective date of this article. 
Tier Two means the defined benefit pension program for police officers hired on or after the creation of the second tier. Tier Two benefits shall be administered as follows: (1) the normal retirement date for Tier Two participants shall be the completion of twenty (20) years of service or reaches age fifty-five (55) and completes ten (10) years of credited service, whichever occurs first; (2) the normal retirement benefit for Tier Two participants shall be calculated using a three percent (3%) multiplier for each year of service; (3) upon completion of twenty (20) years of service the benefit shall be increased to seventy-five percent (75%) of average monthly earnings; (4) the maximum benefit shall be eighty percent (80%) of average monthly earnings; and (5) Tier Two participants shall not be entitled to the COLA set forth in Section 15-225. Tier Two shall be interpreted at all times as is necessary to comply with all minimum benefits and standards under Chapter 185, Florida Statutes. 
Trust means the trust established herein as part of the plan. 
(Code 1964, § 19-20; Ord. No. 91-43, § 2, 8-21-91; Ord. No. 00-32, § 6, 6-21-00; Ord. No. 04-24, § 1, 9-1-04; Ord. No. 05-23, § 1, 9-21-05; Ord. No. 08-20, § 2, 6-10-08; Ord. No. 19-13 , § 2, 2-20-19)  
Sec. 15-167. - Conditions of eligibility. 
(a)  All police officers already covered under the city's retirement trust on the amended plan effective date shall automatically continue participation under the amended plan and trust without any further action being required. 
(b)  All persons employed by the city as police officers following the amended plan effective date may become members of the plan as of their respective dates of employment upon meeting the requirements set forth below in section 15-168. 
(Code 1964, § 19-21(a))  
Sec. 15-168. - Application for membership. 
Each police officer is eligible for membership on the date of employment. Each police officer shall complete an application within thirty (30) days after the date of employment, the form of which shall cover the following points, as well as such other points or items as may be prescribed by the board: 
(1)  Acceptance of the terms and conditions of the plan and trust; 
(2)  Designation of a beneficiary; 
(3)  Authorization of thirteen and four-tenths (13.4) percent payroll deduction payable to the plan, such deduction commencing as of his or her date of employment; and 
(4)  Provides acceptable evidence of his or her date of birth. 
(Code 1964, § 19-21(b); Ord. No. 00-32, § 5, 6-21-00; Ord. No. 05-23, § 2, 9-21-05)  
Sec. 15-169. - Change in designation of beneficiary. 
A retired member may change his designation of joint annuitant or beneficiary only twice. If such retired member desires to change his or her joint annuitant or beneficiary, he or she shall file with the board of trustees a notarized notice of such change either by registered letter or on a form as prescribed by the administrator of the plan. Upon notice of a completed change of joint annuitant form or such other notice, the board of trustees shall adjust the member's monthly benefit by the application of actuarial tables and calculations developed to ensure that the benefit paid is the actuarial equivalent of the present value of the member's current benefit. 
(Code 1964, § 19-21(c))  
Sec. 15-170. - Repeal or termination of system. 
(a)  This article setting forth the provisions of the plan and fund, and subsequent ordinances pertaining thereto, may be modified, terminated, or amended, in whole or in part, solely by the city commission; provided that if this article or any subsequent ordinance shall be amended or repealed in its application to any person benefiting hereunder, the amount of benefits which at the time of any such alteration, amendment, or repeal shall have accrued to the member or beneficiary shall not be affected thereby, except to the extent that the assets of the fund may be determined to be inadequate. 
(b)  If this article shall be repealed, or if contributions to the plan and trust are discontinued, the board shall continue to administer the plan and trust in accordance with the provisions of this article, for the sole benefit of the then members, any beneficiaries then receiving retirement allowances, and any future persons entitled to receive benefits under one (1) of the options provided for in this article who are designated by any of such members. In the event of repeal or termination, or if contributions to the plan are discontinued, there shall be full vesting (one hundred (100) percent) of benefits accrued to date of repeal and the assets of the plan and trust shall be allocated in an equitable manner to provide benefits on a proportionate basis to the persons so entitled to benefits in accordance with the provisions hereof, with prior preference being directed towards the return of accumulated contributions. 
(c)  Upon termination of the plan for any reason, or upon written notice to the board of trustees that contributions thereunder are being permanently discontinued, the fund shall be apportioned and distributed in accordance with F.S. § 185.37. 
(Code 1964, § 19-32)  
Sec. 15-171. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  Nonparticipation. Any person who entered the employment of the city as a full-time police officer prior to the effective date of this amended plan, and who elected not to participate, shall not have that election disturbed by the terms of this amendment. No person may elect not to participate in the plan who becomes employed on or after the effective date of this amendment. 
(b)  Discharged members. Members entitled to a pension shall not forfeit the same upon dismissal from the department, but shall be retired as herein described. 
(c)  Nonassignability. No benefit provided for herein shall be assignable or subject to garnishment for debt or for other legal process. 
(d)  Pension validity. The board of trustees shall have the power to examine into the facts upon which any pension shall heretofore have been granted under any prior or existing law, or shall hereafter be granted or obtained erroneously, fraudulently, or illegally for any reason. The board is empowered to purge the pension rolls of any person heretofore granted a pension under prior or existing law or hereafter granted under this article if the same is found to be erroneous, fraudulent or illegal for any reason; and to reclassify any pensioner who has heretofore under any prior or existing law or who shall hereafter under this article be erroneously, improperly or illegally classified. 
(e)  Incompetents. If any member or beneficiary is a minor or is, in the judgment of the board, otherwise incapable of personally receiving and giving a valid receipt for any payment due him or her under the plan, the board may, unless and until claims shall have been made by a duly appointed guardian or committee of such person, make such payment or any part thereof to such person's spouse, children or other person deemed by the board to have incurred expenses or assumed responsibility for the expenses of such person. Any payment so made shall be a complete discharge of any liability under the plan for such payment. 
(Code 1964, § 19-34(a)—(e))  
Sec. 15-172. - Claims procedure for participants and beneficiaries upon denial of claim. 
(a)  Any member or beneficiary whose application of claim for benefits has been denied shall receive from the board a written notice setting forth the specific reasons for such denial, the reasons therein to be clearly and fully explained so as to afford such member or beneficiary a clear understanding of the decision rendered. 
(b)  Any member or beneficiary whose application or claim for benefits has been denied shall have the right to a rehearing and a fair and full review by the board regarding the facts, circumstances and information pertaining to the claim and the reasons for denial of such claim. 
(Code 1964, § 19-34(f))  
Sec. 15-173. - Buy-back for military service. 
(a)  Any member of the retirement plan who is employed by the city prior to the entry of military service and who takes a leave of absence for the purpose of entering into military service in the armed forces of the United States and thereafter reenters the service of the city shall be entitled to purchase service credits for the period of absence by contributing the amount he or she would have contributed had he or she remained in service for the period of time absent. 
(b)  Any member who has served on active military duty but is ineligible to claim credit for service under (a) above shall receive credit up to a maximum of four (4) years for the time spent on active military service in the armed forces of the United States provided that the member pays to the retirement plan the contributions he or she would have contributed had they been employed for that period of time, provided that the member pays the cost of the military service within four (4) years of their date of hire. 
(c)  The method of payment of the military buy-back shall be as determined by the board. 
(d)  All members shall have four years from their date of hire to purchase military service under subsection 15-173(b). If a member desires to purchase military service more than four years after their date of hire, the member shall be required to pay the full actuarial cost of the service. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this plan, beginning with the passage of this amended ordinance and for the thirty (30) days immediately following thereafter, any member of the plan who has more than two (2) years, but less than ten (10) years of credited service, shall receive credit up to a maximum of four (4) years for the time spent on active military service in the armed forces of the United States provided that the member pays to the retirement plan the contributions he or she would have contributed had they been employed for that period of time. Payment shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(f)  The provisions of subsection (e) above shall automatically expire on the thirtieth (30th) day following the passage hereof. 
(Code 1964, § 19-34(g); Ord. No. 92-47, § 1, 9-16-92; Ord. 94-28 § 1, 3-16-94; Ord. No. 98-35, § 1, 5-20-98; Ord. No. 19-13 , § 3, 2-20-19)  
Sec. 15-174. - Permissive service credit. 
(a)  Purchase of higher multiplier : Members shall be permitted to purchase permissive service credit, applied as an increased benefit accrual factor ("multiplier"), as set forth below. The increased multiplier may be purchased in one percent (1%) increments in an amount not to exceed twenty percent (20%) of Final Average Earnings. The eighty percent (80%) maximum benefit cap shall remain in place notwithstanding the purchase of permissive service credit. 
(b)  Purchase of a lower retirement age : Alternatively, members shall be permitted to purchase permissive service credit expressed as an earlier normal retirement date. A member selecting this option will not accrue a higher multiplier, but will be permitted to begin receiving an unreduced benefit with fewer years of actual service, not to exceed a five (5) year reduction in their normal retirement age. 
(c)  Simultaneous Purchase of higher multiplier and lower retirement age : Members shall be permitted to simultaneously purchase both a higher multiplier and a lower retirement age. 
(d)  Procedure : 
(1)  Permissive service credit shall not be granted until: 1) the member has paid to the Pension Fund the actuarial cost of the purchase, as determined by the actuary for the Plan, and 2) the member is vested. The Board shall establish a uniform rule for the implementation of this provision. 
(2)  The cost of such permissive service credit purchase shall be determined as the increase in the actuarial present value of the member's plan benefits before and after the purchase. 
(3)  The total benefits actually paid from the Plan to the member or their beneficiaries after the permissive service credit purchase shall be guaranteed to be not less than the total amount of contributions that the member has made, including permissive service credit purchase contributions. 
(4)  The contribution by the member of the actuarially determined cost of the permissive service may be made in one lump sum or may be made by payroll deductions in installments for a period not to exceed five (5) years. A member electing to make installment payments shall be charged interested based on the Plan's assumed rate of return. A member making installment payments shall complete all required payments prior to payment of any enhanced benefit under this section. If a member separates from service prior to vesting, their permissive service contributions shall be returned without interest. 
(Ord. No. 19-13 , § 4, 2-20-19)  
Secs. 15-175—15-185. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF TRUSTEES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, committees and commissions, § 2-51 et seq. 
 
Sec. 15-186. - Composition. 
The board of trustees shall consist of six (6) persons as follows: 
(1)  Two (2) legal residents of the city appointed by the city commission; 
(2)  Three (3) regularly employed police officers of the city, upon the recommendation of a majority of the regularly employed police officers of the city; and 
(3)  One (1) member to be elected by a majority of the other members of the board of trustees who shall be approved by the city commission. 
DROP participants may serve as trustees on the board. 
(Code 1964, § 19-29(b); Ord. No. 05-23, § 3, 9-21-05)  
Sec. 15-187. - Terms. 
Each police officer member of the board of trustees shall serve for a period of four (4) years unless he or she sooner leaves the employment of the city as a police officer, whereupon, a successor shall be chosen in the same manner as the original appointment. The resident members shall serve for a period of four (4) years. The term of office of the elected member shall be four (4) years. The members may succeed themselves in office. 
(Code 1964, § 19-29(b); Ord. No. 10-04, § 2, 2-17-10)  
Sec. 15-188. - Compensation. 
The members of the board of trustees shall not receive any compensation for their services as such. 
(Code 1964, § 19-29(b))  
Sec. 15-189. - Chairperson, secretary. 
The board members shall elect a chairperson and a secretary of the board. The secretary shall keep a complete minute book of the proceedings of the board. 
(Code 1964, § 19-29(b))  
Sec. 15-190. - Voting procedures, quorum. 
Each trustee shall be entitled to one (1) vote on matters and items of business presented to the board. Three (3) affirmative votes shall be necessary for a decision by the trustees at any meeting of the board. The chairperson shall have the right to one (1) vote only. 
(Code 1964, § 19-29(c))  
Sec. 15-191. - Rules, regulations. 
Subject to the limitations of this article, the board of trustees shall from time to time establish uniform rules and regulations for the administration of funds created by this article and for the transaction of its business. 
(Code 1964, § 19-29(d))  
Sec. 15-192. - Support staff. 
The board of trustees shall engage such actuarial and other services as shall be required to transact the business of the retirement plan. The compensation of all persons engaged by the board of trustees and all other expenses of the board necessary for the operation of the retirement system shall be paid at such rates and in such amounts as the board of trustees shall agree. Funds may be disbursed by the city finance department or other disbursing agent as determined by the board, but only upon written authorization by the board of trustees. 
(Code 1964, § 19-29(e))  
Sec. 15-193. - General authority. 
(a)  The board of trustees shall serve as trustee of the trust created as part of the plan. The board shall be vested with full legal title to the trust and assets thereof. 
(b)  The board of trustees shall be the plan administrator and as such shall be charged with the sole and exclusive administration and responsibility for the proper operation of the retirement plan and trust and for making effective the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 19-29(a), (b))  
Sec. 15-194. - Duties, responsibilities. 
The duties and responsibilities of the board of trustees shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following: 
(1)  To construe the provisions of the plan and trust and determine all questions arising thereunder; 
(2)  To determine all questions relating to eligibility and participation; 
(3)  To determine or have determined and certified the amount of all retirement allowances or other benefits hereunder; 
(4)  To receive and process all applications for participation and benefits and, where necessary, conduct hearings thereon; 
(5)  To authorize all payments whatsoever from the fund, and to notify the disbursing agent, in writing, or approve benefit payments and other expenditures arising through operation of the plan; 
(6)  To make recommendations to the city commission regarding changes in the provisions of the plan and trust; 
(7)  To review reports of and have meetings with the custodian and investment agent(s) or advisor; to require written reports from the custodian on fund assets and transactions on a semiannual or more frequent basis if deemed advisable by the board; to require written and oral reports from the investment agent or advisor on at least a semiannual basis, such reports to reflect trust fund investment performance, investment recommendations and overall review of fund investment policies; 
(8)  To determine or have determined that the retirement plan complies at all times with the provisions of state law both substantively and in operation, and including the following: 
a.  Have prepared annually and distributed to all members a plan description and a summary of pertinent updated financial and actuarial information; 
b.  Assure that member contributions are deposited into the trust fund monthly (or more often), city contributions at least quarterly and state refund monies immediately; 
c.  Assure that all regular and special actuarial reports are filed with the Florida Division of Retirement within sixty (60) days of receipt; 
d.  Have actuarial valuations performed on a regular basis. Have special actuarial work performed in advance so as to determine costs of any plan changes or amendments prior to their adoption; 
e.  Establish a uniform procedure for prompt review and rehearing of all claims by members or beneficiaries. 
(9)  To maintain a minute book containing the minutes and records of the proceedings and meetings of the board. 
(Code 1964, § 19-29(f))  
Sec. 15-195. - Investment authority. 
The board of trustees shall have the following investment powers and authority: 
(1)  The board of trustees shall be vested with full legal title to the fund, subject however, to the authority and power of the city commission to amend or terminate this trust, provided that no amendment or trust fund termination shall ever result in the use of any assets of this fund except for the payment of regular expenses and benefits under the plan. 
(2)  All contributions from time to time paid into the trust fund, and the income thereof, without distinction between principal and income, shall be held and administered by the board or its agent in the fund and the board shall not be required to segregate or invest separately any portion of the fund. 
(3)  The fund may be invested and reinvested in such securities or property, real or personal, wherever situated and of whatever kind, as shall be approved by the board of trustees, including, but not limited to, stocks, common or preferred, and bonds, and other evidences or indebtedness or ownership as authorized by Chapter 185, Florida Statutes. Investment shall not be made in any stocks, bonds or other securities owned or controlled by a government other than that of the United States or of the several states. The board shall have the power to invest up to, but not more than, fifty (50) percent of the trust fund assets in common stock or preferred stock or both. 
(4)  The board of trustees may retain in cash and keep unproductive of income such amount of the fund as it may deem advisable, having regard for the cash requirements of the system. 
(5)  No person or entity shall be liable for the making, retention, or sale of any investment or reinvestment made as herein provided, nor for any loss or diminishment of the fund, except that due to his, her or its own negligence, wilful misconduct or lack of good faith. 
(6)  The board may cause any investment in securities held by it to be registered in or transferred into its name as trustee or into the name of such nominee as it may direct, or it may retain them unregistered and in form permitting transferability, but the books and records shall at all times show that all investments are part of the trust fund. 
(7)  The board is empowered, but is not required, to vote upon any stocks, bonds, or securities of any corporation, association, or trust and to give general or specific proxies or powers of attorney with or without power of substitution; to participate in mergers, reorganizations, recapitalizations, consolidations, and similar transactions with respect to such securities; to deposit such stock or other securities in any voting trust or any protective or like committee or with the trustees or with depositories designated thereby; to amortize or fail to amortize any part or all of the premium or discount resulting from the acquisition or disposition of assets; and generally, to exercise any of the powers of an owner with respect to stocks, bonds, or other investments, comprising the fund, which it may deem to be to the best interest of the fund to exercise. 
(8)  The board shall not be required to make any inventory or appraisal or report to any court, nor to secure any order of court for the exercise of any power herein contained. 
(9)  Where any action which the board is required to take or any duty or function which it is required to perform, either under the terms herein or under the general law applicable to it as trustee under this article, can reasonably be taken or performed only after receipt by it from a member, the city or any other entity of specific information, certification, direction or instructions, the board shall be free of liability in failing to take such action or perform such duty or function until such information, certification, direction or instruction has been received by it. 
(10)  Any overpayments or underpayments from the fund to a member or beneficiary caused by errors of computation shall be adjusted with interest at a rate per annum approved by the board. Overpayments shall be charged against payments next succeeding the correction. Underpayments shall be made up from the trust fund. 
(11)  The board shall sustain no liability whatsoever for the sufficiency of the fund to meet the payments and benefits herein provided for. 
(12)  In any application to or proceeding or action in the courts, only the city and the board shall be necessary parties, and no member or other person having an interest in the fund shall be entitled to any notice or service of process. Any judgment entered in such a proceeding or action shall be conclusive upon all persons. 
(13)  Any of the foregoing powers and functions reposed in the board may be performed or carried out by the board through duly authorized agents, provided that the board at all times requires of and reviews reports of any such agent; provided, further, that legal title to the fund shall always remain in the board of trustees. 
(Code 1964, § 19-30)  
Secs. 15-196—15-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - BENEFITS 
 
Sec. 15-211. - Normal retirement date. 
(a)  A member shall be eligible to retire on the first day of the month coincident with or next following that date on which such member completed twenty (20) years of credited service regardless of age, or reaches age fifty-five (55) and completed ten (10) years of credited service, whichever shall occur first. Vested members separating from service on or before November 25, 2004 shall be permitted to commence receipt of normal retirement benefits on what would have been the member's twentieth anniversary of service, had the member remained continuously employed. Members continuing in service on or after November 26, 2004 or hired on or after February 21, 2002 shall be permitted to commence receipt of normal retirement upon the completion of twenty (20) years of actual creditable service, including purchases of service credit as authorized by the plan, or the attainment of age fifty-five (55) with ten (10) years of actual creditable service. 
(b)  A member may retire on a date later than that described in (a) above if the board extends such member's retirement date by written authorization, on a year-to-year basis. 
(Code 1964, § 19-22(a); Ord. No. 91-34, § 1, 5-15-91; Ord. No. 05-23, § 4, 9-21-05; Ord. No. 08-20, § 3, 6-10-08; Ord. No. 19-13 , § 5, 2-20-19)  
Sec. 15-212. - Normal retirement benefit. 
(a)  Amount. The monthly retirement benefit shall be an amount determined as follows: Three and one quarter (3.25%) percent of average monthly earnings times credited service. For members retiring on or after October 1, 1994, the maximum benefit provided shall be eighty (80%) percent of their average monthly earnings, unless the member was eligible for normal retirement as of April 5, 1995 and remains employed as of October 1, 2004, in which case, there shall be no maximum accrual, as permitted by state law. Any member who as of October 1, 1994, has accrued in excess of eighty (80%) of average monthly earnings shall be permitted to retain the accrued benefit, but shall not be permitted to accrue additional benefits under the plan. Notwithstanding the eighty percent (80%) cap, members= monthly retirement benefit shall not be less than two percent (2%) of average monthly earnings times credited service. Effective October 1, 2006, the monthly retirement benefit for members who retire or enter the DROP on or after October 1, 2006 shall be an amount determined as follows: five (5%) percent of average monthly earnings times credited service for the twenty-first (21st), twenty-second (22 nd ), and twenty-third (23 rd ) years of employment as a member of the Plan. Effective October 1, 2007 Tier One members retiring with twenty (20) or more years of service shall be entitled to the maximum benefit of eighty percent (80%) of average monthly earnings. Effective October 1, 2018, notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the multiplier for Tier Two members shall be three percent (3%) of average monthly earnings, but upon the completion of twenty (20) years of service or reaching age fifty-five (55) and completing ten (10) years of credited service, a Tier Two member shall be entitled to a benefit of seventy-five percent (75%) of Average Monthly Earnings, which shall be subject to an eighty percent (80%) maximum benefit cap. 
(b)  [ Reserved. ] 
(Code 1964, § 19-22(b); Ord. No. 91-34, § 2, 5-15-91; Ord. No. 95-15, § 1; Ord. No. 97-41, § 1, 9-17-97; Ord. No. 00-06, § 1, 11-3-99; Ord. No. 00-32, § 1, 6-21-00; Ord. No. 01-08, § 1, 12-6-00; Ord. No. 05-23, § 5, 9-21-05; Ord. No. 08-20, § 4, 6-10-08; ; Ord. No. 19-13 , § 6, 2-20-19)  
Sec. 15-213. - Early retirement date. 
A member may retire on the first day of the month coincident with or next following the attainment of age fifty (50) and the completion of ten (10) years of credited service. 
(Code 1964, § 19-29(c))  
Sec. 15-214. - Early retirement benefit. 
A member retiring under this article on his or her early retirement date may receive either a deferred or an immediate benefit as follows: 
(1)  A deferred monthly benefit which shall commence on his or her normal retirement date and shall be continued on the first of each month thereafter during his or her lifetime. The amount of the benefit shall be determined and paid in the same manner as for retirement at his or her normal retirement date except that the average monthly earnings and credited service shall be determined as of his or her early retirement date; or 
(2)  An immediate monthly retirement benefit which shall commence on his or her early retirement date and shall be continued on the first day of each month thereafter during his or her lifetime. The benefit shall be payable as determined by subparagraph (1) above, reduced by three (3) percent for each year by which the starting date of the benefit precedes the normal retirement date. 
(Code 1964, § 19-22(d))  
Sec. 15-215. - Delayed retirement date. 
The delayed retirement date shall be that date following normal retirement date on which a member actually retires. A member may retire later than his or her normal retirement date if the board extends such member's retirement date by written authorization, on a year-to-year basis. 
(Code 1964, § 19-22(e))  
Sec. 15-216. - Delayed retirement benefit. 
A member retiring under this article at his or her delayed retirement date shall receive a monthly retirement benefit which shall commence on the first day of the month coincident with or next following such delayed retirement date. The amount of each such monthly retirement benefit shall be determined in the same manner as for normal retirement except that average monthly earnings and credited service shall be determined as of the member's actual retirement date. The duration and method of payment shall be the same as for normal retirement. 
(Code 1964, § 19-22(f))  
Sec. 15-217. - Applicable benefit formula. 
The benefit formula applicable in all cases of retirement, whether normal, early or delayed, shall be that in effect on the member's employment termination date. 
(Code 1964, § 19-22(g))  
Sec. 15-218. - Limitation on benefits. 
(a)  In no event may a member's annual benefit exceed the lesser of: 
(1)  Ninety thousand dollars ($90,000.00), adjusted for cost of living in accordance with Internal Revenue Code (IRC), Section 415(d), but only for the year in which such adjustment is effective; or 
(2)  One hundred (100) percent of the average annual compensation for the member's three (3) highest paid consecutive years; however, benefits of up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) a year can be paid without regard to the one-hundred-percent limitation if the total retirement benefits payable to a member under all defined benefit plans, as defined in IRC section 414(j) maintained by the city for the present and any prior year do not exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and the city has not at any time maintained a defined contribution, as defined in IRC section 414(i) in which the employee was a member. 
(b)  If the member has less than ten (10) years of service with the city (as defined in IRC section 415(b)(5) and as modified by IRC section 415(b)(6)(D)), the applicable limitation in paragraph (a)(1) or paragraph (a)(2) of this section shall be reduced by multiplying such limitation by a fraction, not to exceed one (1). The numerator of such fraction shall be the number of years, or parts thereof, of service with the city; the denominator shall be ten (10) years. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, the "annual benefit" means a benefit payable annually in the form of a straight life annuity with no ancillary or incidental benefits and with no member or rollover contributions. To the extent that ancillary benefits are provided, the limits set forth in paragraphs (a)(1) and (a)(2) above will be reduced actuarially, using an interest rate assumption equal to the greater of five (5) percent or the interest rate used in the most recent annual actuarial valuation, to reflect such ancillary benefits. 
(d)  If distribution of retirement benefits begins before age sixty-two (62), the dollar limitation as described in paragraph (a)(1) shall be reduced actuarially using an interest rate assumption equal to the greater of five (5) percent or the interest rate used in the most recent annual actuarial valuation; however, retirement benefits shall not be reduced below seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) if payment of benefits begins at or after age fifty-five (55) and not below the actuarial equivalent of seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) if payment of benefits begins before age fifty-five (55). If retirement benefits begin after age sixty-five (65), the dollar limitation of paragraph (a)(1) shall be increased actuarially using an interest assumption equal to the lessor of five (5) percent or the interest rate used in the most recent annual actuarial valuation. For purposes of this section, the "average annual compensation for a member's three (3) highest paid consecutive years" shall mean the member's greatest aggregate compensation during the period of three (3) consecutive years in which the individual was an active member of the system. 
(Code 1964, § 19-22(h))  
Sec. 15-219. - Disability benefits. 
(a)  Eligibility period. A member shall be deemed eligible for in the line of duty injury or illness disability benefits upon entry into the plan. A member shall not be eligible for other than in the line of duty injury or illness disability benefits until the completion of ten (10) years of credited service. Disability retirees shall be eligible to elect any optional form of payment under section 15-222(d). 
(b)  Disability defined. A police officer may retire from the service of the city if, prior to his or her normal retirement date, the officer becomes totally and permanently disabled as defined herein. Total disability shall mean that a member is wholly prevented from rendering useful and efficient service as a police officer. Permanent disability shall mean disability by physical or mental injury or disease which is assumed to be permanent and continuous during the remainder of the member's lifetime. Proof of disability shall be submitted to the board of trustees. Such disability will not be considered established unless it has continued for a period of not less than six (6) consecutive months. Disability benefits will not be paid to a member whose employment terminated prior to his or her becoming disabled nor in any case where the disability results from self-inflicted injury or the habitual use of narcotics or alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  Duration. The monthly amount of disability benefit payable to a member eligible for such benefit shall be an amount determined in the same manner as the normal retirement benefit based on the member's credited service to the date of his or her disability. The disability benefit shall be payable monthly commencing with the first day of the month following establishment of total and permanent disability and shall terminate with the last monthly payment due preceding the earliest of the following dates: 
(1)  The date of the death of the member; or 
(2)  The date the member is deemed to be no longer totally and permanently disabled. 
Upon occurrence of the earliest of the above events, the disability benefit shall cease; provided, however, that if a disability retiree dies after having elected an optional joint and survivor annuity or ten-year certain and life annuity, a benefit shall be paid to the joint annuitant or beneficiary, as provided by section 15-222. 
(d)  Required reexamination of disability retirees. Any disability retiree may be required to undergo a reexamination as directed by the board in order to confirm the continued existence of the disability condition. Any refusal by a member to undergo such examination or reexamination shall result in a termination of disability payments until such disability condition is again medically substantiated to the satisfaction of the board. If, prior to the normal retirement date, the member is found to have recovered from the disability sufficiently to reenter the service of the city, such disability benefit shall be terminated. 
(e)  Line-of-duty disability. If the police officer's disability occurred in the line of duty, his or her monthly benefit shall be sixty-six and two-thirds (66 2/3 ) percent of his or her average monthly compensation as of his or her disability retirement date. If the disability is not in the line of duty, the police officer's monthly benefit shall be the accrued normal retirement benefit, but shall be not less than twenty-five (25) percent of his or her average monthly compensation as of his or her disability retirement date. 
(f)  Certain disabilities. Any condition or impairment of health of any police officer employed by the city caused by tuberculosis, hypertension, heart disease, hardening of the arteries, resulting in total or partial disability or death, shall be presumed to be accidental and suffered in the line of duty unless the contrary be shown by competent evidence. Any condition or impairment of health caused directly or approximately by exposure, which exposure occurred in the act or performance of duty at some definite time or place without wilful negligence on the part of the police officer, resulting in total or partial disability, shall be presumed to be accidental and suffered in the line of duty; provided, however, that such police officer shall have successfully passed a physical examination upon entering the service of the city which physical examination, including electro-cardiogram, failed to reveal any evidence of such condition; provided further that such presumption shall not apply to benefits payable under or granted in a policy of life insurance or disability insurance. 
(g)  Medical examination. The board may require an applicant for disability benefits to submit to a medical examination conducted by a physician selected by the board. The board may also consider such other medical evidence as is presented to it on the question of total and permanent disability. 
(h)  Contributions suspended during period of disability. Any employee who suffers an injury or illness while in the line of duty and is receiving, as the sole and only benefit from the city, payments pursuant to F.S. ch. 440, the workers' compensation law, shall not be required to contribute to the pension plan for the period of such disability, provided, however, that the employee shall continue to receive credited service for such period of disability. In the event that the employee supplements the workers' compensation payments with accrued sick, vacation or other leave benefits, the employee shall make a regular pension contribution from the portion of the employee's pay provided by those accrued benefits. 
(Code 1964, § 19-23; Ord. No. 04-02, § 1, 11-5-03)  
Sec. 15-220. - Death benefits. 
(a)  Death prior to retirement. In the event of the death of a member prior to that date upon which he or she has completed ten (10) years of creditable service, a death benefit shall be payable to his or her designated beneficiary in an amount equal to his or her accumulated contributions plus the death benefit payable pursuant to the group life insurance contract which is funded by the plan. In the event of death prior to retirement but following ten (10) years of creditable service, the beneficiary is entitled to the benefits otherwise payable at early or normal retirement age. This shall be in addition to the death benefit payable pursuant to any group life insurance contract funded by the plan. In the event of a member's death that the board determines to be duty related or presumed by law to have occurred in the line of duty: 
(1)  Tier I members: 
a.  The spouse of a tier one member shall receive the greater of the accrued benefit or eighty (80) percent of final monthly earnings at the date of death, adjusted as if the member had retired on the date of death and had elected a joint and one hundred (100) percent survivor benefit. 
b.  If there is no surviving spouse, the member's minor child(ren) shall receive a pro rata portion of the eighty (80) percent death benefit. As each child reaches the age of majority, the remaining minor child(ren) shall receive an increased share of the eighty (80) percent death benefit. The board may, in its discretion, pay the benefit in another form if the board deems it to be in the best interest of the minor children. 
c.  If the member has minor children, who are not also the children of the surviving spouse, the eighty (80) percent death benefit shall be divided with fifty (50) percent of the benefit being paid to the surviving spouse, and the remaining fifty (50) percent divided among the minor children. As each minor child reaches the age of majority, the remaining minor child(ren) shall receive an increased share of the survivorship benefit. Upon emancipation of the last minor child, the spouse will receive the full eighty (80) percent benefit. 
d.  Should the surviving spouse die prior to the member's child(ren) reaching the age of majority, then the surviving children of the member shall each be entitled to a pro rata share of the surviving spouse's eighty (80) percent death benefit until the child(ren) reach the age of majority. 
e.  If a vested member has no spouse or minor children, the designated beneficiary shall receive the accrued benefit adjusted as if the member had retired on the date of death and had elected a joint and one hundred (100) percent survivor benefit. 
f.  If a non-vested member has no spouse or minor children, the designated beneficiary shall receive a refund of member contributions with interest at the rate of three (3) percent per annum. 
g.  The pension death benefit plus the worker's compensation benefit shall not exceed one hundred (100) percent of a member's final compensation, but a member's accrued benefit shall not be subject to offset. 
(2)  Tier II members: 
a.  The spouse of a tier two member shall receive the greater of the accrued benefit or seventy-five (75) percent of final monthly earnings at the date of death, adjusted as if the member had retired on the date of death and had elected a joint and one hundred (100) percent survivor benefit. 
b.  If there is no surviving spouse, the member's minor child(ren) shall receive a pro rata portion of the seventy-five (75) percent death benefit. As each child reaches the age of majority, the remaining minor child(ren) shall receive an increased share of the seventy-five (75) percent death benefit. The board may, in its discretion, pay the benefit in another form if the board deems it to be in the best interest of the minor children. 
c.  If the member has minor children, who are not also the children of the surviving spouse, the seventy-five (75) percent death benefit shall be divided with fifty (50) percent of the benefit being paid to the surviving spouse, and the remaining fifty (50) percent divided among the minor children. As each minor child reaches the age of majority, the remaining minor child(ren) shall receive an increased share of the survivorship benefit. Upon emancipation of the last minor child, the spouse will receive the full seventy-five (75) percent benefit. 
d.  Should the surviving spouse die prior to the member's child(ren) reaching the age of majority, then the surviving children of the member shall each be entitled to a pro rata share of the surviving spouse's seventy-five (75) percent death benefit until the child(ren) reach the age of majority. 
e.  If a vested member has no spouse or minor children, the designated beneficiary shall receive the member's accrued benefit adjusted as if the member had retired on the date of death and had elected a joint and one hundred (100) percent survivor benefit. 
f.  If a non-vested member has no spouse or minor children, the designated beneficiary shall receive a refund of member contributions with interest at the rate of three (3) percent per annum. 
g.  The pension death benefit plus the worker's compensation benefit shall not exceed one hundred (100) percent of a member's final compensation, but a member's accrued benefit shall not be subject to offset. 
(Code 1964, § 19-24; Ord. No. 17-01, § 2, 11-14-16)  
Sec. 15-221. - Termination benefits. 
All rights to benefits under this plan shall cease upon a member's termination of employment, other than by reason of early, normal, or delayed retirement (at which time members are one-hundred-percent vested); however, all members shall acquire a vested nonforfeitable right to accrued benefits pursuant to the following vesting schedule: 
Vesting Schedule for Accrued Benefits 
Completed Years 
of Credited 
Service With 
the City 	Vested 
Nonforfeitable 
Interest 
(percent) 
Less than 10 	0 
10 or more 	100 
 
Provided, any member who has a vested interest at time of termination of employment, and who elects to leave his or her contributions in the trust, shall receive a deferred retirement benefit commencing at either his or her early or normal retirement date, as elected by such member, the benefit amount to be based on credited service and average monthly earnings as of the date such member terminated his or her service to the city. Provided further in lieu of receiving any benefits to city and state refunded contributions, a member may elect to receive immediately on termination of employment payment of his or her accumulated contributions in a lump sum. 
(Code 1964, § 19-25)  
Sec. 15-222. - Duration; survivor benefit; optional forms of benefit payments; naming of multiple beneficiaries. 
(a)  A pensioner's retirement benefit shall be payable in the form of a monthly life annuity commencing on his or her normal, early or delayed retirement date, and shall cease with the last payment due immediately preceding the pensioner's death; provided, however, that if the pensioner shall die prior to receiving at least one hundred twenty (120) monthly payments, the remainder of such one hundred twenty (120) monthly payments shall be made to the pensioner's named beneficiary until a total of one hundred twenty (120) monthly payments have been made to the pensioner and his or her named beneficiary. 
(b)  In the event there is no named beneficiary living at the death of the pensioner, the balance of the one hundred twenty (120) guaranteed monthly payments which would have otherwise have become payable to the pensioner's beneficiary shall be commuted to a single sum and shall be paid to the pensioner's executors or administrators. If the beneficiary of a deceased pensioner should die prior to receiving the balance of the one hundred twenty (120) guaranteed monthly payments, the balance of the one hundred twenty (120) guaranteed monthly payments shall be commuted to a single sum and be paid to the beneficiary's executors or administrators. 
(c)  If a member should die after his or her normal retirement date and prior to commencement of benefits, his or her beneficiary shall be entitled to benefits payable for one hundred twenty (120) months in an amount equal to the amount which would have been payable had the member retired on the date of his or her death. In the case of a member who is married on the date of his or her death, the surviving spouse may elect to receive in lieu of the benefits provided in this subsection, benefits equal to those which would have been paid had the member retired on the day prior to his or her death and elected a one hundred (100) percent survivorship option. 
(d)  Each member entitled to a normal, early or delayed retirement benefit shall have the right at any time prior to the date on which benefit payments begin to elect to have his or her benefit payable under any one (1) of the options hereinafter set forth in lieu of the benefits otherwise provided herein, and to revoke any such elections and make a new election at any time prior to the actual commencement of benefit payments. The value of optional benefits shall be actuarially equivalent to the value of benefits otherwise payable, and the present value of payments to the retiring member must be at least equal to fifty (50) percent of the total present value of payments to the retiring member and his or her beneficiary. The member shall make such an election by written request to the board, such request being retained in the board's files. 
(1)  Option 1. Joint and last survivor option. The member may elect to receive a benefit during his or her lifetime and have such benefit (or a designated fraction thereof) continued after his or her death to and during the lifetime of his or her spouse or a relative other than his or her spouse. The election of Option 1 shall be null and void if the designated beneficiary dies before the member's benefit payments commence. 
(2)  Option 2. Other. The member may elect to receive the payment of a benefit of seventy-five (75) percent, sixty-six and two-thirds (66 2/3 ) percent, or fifty (50) percent of the member's monthly retirement allowance to be paid at the member's death to his or her joint pensioner designated by the member at the time of or prior to retirement, such benefit to be payable during the lifetime of the joint pensioner. The reduced retirement benefit shall be the actuarial equivalent of the amount of the retirement compensation otherwise payable to the member. In lieu of the other optional forms enumerated in this section, benefits may be paid in any form approved by the board so long as actuarial equivalence with the benefits otherwise payable is maintained. Regardless of any other provisions herein the board may direct that any monthly benefit of ten dollars ($10.00) or less be paid in a lump sum or on such other basis as is approved by the board, provided that actuarial equivalence is maintained at all times. 
(3)  Reemployment—Cessation of benefit payments. If a pensioner is reemployed by the city, his or her retirement benefit payments shall cease with the last payment due prior to his or her reemployment. Retirement benefit payments shall again become payable on the first day of the month following subsequent termination of employment. 
(4)  Pop-up option. Upon retirement, including entry into the DROP, a member may elect an actuarially equivalent pop-up option as part of a reduced retirement benefit providing for a survivorship option. Under the terms of this option, a member's survivorship benefit shall be deemed canceled if the member's designated survivor predeceases the member. In that event, the member's annuity shall be increased or "pop-up" to the original annuity amount that would have been payable had the member not elected a survivorship option, to be effective on the first day of the month following the death of the member's designated survivor. This option shall also apply in the case of a member whose marriage is dissolved where the former spouse cannot lawfully be deemed the surviving spouse. In such an event, the survivorship option shall be deemed canceled and the member's annuity shall be increased or "pop-up" to the original annuity amount that would have been payable had the member not elected an option, to be effective on the first day of the month after the entry of the final order of dissolution of marriage. A member who is not married at the time of retirement may also elect an automatic joint-and-survivor benefit to apply one (1) year after marriage should the member marry after retirement. Any joint-and-survivor benefit option provided by the plan may be selected. The joint-and-survivor benefit shall be determined as the then actuarial equivalent of the annuity in effect prior to the marriage. A member electing this option may choose a survivorship amount equal to the member's reduced monthly benefit or some designated portion thereof. The board shall promulgate administrative rules for the implementation of this section. 
(e)  No police officer may make any change in his or her retirement option after the date of cashing or depositing his or her first retirement check. 
(f)  A member may designate a choice of one (1) or more persons, named sequentially or jointly, as his or her beneficiary (or beneficiaries). Upon failure of a member to designate a beneficiary, any benefit shall be paid to the deceased member's estate. 
(Code 1964, § 19-26; Ord. No. 97-41, § 2, 9-17-97; Ord. No. 00-32, § 4, 6-21-00; Ord. No. 01-31, § 1, 5-2-01)  
Sec. 15-223. - Deferred retirement option plan. 
(a)  A deferred retirement option plan ("DROP") is hereby created. 
(b)  The administration cost of the DROP, including any actuarial fees, shall be at no cost and with no liability to the city. 
(c)  An employee's participation in the DROP when combined with the number of years of credited service in the retirement plan shall not exceed a total of thirty (30) years. However, in no event shall total participation in the DROP exceed eight (8) years. In addition, the DROP is extended to a maximum of eight (8) years for incumbents in the position of police chief despite the fact that such participation may cause the incumbent police chief to be employed by the city for more than thirty (30) years. 
(d)  During a "window" period of thirty (30) calendar days after the effective date of this section, an eligible employee may elect to enter the DROP. For the purposes of this section, "eligible employee" mean an employee who has a minimum of twenty-five (25) years of credited service and is currently eligible for normal retirement. Any employee electing to enter the DROP during this window shall be eligible to participate in the DROP for a maximum of sixty (60) months notwithstanding the thirty (30) year limitation in subsection (c). 
(e)  Except as otherwise specified in subsection (d), an employee shall be eligible to enter the DROP at the earliest date of eligibility for normal retirement and subsequently on his/her anniversary date through completion of twenty-four (24) years of credited service. 
(f)  As a condition of participation in the DROP, employees agree to tender an irrevocable resignation. The resignation shall take effect not more than ninety-six (96) months after commencement of DROP participation or the date upon which the combined total of credited service and DROP participation equal thirty (30) years, whichever shall occur first. In addition, the DROP is extended to a maximum of eight (8) years for incumbents in the position of police chief despite the fact that such participation may cause the incumbent police chief to be employed by the city for more than thirty (30) years. 
(g)  A member may participate in the DROP only once and after commencement the employee shall not have the right to be a contributing member of the pension plan. 
(h)  Upon the effective date of participation in the DROP, both employee and employer contributions shall cease and employees shall no longer accrue credited service; final average compensation shall be determined; and any survivorship options shall be selected. 
(i)  For the purposes of this section, a member's final average compensation and credited service shall be determined as of the effective date of commencement of participation in the DROP. 
(j)  DROP participants shall not be eligible for disability or death benefits from the pension plan. 
(k)  In the event that a DROP participant becomes permanently and totally disabled, the participant shall be deemed to have accepted a service retirement on the day prior to the date of disability. 
(l)  In the event that a DROP participant dies, the participant shall be deemed to have retired on a service retirement on the day prior to the actual date of death. 
(m)  Upon the date of participation in the DROP the monthly retirement benefits that would have been payable had the member elected to cease employment and receive a service retirement allowance shall be paid in to a deferred retirement option account created by the board of trustees. 
(n)  DROP monies shall be invested the same as any other asset of the pension plan and shall gain or lose interest at the same rate as the pension plan. Actual earnings shall be determined on the first day of the month preceding the employee's date of separation. The board of trustees of the pension plan may, by administrative rule, establish a self-directed investment alternative. 
(o)  At the end of the specified period of DROP participation or other termination of the DROP, the employee shall receive a sum equal to accumulated DROP payments plus interest. The payment shall be made as a lump sum payment; as an annuity; by periodic payments; rollover to another qualified plan; or any other combination of the above elections. 
(p)  If a participant dies during the period of participation in the DROP plan, a lump sum equal to accrued DROP payments plus interest shall be paid to the named beneficiary or, if no beneficiary is named, to the estate of the employee in addition to any other normal survivorship benefits which would be paid. 
(q)  No distribution of DROP monies shall be made while a participant is still employed by the city. 
(r)  The board of trustees of the pension plan is authorized to adopt administrative rules necessary for the administration of the DROP. 
(s)  DROP Loan Program : A DROP Loan Program is hereby established for police officer retirees who participated in the DROP program. 
(1)  Availability of loans. 
a.  Loans are available to members only after termination of employment, provided the member had participated in the DROP for a period of 12 months. 
b.  Loans may only be made from a member's own account. 
c.  There may be no more than one loan at a time. 
(2)  Amount of loan. 
a.  Loans may be made up to a maximum of 50% of account balance. 
b.  The maximum dollar amount of a loan is $50,000, reduced by the highest outstanding loan balance during the last 12 months. 
c.  The minimum loan is $5,000. 
d.  After taking a loan, no additional distributions may be taken from a member's DROP account, unless the remaining DROP account balance is at least 200% of the outstanding DROP loan. 
(3)  Limitations on loans shall be made from the amounts paid into the DROP and the earnings thereon. 
(4)  Term of loan. 
a.  The loan must be for at least one year. 
b.  The loan shall be no longer than five years. 
(5)  Loan interest rate. 
a.  The interest rate shall be fixed at time the loan is originated for the entire term of loan. 
b.  The interest rate shall be equal to the prime rate published by an established local bank on the last day of each calendar quarter preceding the date of loan application. 
(6)  Defaults on loans. 
a.  Loans shall be in default if two consecutive months' repayments are missed or if a total of four months' repayments are missed. 
b.  Upon default, the entire balance becomes due and payable immediately. 
c.  If a loan in default is not repaid in full immediately, the loan may be canceled and the outstanding balance treated as a distribution, which may be taxable. 
d.  Upon default of a loan, a member will not be eligible for additional loans. 
(7)  Miscellaneous provisions. 
a.  All loans must be evidenced by a written loan agreement signed by the member and the Board of Trustees. The agreement shall contain a promissory note. 
b.  Notice of a loan shall be provided to a member's spouse, including a copy of the promissory note. 
c.  Loans shall be considered a general asset of the fund. 
d.  Loans shall be subject to administrative fees to be set by the Board of Trustees. 
e.  Outstanding loan balances shall not be credited with earnings or losses. As the outstanding balance is repaid with interest, earnings and losses shall be applied to the payments and interest on a quarterly basis. 
(Ord. No. 00-16, § 1, 1-5-00; Ord. No. 08-20, § 5, 6-10-08; Ord. No. 10-04, § 3, 2-17-10; Ord. No. 19-13 , § 7, 2-20-19)  
Sec. 15-224. - Coordination of benefits. 
This plan will coordinate benefits with the Miramar general employees, fire and ICMA pension plans (hereinafter, "city sponsored plans"). In the event that a participant of this plan has earned a minimum of ten (10) years of aggregate service in one (1) or more city sponsored plans, including this plan, the participant shall be eligible for coordination of benefits from the city sponsored plans, to the extent of any service credit used to determine eligibility for benefits in such plans. Upon the commencement of a service retirement, the participant shall receive payment from this plan in an amount equal to the accrued benefit based on credited service accrued while a participant is in this plan. In addition, the participant shall also be eligible for payment from any city sponsored plans, as appropriate, of a benefit equal to the years of credited service in that plan based upon the average salary in effect at the time the participant terminated service with the city and at a formula rate in effect when the participant terminated membership in that plan. The benefits in the applicable city sponsored plan shall be available even though the participant shall not have otherwise vested under the terms of that plan. 
In the event a participant of this plan shall transfer from this plan to another city sponsored plan, and the participant shall have accrued a total of ten (10) or more years of aggregate credited service in one (1) or more city sponsored plans, including this plan, the participant shall, upon retirement from such plan, be deemed vested in this plan and eligible to receive benefits accrued in this plan based upon aggregate years of service with the city, with benefits accrued in this plan based on credited service in this plan, average salary in effect at the time of retirement and the formula rate in effect when the participant transferred from this plan. This benefit shall be available even though the participant shall not have otherwise achieved a vested benefit in this plan; provided, however, that the participant, upon termination in this plan, kept his/her contributions on deposit in this plan. 
(Ord. No. 01-20, § 1, 2-21-01)  
Sec. 15-225. - Cost of living adjustment. 
Effective October 1, 2001, an annual two (2) percent cost of living adjustment (COLA) is created. The COLA shall be paid on the annual retirement benefit and shall be cumulative. The COLA shall apply to all Tier One retirees and DROP participants who were employed on or after October 1, 2001, including DROP participants who had entered the DROP prior to October 1, 2001. COLA payments shall commence five (5) years after retirement. For the purposes of this section, retirement shall include entry into the DROP, but COLA payments shall commence five (5) years after October 1, 2001 for Tier One DROP participants who were participating in DROP as of October 1, 2001. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, Tier Two members are not covered by the COLA. 
(Ord. No. 05-23, § 7, 9-21-05; Ord. No. 08-20, § 6, 6-10-08)  
Sec. 15-226. - Transfer of accumulated leave. 
Members eligible to receive accumulated sick leave, accumulated vacation leave or any other accumulated leave payable upon separation may elect, not later than the December 31st of the calendar year prior to the year of separation from service, to have the leave transferred into the member's DROP account. For purposes of this section, the term "separation" shall mean termination of service as a police officer with the city. The board, by rule, shall have the authority to enact administrative rules for purposes of administering the provisions of this section, consistent with the federal tax laws in effect on the date of transfer. No such rule shall conflict with the provisions of this section or the IRS Code. The value of the leave transferred shall be determined in accordance with applicable personnel policies or collectively bargained agreements. 
(Ord. No. 05-23, § 8, 9-21-05)  
Sec. 15-227. - Ad Hoc Variable Benefit. 
(a)  Ad Hoc Variable Benefit for all members and retirees of the Plan. Effective October 1, 2010, an annual Ad Hoc Variable Benefit is created for all members and retirees of the Plan (the "Ad Hoc Variable Benefit"). The Ad Hoc Variable Benefit shall be paid on the annual retirement benefit and shall be cumulative subject to the requirements of sections 15-227(d) and (e). The Ad Hoc Variable Benefit payment shall commence five (5) years after retirement. 
(b)  The Ad Hoc Variable Benefit shall be solely funded from Chapter 185 Premium Tax Revenues in excess of the amounts currently used for existing benefits and in excess of those amounts committed to funding enhanced benefits that were in place on September 30, 2010 ("Excess Chapter 185 Funds"). 
(c)  The Ad-Hoc Variable Benefit for Fiscal Year 2011 (October 1, 2010 through September 30, 2011) shall be forty-two one hundredths of one percent (0.42%). 
(d)  The cost of the Ad Hoc Variable Benefit shall be reviewed annually during the month of June by the board and its actuary to determine what, if any, the Ad Hoc Variable Benefit will be for the next fiscal year. No Ad Hoc Variable Benefit shall be distributed to any retiree until the board and its actuary have determined what the Ad Hoc Variable Benefit will be for that fiscal year based solely on the Excess Chapter 185 Funds. In the event that there are no Excess Chapter 185 Funds to fund this benefit for a particular fiscal year, there will be no Ad Hoc Variable Benefit for that fiscal year. 
(e)  This benefit is a "variable defined benefit" in that the actual level of the Ad Hoc Variable Benefit, if any, shall be determined on an annual basis and shall be strictly based upon the availability of the Excess Chapter 185 Funds. As such, participants shall not have any vested and/or property rights to the Ad Hoc Variable Benefit. 
(f)  The Ad Hoc Variable Benefit shall be cost neutral to the city and shall not become an actuarial liability of the city. Consistent with this intent, any future state legislation amending Chapter 185, Florida Statutes, to enable the city to use excess Chapter 185 funds to pay for the Plan's actuarial accrued liabilities and/or Plan costs will automatically render the Ad Hoc Variable Benefit void on a going forward basis (i.e. excess Chapter 185 funds collected after such legislative change will not be used to fund the Ad Hoc Variable Benefit). 
(Ord. No. 12-01, § 2, 10-5-11)  
Sec. 15-228. - Share plan. 
Pursuant to the requirements of F.S. § 185.35(6), a defined contribution plan component ("share plan") is established in addition to the defined benefit component of this local law plan. This share plan is not currently funded and does not currently pay benefits. When and if the share plan is ever required to be funded under chapter 185, or by virtue of a future agreement between the city and the police benevolent association, the board of trustees shall have the authority to adopt rules regarding the operation of the share plan. 
Beginning with the chapter 185 insurance premium tax allocation for 2015 (received in 2016), the first $500,000.00 of tax rebates shall be used to fund existing defined benefits. Premium taxes above $500,000.00 will be split in half, with fifty (50) percent being used to fund minimum defined benefit pension costs of the retirement system and the remaining fifty (50) percent used to fund section 15-227's ad hoc variable benefit. 
(Ord. No. 17-02, § 2, 11-14-16)  
Secs. 15-229—15-235. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CONTRIBUTIONS AND FINANCES 
 
Sec. 15-236. - Member contributions 
(a)  Effective February 20, 2002, members shall contribute twelve and four-tenths (12.4) percent of their earnings to the retirement trust fund each pay period. Effective October 1, 2002, members shall contribute thirteen and four-tenths (13.4) percent of their earnings to the retirement trust fund each pay period. 
(b)  The city shall pick up, rather than deduct, all regular contributions of members. The city shall derive pickup amounts from the same source of funds which is used in compensating members of the retirement trust and shall do so by reducing the earnable compensation of each member. All pickup amounts shall be treated as employer contributions for purposes of determining tax treatment under the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended. 
(c)  The board shall certify to the appropriate city authority or officer responsible for making up the payroll for members of the retirement trust the proper proportion of each member's earnable compensation which shall be picked up each pay period, as well as any additional amounts which shall be deducted for any member. 
(d)  Regular contributions shall be made, notwithstanding the fact that the minimum compensation provided for by law for any member shall be reduced thereby. Each member shall be deemed to consent and agree to the pickup of regular contributions provided herein, and payment of compensation less such contribution shall be a full and complete discharge of all claims and demands whatsoever for service rendered during the period of employment covered by such payment, except as to benefits otherwise provided by this article. 
(e)  Member contributions shall be deposited in the trust fund immediately after each pay period. 
(f)  Interest shall be credited annually to member contributions at the rate of not less than three (3) percent per annum to be determined from time to time by the board. 
(g)  All benefits payable under this plan are in lieu of a refund of accumulated contributions. In any event, however, each member shall be guaranteed the payment of benefits on his or her behalf at least equal to the total amount of his or her accumulated contributions. 
(Code 1964, § 19-27(a); Ord. No. 95-15, § 2(a); Ord. No. 00-06, § 2, 11-3-99; Ord. No. 00-32, § 2, 6-21-00; Ord. No. 01-08, § 1, 12-6-00; Ord. No. 04-24, § 2 9-1-04; Ord. No. 05-23, § 6, 9-21-05)  
Sec. 15-237. - City contributions. 
So long as this plan is in effect, the city shall make an annual contribution to the trust fund in an amount at least equal to the difference in each year as between the total of aggregate member contributions for the year plus state refund contributions for the year and the total cost for the year as shown by the most recent actuarial valuation and report for the plan. The total cost for any year shall be defined as the total of normal cost plus the additional amount sufficient to amortize the unfunded accrued past service liability over a forty-year period commencing with the initial effective date of the plan. City contributions shall be deposited in the fund on at least a monthly basis. The city contribution to the plan shall be a minimum of ten (10) percent of the earnings of the members of the plan on an annual basis. 
(Code 1964, § 19-27(b))  
Sec. 15-238. - State contributions. 
Any monies received or receivable by reason of laws of the state for the express purpose of funding and paying for retirement benefits for police officers of the city shall be deposited in the trust fund comprising part of this plan. Any such amount shall be deposited in the fund immediately but under no circumstances more than five (5) days after receipt by the city. 
(Code 1964, § 19-27(c); Ord. No. 00-32, § 3, 6-21-00)  
Sec. 15-239. - Other contributions. 
Private donations, gifts, and contributions may be deposited to the fund, but such deposits must be accounted for separately and kept on a segregated bookkeeping basis. Funds arising from these sources may be used only for additional benefits for members, as determined by the board, and may not be used to reduce what would have otherwise been required city contributions. Any such amount shall be deposited in the fund within thirty (30) days of its receipt by the employer. 
(Code 1964, § 19-27(d))  
Sec. 15-240. - Fund management. 
(a)  As part of the plan there is hereby established a trust, into which shall be deposited all of the contributions and assets whatsoever attributable to the plan. 
(b)  The supervision of the trust fund (and assets thereof) and the responsibility for custodianship shall be vested in the board of trustees. Payment of benefits and disbursements from the fund shall be made by the disbursing agent on authorization from the board. 
(c)  The board may hire and appoint such persons, agents or entities (including corporate fiduciaries) as in its discretion may be required or advisable to the performance of custodial and investment duties hereunder. The board may enter into agency, investment advisory and custodial agreements as it deems appropriate. At least once every three (3) years, the board of trustees shall retain an independent consultant professionally qualified to evaluate the performance of professional money managers. The independent consultant shall make recommendations to the board of trustees regarding the selection of money managers for the next investment term. These recommendations shall be considered by the board of trustees at its next regularly scheduled meeting. Time, date, place and subject of this meeting shall be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(d)  All funds and securities of the plan and trust may be commingled in the fund, provided that accurate records are maintained at all times reflecting the financial composition of the fund, including accurate current accounts and entries as regards the following: 
(1)  Current amounts of accumulated contributions of members on both an individual and aggregate account basis; 
(2)  Receipts and disbursements; 
(3)  Benefit payments; 
(4)  State premium refunds due the city for deposit to the trust fund; 
(5)  All monies, funds and assets whatsoever attributable to contributions and deposits from the city; 
(6)  All interest, dividends and gains or losses whatsoever; and 
(7)  Such other entries as may be properly required so as to reflect a clear and complete financial report of the fund. 
(e)  It shall be impossible, at any time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities with respect to covered employees and their beneficiaries under the trust, for any part of the principal or income of the trust to be used for, or diverted to, purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of the employees or their beneficiaries. 
(Code 1964, § 19-28)  
Sec. 15-241. - Fiduciaries and fiduciary responsibility. 
(a)  Fiduciary defined. A "fiduciary" shall be any person or entity who exercises any discretionary authority or control regarding regular, ongoing management or administration of the plan or plan assets, and any person or entity who renders or who has authority or responsibility to render investment advice. 
(b)  Standards of responsibility. All fiduciaries shall discharge their duties with respect to the plan solely in the interest of members and beneficiaries, and more particularly as follows: 
(1)  For the exclusive purpose of providing benefits to members and their beneficiaries, and defraying reasonable plan administrative expenses; 
(2)  With the care, skill, prudence, and diligence under the circumstances then prevailing that a prudent man acting in a like capacity and familiar with such matters would use in the conduct of an enterprise of a like character and with like aims; and 
(3)  By performing their duties in accordance with the documents and instruments setting forth and governing the plan. 
(Code 1964, § 19-31)  
Secs. 15-242—15-260. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CITY RETIREMENT PLAN AND TRUST FUND  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 15-261. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, unless otherwise defined or required by the context, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning indicated: 
Accumulated contributions means a member's own contributions with interest, if any, as determined by the board from time to time. In no event may such rate of interest exceed five (5) percent per year. 
Actuarial equivalence or actuarially equivalent means that any benefit payable under the terms of this system in a form other than the normal form of benefit shall have the same actuarial present value on the date payment commences as the normal form of benefit. For purposes of establishing the actuarial present value of any form of payment other than a lump sum distribution, all future payments shall be discounted for interest and mortality by using seven (7) percent interest and the 1983 group annuity mortality table for males, with ages set ahead five (5) years in the case of disability retirees. In the case of a lump sum distribution, the actuarial present value shall be determined on the basis of the same mortality rates as just described and the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation's interest rates for terminating single employer plans, which rates are in effect: 
(1)  Ninety (90) days prior to the member's date of termination, if distribution is made within six (6) months of such date of termination; or 
(2)  Ninety (90) days prior to the distribution date, if distribution is made later than six (6) months after the member's date of termination. 
Amended plan effective date means December 1, 1980. 
Average monthly earnings means one thirty-sixth ( 1/36 ) of the member's earnings for the highest three (3) years preceding the actual retirement date or termination date of the member. 
Beneficiary means the person entitled to receive benefits hereunder at the death of a member who has or have been designated in writing by the member and filed with the board. If no such designation is in effect at the time of death of the member, or if no person so designated is living at that time, or if no provision for an alternate or contingent beneficiary is otherwise provided for, or if no such alternate or contingent beneficiary is living at such time, the beneficiary shall be the member's estate. 
Board means the board of trustees, which shall administer and manage the plan herein provided and serve as trustee of the fund. 
Credited service means uninterrupted service (expressed as years and completed months), from the date a member last entered employment, until the date his or her employment shall be terminated by death, disability, retirement, resignation, or discharge; provided, however, the credited service of any member shall not be deemed to be interrupted by reason of: 
(1)  Temporary layoff; 
(2)  Paid vacation; 
(3)  Any involuntary, authorized leave of absence; 
(4)  Sick leave. 
Time spent in compulsory military service for the United States by a member shall be credited provided he or she reenters the service of the city as a general employee within forty (40) days after the date of release from such military service. No credit for benefits or vesting shall be allowed for any period of time due to leave of absence in excess of one (1) year. All members similarly situated in similar circumstances shall be treated alike pursuant to uniform nondiscriminatory rules and policies established by the board of trustees. 
Earnings means a member's basic rate of pay from the city, exclusive of all overtime pay, bonuses, commissions and any other extraordinary compensation. 
General employee means any person other than a police officer or firefighter who is employed on a full-time basis as classified by the city. 
Initial effective date means August 14, 1967. 
Member means a general employee who fulfills the prescribed participation requirements. 
Ordinance means Ord. No. 81-12, codified in this section, City Retirement Plan and Trust Fund, as amended from time to time. 
Plan means the City of Miramar Amended Retirement Plan as contained herein as part of the plan. 
Plan year means the twelve-month period commencing on October first of each year. 
Prior plan means the retirement plan of the city for general employees initially established on August 14, 1967, and in effect up to the effective date of this amended retirement plan as set forth in this article. 
Spouse shall mean the lawful wife or husband of a member. 
Trust means the trust established herein as part of the plan. 
(Code 1964, § 19-40, Ord. No. 81-12; Ord. No. 89-1, § 1, 10-3-88; Ord. No. 95-3, 11-2-94, effective 10-1-94; Ord. No. 02-03, § 1, 12-12-01, effective 11-20-01) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that the provisions of Ord. No. 02-03, adopted Dec. 12, 2001, are effective retroactively to Nov. 20, 2001.  
Sec. 15-262. - Conditions of eligibility. 
(a)  All general employees already covered under the city's prior plan on the amended plan effective date shall automatically continue participation under the amended plan and trust without any further action being required. 
(b)  All persons employed by the city as general employees shall, as a condition of employment, become members of the plan as of their respective dates of employment. However, membership in the plan shall not be mandatory for each general employee whose job classification is covered by the other city-sponsored retirement plan pursuant to Section 2.4.1a of the city's personnel policies and regulations. General employees of the city who were employed as of September 30, 1988, and who had been previously excluded from the plan due to being sixty (60) years of age on their date of hire shall be included in the plan as of October 1, 1988, and shall be given service credit under the plan as of their date of hire. 
(c)  Irrevocable Election to Join: All general employees who are members of the City's 401(a) plan shall be permitted to join the Plan by making an irrevocable election using the ballot and forms prepared by the Board. The employee's decision shall be irrevocable. 
(Code 1964, § 19-41(a); Ord. No. 89-1, § 2, 10-3-88; Ord. No. 95-3, §(b), 11-2-94, effective 10-1-94; Ord. No. 18-02, § 2, 11-27-17)  
Sec. 15-263. - Application for membership. 
Each general employee shall complete an application within thirty (30) days after his or her date of employment, the form of which shall cover the following points, as well as such other points or items as may be prescribed by the board: 
(1)  Acceptance of the terms and conditions of the plan and trust; 
(2)  Designation of a beneficiary or beneficiaries; and 
(3)  Provision of acceptable evidence of his or her date of birth; and 
(4)  Authorization of payroll deductions. 
(Code 1964, § 19-41(b); Ord. No. 95-3, 11-2-94, effective 10-1-94).  
Sec. 15-264. - Change in designation of beneficiary. 
A member may from time to time change his or her designated beneficiary by a written notice to the board upon forms provided by the board. Upon such change, the rights of all previously designated beneficiaries to receive any benefit under the plan shall cease. 
(Code 1964, § 19-41(c))  
Sec. 15-265. - Election by prior plan members. 
Each member who, as of the amended plan effective date, has an account balance standing to his or her credit under the prior plan shall, within sixty (60) days following the amended plan effective date, make an irrevocable election to: 
(1)  Leave his or her account balance in the fund and thus be entitled to larger benefits, as described herein; or 
(2)  Withdraw his or her vested account balance and thus be entitled to the same level of benefits as other members. 
(Code 1964, § 19-41(d))  
Sec. 15-266. - Repeal or termination of system. 
(a)  This article setting forth the provisions of the plan and amended trust and subsequent ordinances pertaining thereto, if any, may be modified, terminated, or amended, in whole or in part solely by the city commission; provided that if this or any subsequent ordinance shall be amended or repealed in its application to any person benefiting hereunder, the amount of benefits which at the time of any such alteration, amendment, or repeal shall have accrued to a member or beneficiary shall not be affected thereby, except to the extent that the assets of the fund may be determined to be inadequate. 
(b)  If this article shall be repealed, or if contributions to the plan and trust are discontinued, the board shall continue to administer the amended plan and trust in accordance with the provisions of this article, for the sole benefit of the then members, any beneficiaries then receiving retirement allowances and any future persons entitled to receive benefits under one (1) of the options provided for in this article who are designated by any of such members. In the event of repeal or termination, or if contributions to the plan are discontinued, there shall be full vesting one hundred (100) percent of benefits accrued to date of repeal and the assets of the plan and trust shall be allocated in an equitable manner to provide benefits on a proportionate basis to the persons so entitled to benefits in accordance with the provisions hereof, with prior preference being directed towards the return of prior plan account balances. 
(c)  The following shall be the order of priority for purposes of allocating the assets of the trust upon repeal or termination of this article or if contributions to the plan and trust are discontinued: 
(1)  Prior plan account balances and employee contributions of the members, if any, less any benefits received, in proportion to and to the extent of the then amount of such account balances and employee contributions. If any funds remain, then 
(2)  Members already retired under the normal, delayed and early retirement provisions of the plan and those eligible for normal, delayed or early retirement but not actually retired, and their beneficiaries, in proportion to and to the extent of the then actuarially determined present value of the benefits payable less amounts received according to (1) above. If any such funds remain, then 
(3)  All other members and their beneficiaries in the same manner as in (2) but based upon credited service and average monthly earnings as of the date of termination of the plan, and with any benefits vested given precedence. 
(d)  The allocation of the fund provided for in this section may, as decided by the board, be carried out through the purchase of insurance company contracts to provide the benefits determined in accordance with this subsection. The fund may be distributed in one (1) sum to the persons entitled to such benefits or the distributions may be carried out in such other equitable manner as the board may direct. The trust may be continued in existence for purposes of making subsequent distributions and invested and reinvested until full distribution of all assets has been made. 
(e)  If, at any time during the first ten (10) years after the effective date of the amended plan, the plan shall be terminated or the full current costs of the plan (consisting of the normal costs and interest on any accrued liability) shall not have been met, anything in the plan to the contrary notwithstanding, city contributions which may be used for the benefit of any one of the twenty-five (25) highest paid members in the plan on the effective date, whose anticipated annual retirement allowance provided by the city's contributions at his or her normal retirement date would exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00), shall not exceed the greater of either twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), or an amount computed by multiplying the smaller of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or twenty (20) percent of such employee's average annual earnings during his or her last five (5) years of service by the number of years of service since the effective date. In the event that it shall hereafter be determined by statute, court decision, ruling by the commissioner of internal revenue, or otherwise, that the provisions of this paragraph are not then necessary to qualify the plan under the Internal Revenue Code, this paragraph shall be ineffective without the necessity of further amendment of this article. 
(f)  After all the vested and accrued benefits provided hereunder have been paid and after all other liabilities have been satisfied, then and only then shall any remaining funds revert to the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 19-51)  
Sec. 15-267. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Discharged members. Members entitled to a pension shall not forfeit the same upon dismissal from employment, but shall be retired as herein described. 
(b)  Nonassignability. No benefit provided for herein shall be assignable or subject to garnishment for debt or for other legal process. 
(c)  Pension validity. The board of trustees shall have the power to examine into the facts upon which any pension shall heretofore have been granted under any prior or existing law, or shall hereafter be granted or obtained erroneously, fraudulently, or illegally for any reason. The board is empowered to purge the pension rolls of any person heretofore granted a pension under prior or existing law or hereafter granted under this article if the same is found to be erroneous, fraudulent or illegal for any reason; and to reclassify any pensioner who has heretofore under any prior or existing law or city retirement plan or who shall hereafter under this article be erroneously, improperly or illegally classified. 
(d)  Incompetents. If any member or beneficiary is a minor or is, in the judgment of the board, otherwise incapable of personally receiving and giving a valid receipt for any payment due him or her under the plan, the board may, unless and until claims shall have been made by a duly appointed guardian or committee of such person, make such payment or any part thereof to such person's spouse, children or other person deemed by the board to have incurred expenses or assumed responsibility for the expenses of such person. Any payment so made shall be a complete discharge of any liability under the plan for such payment. 
(Code 1964, § 19-52(a)—(e); Amended, Ord. No. 95-3, 11-2-94, effective 10-1-94).  
Sec. 15-268. - Claims procedure for participants and beneficiaries upon denial of claim. 
(a)  Any member or beneficiary whose application or claim for benefits has been denied shall receive from the board a written notice setting forth the specific reasons for such denial, the reasons therein to be clearly and fully explained so as to afford such member or beneficiary a clear understanding of the decision rendered. 
(b)  Any member or beneficiary whose application or claim for benefits has been denied shall have the right to a rehearing and a fair and full review by the board regarding the facts, circumstances and information pertaining to the claim and the reasons for denial of such claim. 
(Code 1964, § 19-52(f))  
Sec. 15-269. - Reemployment; cessation of benefit payments. 
If a pensioner is reemployed by the city, his or her retirement benefit payments shall cease with the last payment due prior to his or her reemployment. Retirement benefit payments shall again become payable on the first day of the month following subsequent terminations of employment. 
(Code 1964, § 19-52(g))  
Sec. 15-270. - Guaranteed return of benefits from prior plan to those eligible therefor. 
All benefits payable under this amended plan and trust are in lieu of any rights or benefits under the prior plan for general employees. In any event, however, each member entitled to any benefits under the prior plan shall be guaranteed the payment of benefits on his or her behalf at least equal in value to the value of benefits arising or existing by reason of participation in the prior plan for general employees. 
(Code 1964, § 19-52)  
Sec. 15-271. - Withdrawal from the plan. 
Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary contained in this article, currently employed department heads who are members of the plan may withdraw and join the applicable pension plan. The present value of accrued benefits based on current funding assumptions shall be transferred from the pension fund to the applicable plan for such department heads. 
A member of the plan who ceases to be a member of the collective bargaining unit may withdraw from this plan pursuant to the last sentence of section 2.4.1C of the city's personnel policies and regulations. On behalf of any such member who exercises this election to withdraw from the plan there shall be a transfer of monies from this plan's trust fund to the other city-sponsored retirement plan covering such employee. The amount of the transfer shall be equal to the greater of the member's accumulated contributions or the actuarial present value of the member's accrued pension benefit based on the funding assumptions in effect at the time of the transfer. This provision shall apply to each member who elects to withdraw from this plan on or after March 13, 1991. 
Former members who have withdrawn from the plan prior to July 1, 2001, in connection with a promotion, but who have not been paid the lump sum value of their benefit pursuant to this section, shall have the option of receiving (i) the lump sum payment in any method approved by the board of trustees, including direct payment into the applicable city defined contribution plan or by rollover into the managerial plan, or for members who repay refunded employee contributions, (ii) payment of the member's original monthly annuity set forth below. 
The funding assumptions used to calculate the accrued pension benefit under this section shall be as follows: (i) the benefit shall be assumed to commence at the earlier of age sixty-five (65) with ten (10) years of service or twenty (20) years of service regardless of age; and (ii) the multiplier shall be calculated using the two and three-quarter (2.75) percent benefit accrual rate. 
Former members who are eligible to receive a lump sum payment under section 15-271 shall have thirty (30) days to select a payment option. Lump sum payments shall be conditioned upon the execution of a release by the former member. The value of any previously refunded employee contributions shall be set off against the lump sum payment. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this plan, members who withdrew from the plan prior to July 1, 2001, but who elected to repay member contributions pursuant to Ordinance No. 09-07 shall be permitted to purchase that covered service, including the connection of service. In order to purchase prior service, the member shall be required to: 
(1)  Contribute the entire balance of the member's 401(a) account balance; 
(2)  Repay any withdrawn employee contributions; and 
(3)  Contribute the full member contribution of seven and thirty-six one hundredths (7.36) percent for those years being purchased. 
The member's cost of the service buyback may be made in one (1) lump sum or may be made by payroll deductions over a time period which shall not exceed the time period for the years of prior service being purchased. If the applicable members have not repaid the required contributions upon separation from service, the unpaid balance shall be deducted from the member's monthly pension, along with any other available sources of funds, including accumulated leave. The board shall have rulemaking authority to implement the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1964, § 19-53; Ord. 94-20, § 1, 1-5-94; Amended, Ord. No. 95-3, 11-2-94, effective 10-1-94; Ord. No. 09-07, § 1, 4-1-09; Ord. No. 16-01, § 1, 11-23-2015)  
Secs. 15-272—15-285. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF TRUSTEES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, committees and commissions, § 2-51 et seq. 
 
Sec. 15-286. - Composition. 
The board of trustees shall consist of five (5) persons as follows: 
(1)  The city manager of the city; 
(2)  The mayor of the city; 
(3)  Two (2) regularly employed general employees of the city, upon the election by a majority of the regularly employed general employees of the city; 
(4)  One (1) resident of the city, to be selected by the previous four (4) members. 
(Code 1964, § 19-48(b); Ord. No. 91-22, § 12, 3-4-91; Ord. No. 92-21, § 1, 1-8-92)  
Sec. 15-287. - Terms. 
The mayor and the city manager president shall serve as long as they continue to hold office as mayor and city manager, respectively, and upon a vacancy in such offices, their respective successors shall succeed to the position of member trustees. The two (2) general employees who were elected to serve as trustees for the prior plan immediately preceding the effective date of this plan shall serve as the initial general employee members of the board. Each of these two (2) members shall serve for a period of three (3) years from the effective date. At the end of the three-year period, an election shall be held by the general employees who are members of the plan at that time in order to elect two (2) successor general employee members to the board. The general employee receiving the greatest number of votes shall serve for a period of four (4) years and the general employee receiving the second greatest number of votes shall serve for a period of two (2) years. Thereafter, each elected general employee member of the board of trustees shall serve for a period of four (4) years unless he sooner leaves the employment of the city as a general employee, whereupon, the city commission, upon an election by a majority of the regularly employed general employees, shall choose his or her successor. The resident member shall serve for a period of four (4) years. The two (2) general employees and the resident member may succeed themselves in office. 
(Code 1964, § 19-48(b); Ord. No. 91-22, § 12, 3-4-91; Ord. No. 12-11, § 5, 4-4-12)  
Sec. 15-288. - Compensation. 
The trustees shall not receive any compensation as such but may be reimbursed for reasonable expenses which they may incur in their positions as trustees. 
(Code 1964, § 19-48(b))  
Sec. 15-289. - Chairperson, secretary. 
The mayor shall be chairperson of the board of trustees. The board shall elect any one (1) of its members as secretary of the board. The secretary shall keep a complete minute book of the proceedings of the board. 
(Code 1964, § 19-48)  
Sec. 15-290. - Voting procedures; quorum. 
Each trustee shall be entitled to one (1) vote on matters and items of business presented to the board. Three (3) affirmative votes shall be necessary for a decision by the trustees at any meeting of the board. The chairperson shall have the right to one (1) vote only. 
(Code 1964, § 19-48(c))  
Sec. 15-291. - Rules, regulations. 
Subject to the limitations of this article, the board of trustees shall from time to time establish uniform rules and regulations for the administration of funds created by this article and for the transaction of its business. 
(Code 1964, § 19-48(d))  
Sec. 15-292. - Support staff. 
The board of trustees shall engage such actuarial and other services as shall be required to transact the business of the retirement plan. The compensation of all persons engaged by the board of trustees and all other expenses of the board necessary for the operation of the retirement system shall be paid at such rates and in such amounts as the board of trustees shall agree. Funds may be disbursed by the city finance department or other disbursing agent as determined by the board, but only upon written authorization by the board of trustees. 
(Code 1964, § 19-48(e))  
Sec. 15-293. - General authority. 
(a)  The board of trustees shall serve as trustee of the trust created as part of the plan. The board shall be vested with full legal title to the trust and assets thereof. 
(b)  The board of trustees shall be the plan administrator and as such shall be charged with the general administration and responsibility for the proper operation of the retirement plan and trust and for making effective the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 19-48(a), (b))  
Sec. 15-294. - Duties, responsibilities. 
The duties and responsibilities of the board of trustees shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following: 
(1)  To construe the provisions of the plan and trust and determine all questions arising thereunder; 
(2)  To determine all questions relating to eligibility and participation; 
(3)  To determine or have determined and certified the amount of all retirement allowances or other benefits hereunder; 
(4)  To receive and process all applications for participation and benefits and, where necessary, conduct hearings thereon; 
(5)  To authorize all payments whatsoever from the fund and to notify the disbursing agent, in writing, or approve benefit payments and other expenditures arising through operation of the plan; 
(6)  To make recommendations to the city commission regarding changes in the provisions of the plan and trust; 
(7)  To review reports of and have meetings with the custodian and investment agent(s) or advisor; to require written reports from the custodian on fund assets and transactions on a semiannual or more frequent basis if deemed advisable by the board; to require written and oral reports from the investment agent or advisor on at least a semiannual basis, such reports to reflect trust fund investment performance, investment recommendations and overall review of fund investment policies; 
(8)  To determine or have determined that the retirement plan complies at all times with the provisions of state law both substantively and in operation, and including the following: 
a.  Have prepared annually and distributed to all members a plan description and a summary of pertinent updated financial and actuarial information; 
b.  Assure that city contributions are deposited into the trust fund at least quarterly; 
c.  Assure that all regular and special actuarial reports are filed with the Florida Division of Retirement within sixty (60) days of receipt; 
d.  Have actuarial valuations performed on a regular basis. Have special actuarial work performed in advance so as to determine costs of any plan changes or amendments prior to their adoption; 
e.  Establish a uniform procedure for prompt review and rehearing of all claims by members or beneficiaries. 
(9)  To maintain a minute book containing the minutes and records of the proceedings and meetings of the board. 
(Code 1964, § 19-48(f))  
Sec. 15-295. - Investment authority. 
The board of trustees shall have the following investment powers and authority: 
(1)  The board of trustees shall be vested with full legal title to the fund, subject however, and in any event to the authority and power of the city commission to amend or terminate this trust, provided that no amendment or trust fund termination shall ever result in the use of any assets of this fund except for the payment of regular expenses and benefits under the plan. 
(2)  All contributions from time to time paid into the trust fund, and the income thereof, without distinction between principal and income, shall be held and administered by the board or its agent in the fund and the board shall not be required to segregate or invest separately any portion of the fund. 
(3)  The fund may be invested and reinvested in such securities or property, real or personal, wherever situated and of whatever kind, as shall be approved by the board of trustees, including but not limited to stocks, common or preferred, and bonds, and other evidences of indebtedness or ownership although the same may not be of the character not permitted for trustee's investment by the laws of the state. 
(4)  The board of trustees may retain in cash and keep unproductive of income such amount of the fund as it may deem advisable, having regard for the cash requirements of the plan. 
(5)  No person or entity shall be liable for the making, retention, or sale of any investment or reinvestment made as herein provided, nor for any loss or diminishment of the fund, except that due to his or her, or its own negligence, willful misconduct or lack of good faith. 
(6)  The board may cause any investment in securities held by it to be registered in or transferred into its name as trustee or into the name of such nominee as it may direct, or it may retain them unregistered and in form permitting transferability, but the books and records shall at all times show that all investments are part of the trust fund. 
(7)  The board is empowered, but is not required, to vote upon any stocks, bonds, or securities of any corporation, association, or trust and to give general or specific proxies or powers of attorney with or without power of substitution; to participate in mergers, reorganizations, recapitalizations, consolidations and similar transactions with respect to such securities; to deposit such stock or other securities in any voting trust of any protective or like committee or with the trustees or with depositories designated thereby; to amortize or fail to amortize any part or all of the premium or discount resulting from the acquisition or disposition of assets; and generally, to exercise any of the powers of an owner with respect to stocks, bonds, or other investments, comprising the fund which it may deem to be to the best interest of the fund to exercise. 
(8)  The board shall not be required to make any inventory or appraisal or report to any court, nor to secure any order of court for the exercise of any power herein contained. 
(9)  Where any action which the board is required to take or any duty or function which it is required to perform either under the terms herein or under the general law applicable to it as trustee under this article, can reasonably be taken or performed only after receipt by it from a member, the city or any other entity of specific information, certification, direction or instructions, the board shall be free of liability in failing to take such action or perform such duty or function until such information, certification, direction or instruction has been received by it. 
(10)  Any overpayments or underpayments from the fund to a member or beneficiary caused by errors of computation shall be adjusted with interest at a rate per annum approved by the board. Overpayments shall be charged against payments next succeeding the correction. Underpayments shall be made up from the trust fund. 
(11)  The board shall sustain no liability whatsoever for the sufficiency of the fund to meet the payments and benefits herein provided for. 
(12)  In any application to or proceeding or action in the courts, only the city and the board shall be necessary parties, and no member or other person having an interest in the fund shall be entitled to any notice or service of process. Any judgment entered in such a proceeding or action shall be conclusive upon all persons. 
(13)  Any of the foregoing powers and functions reposed in the board may be performed or carried out by the board through duly authorized agents, provided that the board at all times requires of and reviews reports of any such agent; provided further, that legal title to the fund shall always remain in the board of trustees. 
(Code 1964, § 19-49)  
Secs. 15-296—15-310. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - BENEFITS 
 
Sec. 15-311. - Normal retirement date. 
A member hired prior to November 20, 2001 shall be eligible to retire on the first day of the month coincident with or next following the earlier of: 
(1)  The date on which such member attains age sixty-five (65) and completes seven (7) years of credited service; or 
(2)  The date on which such member completes twenty (20) years of credited service regardless of the member's age at that time; notwithstanding the foregoing, a vested member who has separated from service with the city may elect to begin receiving normal retirement benefits on the date when the member would have earned twenty (20) years of credited service had the member not separated from service with the city, provided the member separates from service on or after November 20, 2001. Deferred vested members who separated from service prior to November 20, 2001 may elect to begin receiving normal retirement benefits on the date when the member would have earned twenty-five (25) years of credited service. 
(3)  The date on which a member has completed (i) twenty (20) years of credited service; (ii) has been appointed by the city commission to serve as city manager; and (iii) has elected to participate in the deferred retirement option program set forth in section 15-325 of the Code. 
The normal retirement date for members hired after November 20, 2001 shall be the first day of the month coincident with or next following the earlier of: 
(1)  The date on which such member attains age sixty-five (65) and completes seven (7) years of credited service; or 
(2)  The date on which such member completes twenty (20) years of credited service; notwithstanding the foregoing, a vested member who has separated from service with the city may elect to begin receiving normal retirement benefits on the date when the member would have earned twenty (20) years of credited service had the member not separated from service with the city, provided the member has reached age fifty-five (55). 
(Code 1964, § 19-42(a); Ord. No. 89-1, § 3, 10-3-88; Ord. No. 01-02, § 1, 11-1-00; Ord. No. 01-43, § 2, 9-5-01; Ord. No. 02-03, § 2, 12-12-01, effective 11-20-01; Ord. No. 05-15, § 1, 6-6-05) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that the provisions of Ord. No. 02-03, adopted Dec. 12, 2001, are effective retroactively to Nov. 20, 2001.  
Sec. 15-312. - Normal retirement benefit. 
(a)  For members not eligible for prior plan benefits, the normal retirement benefit shall be as follows: 
(1)  Amount. The monthly retirement benefit shall be an amount as follows: One and one-half (1½) percent of average monthly earnings times credited service for those employees who retired prior to October 1, 1989. For those employees who have fulfilled normal retirement after October 1, 1989 but prior to September 30, 1999, the monthly retirement benefit shall be two (2) percent of average monthly earnings times credited service. For those employees who have fulfilled normal retirement on or after October 1, 1999 but prior to November 19, 2001, the monthly retirement benefit shall be two and one-half (2½) percent of average monthly earnings times credited service. For those employees who retire on or after November 20, 2001 but prior to October 1, 2018, the monthly retirement benefit shall be two and three-quarters (2¾) percent of average monthly earnings times credited service. 
For employees retiring on or after November 20, 2001 but prior to October 1, 2018, the normal retirement benefit for an employee who has earned in excess of twenty (20) years of credited service shall be as follows: 
(a)  Two and eight-tenths (2.8) percent of average monthly earnings times credited service upon the completion of twenty-one (21) years of credited service; 
(b)  Two and eighty-five one hundredths (2.85) percent of average monthly earnings times credited service upon the completion of twenty-two (22) years of credited service; 
(c)  Two and nine-tenths (2.9) percent of average monthly earnings times credited service upon the completion of twenty-three (23) years of credited service; 
(d)  Two and ninety-five one hundredths (2.95) percent of average monthly earnings times credited service upon the completion of twenty-four (24) years of credited service; 
(e)  Three (3.0) percent of average monthly earnings times credited service upon the completion of twenty-five (25) years of credited service. 
For employees retiring after October 1, 2018, the normal retirement benefit shall be three and twenty-five one hundredths (3.25) percent of average monthly earnings times credited service for the first twenty (20) years of credited service and three (3.00) percent of average monthly earnings times credited service earned in excess of twenty (20) years. The benefit is capped at one hundred (100) percent of average monthly earnings. 
(2)  Duration, survivor benefits. A member retiring hereunder on his or her normal retirement date shall receive a monthly benefit which shall commence on his or her normal retirement date and be continued thereafter during his or her lifetime and cease upon his or her death, unless an optional form of benefit payment providing a survivor's benefit has been selected in writing by the member prior to actual retirement. 
(b)  For members eligible for prior plan benefits. For purposes of this plan, members shall be deemed eligible for prior plan benefits if they permit their respective account balances under the prior plan to be transferred into the trust fund under this plan and commingled with assets thereof for purposes of funding benefits hereunder. 
Such members shall be entitled to the following benefits: 
(1)  Amount. The monthly retirement benefit shall be an amount determined as follows: Two and two-tenths (2.2) percent of average monthly earnings times credited service. Provided, further, the minimum benefit payable in any event to any such member shall be an amount not less than the benefit which can be provided by the respective individual account balance of such member under the prior plan as it existed as of the effective date of the amended plan. 
(2)  Duration. The benefit shall be payable on a life annuity basis in the same manner as provided above for members not eligible for prior plan benefits. 
(c)  The normal retirement benefit for a member appointed by the city commission to serve as city manager shall be two and nine-tenths (2.9) percent of the employee's earnings for the twelve (12) months immediately preceding the effective date of the employee's retirement multiplied by the number of years of credited service. 
(d)  Early exit plan. Members who, as of January 1, 2005, have earned at least twenty (20) but less than twenty-five (25) years of actual city service, shall have the option, upon retirement, to participate in an early exit plan under the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Eligible employees shall have ninety (90) days from July 7, 2005 to provide written notice to the city of their intention to participate in the early exit program. Failure to provide timely notice will render the member ineligible for participation in the program; 
(2)  The retirement benefit for early exit participants shall be three (3) percent of average monthly earnings for all years of credited service; 
(3)  Employees who present their written intention to participate and who are then approved for participation must schedule, in cooperation with their directors, an exit date from city service which will be not more than one (1) year from the beginning date of the window period; 
(4)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary above, participation in the early exit plan will require the approval of the director of human resources for a succession plan to be developed in collaboration with the participating employee and the affected department head. 
(Code 1964, § 19-42(b); Ord. No. 89-1, § 3, 10-3-88; Ord. No. 93-6, § (a)(1), (b)(1), 11-18-92; Ord. No. 1163, § 1, 8-31-99; Ord. No. 01-43, § 3, 9-5-01; Ord. No. 02-03, § 3, 12-12-01, effective 11-20-01; Ord. No. 05-15, § 2, 6-6-05; Ord. No. 19-09 , § 2, 11-28-18) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that the provisions of Ord. No. 02-03, adopted Dec. 12, 2001, are effective retroactively to Nov. 20, 2001.  
Sec. 15-313. - Early retirement date. 
A member may retire on the first day of the month coincident with or next following the attainment of age fifty-five (55) and the completion of seven (7) years of credited service, or on the first day of any month thereafter, except as otherwise provided by this article. 
(Code 1964, § 19-42(c); Ord. No. 89-1, § 3, 10-3-88; Ord. No. 02-03, § 4, 12-12-01, effective 11-20-01; Ord. No. 05-15, § 3, 6-6-05) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that the provisions of Ord. No. 02-03, adopted Dec. 12, 2001, are effective retroactively to Nov. 20, 2001.  
Sec. 15-314. - Early retirement benefit. 
A member retiring hereunder on his or her early retirement date may receive either a deferred or an immediate monthly retirement benefit as follows: 
(1)  A deferred monthly retirement benefit which shall commence on the date which would have been his or her normal retirement date had he or she continued in employment with the city and which shall be continued on the first day of each month thereafter during his or her lifetime. The amount of the benefit shall be determined and paid in the same manner as for retirement at his or her normal retirement date except that average monthly earnings and credited service shall be determined as of his or her early retirement date; or 
(2)  An immediate monthly retirement benefit which shall commence on his or her early retirement date and shall be continued on the first day of each month thereafter during his or her lifetime. The benefit shall be as determined for normal retirement, but reduced by five-tenths percent for each month by which the starting date of the benefit precedes the date which would have been the member's normal retirement date had he or she continued in employment with the city. 
(Code 1964, § 19-42(d); Ord. No. 89-1, § 3, 10-3-88)  
Sec. 15-315. - Delayed retirement date. 
The delayed retirement date shall be that date following normal retirement date on which a member actually retires. 
(Code 1964, § 19-42(e); Ord. No. 89-1, § 3, 10-3-88)  
Sec. 15-316. - Delayed retirement benefit. 
A member retiring under this article at his or her delayed retirement date shall receive a monthly retirement benefit which shall commence on the first day of the month coincident with or next following such delayed retirement date. The amount of each such monthly retirement benefit shall be determined in the same manner as for normal retirement except that average monthly earnings and credited service shall be determined as of the member's actual retirement date. The benefit shall be paid during such member's lifetime and cease upon his or her death, unless an optional form of benefit payment providing a survivor's benefit had been selected in writing by the member prior to actual retirement. 
(Code 1964, § 19-42(f); Ord. No. 89-1, § 3, 10-3-88)  
Sec. 15-317. - Applicable benefit formula. 
The benefit formula applicable in all cases of retirement, whether normal, early or delayed, shall be that in effect on the member's employment termination date. 
(Code 1964, § 19-42(g); Ord. No. 89-1, § 3, 10-3-88)  
Sec. 15-318. - Limitation on benefits. 
In no event shall benefits be paid in excess of the limitations set forth in Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 89-1, § 3(19-42(h)), 10-3-88; Ord. No. 02-03, § 5, 12-12-01, effective 11-20-01) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that the provisions of Ord. No. 02-03, adopted Dec. 12, 2001, are effective retroactively to Nov. 20, 2001.  
Sec. 15-319. - Distribution in plan years beginning after December 31, 1984. 
Commencing with the first plan year beginning after December 31, 1984, the entire interest of a member shall either be distributed to him or her not later than April 1 following the calendar year in which he or she attains age seventy and one-half (70 1/2) or the calendar year in which he or she retires, whichever is later. In the alternative, distribution shall commence no later than the above specified commencement date and be distributable over a period of time not exceeding the limitations set forth as follows: 
(1)  Distributions to a member shall not extend beyond the life of the member or the lives of the member and his or her designated beneficiary or over a period not extending beyond the life expectancy of the member or the life expectancy of the member and his or her designated beneficiary. 
(2)  If distribution has commenced to a member and such member dies before receiving his or her entire interest, the remainder of such interest shall be distributed over a period at least as rapidly as under the method of distribution in effect prior to such member's death (e.g., remainder of period certain basis). 
(3)  Any method of distribution selected and made in writing by a member prior to January 1, 1984 and which is in compliance with system provisions prior to such date shall be permitted hereunder even though not in accordance with the above provisions as applied to plan years beginning after December 31, 1983. 
(Ord. No. 89-1, § 3(19-42(i)), 10-3-88)  
Sec. 15-320. - Death benefits. 
(a)  Death prior to retirement. In the event of death prior to actual retirement under this plan, there shall be a death benefit payable as respects a member or former member who is vested, whether or not the member is eligible for an early, normal or delayed retirement benefit, but who dies prior to commencement of benefit payments. It shall be assumed that such deceased member had retired immediately preceding his or her date of death, and a benefit shall be paid on a monthly basis for ten years to such deceased member's designated beneficiary, assuming the member made an election of a "ten year certain and life thereafter option." In any event, and as respect to any member or former member who elects to leave his or her prior plan account balance in the fund and who dies without having received an amount equal to his or her prior plan account balance, such amount or the balance thereof which remains unpaid shall be paid in a lump sum to the member's designated beneficiary. In the case of a vested member who dies prior to reaching the early retirement date, the benefit shall be calculated as if the member had survived to the early retirement date, or at the election of the beneficiary, deferral of the benefit to the normal retirement date. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the named beneficiary of a non-vested member may elect to utilize accumulated, unused leave toward credited service at the time of death to meet the minimum vesting requirements of this plan. 
(b)  Death after retirement. No benefit shall be paid upon the death of a retiree except such benefits as result by reason of the use of a preretirement selection of an option providing a survivor benefit. 
(Code 1964, § 19-43; Ord. No. 1163, § 1, 8-31-99)  
Sec. 15-321. - Termination benefits. 
Each member who terminates employment without being eligible for a retirement benefit and with less than seven (7) years of credited service shall receive from the fund within a reasonable time following his or her date of termination a refund of his or her accumulated contributions. If at the time of his or her termination of employment, the member has seven (7) or more years of credited service, he or she shall have the option of either receiving his or her accumulated contributions or his or her vested retirement benefit. Each member shall acquire a vested right to accrued benefits pursuant to the following vesting schedule: 
Vesting Schedule 
Completed Years of Credited Service With the City 	Cumulative Vested Nonforfeitable Interest in the Accrued Benefit (percent) 
Less than seven (7) 	0 
Seven (7) or more 	100 
 
Provided, any member not eligible for an early, normal or delayed retirement benefit but who has a vested interest at time of termination shall receive such benefit commencing on the date which would have been his or her normal retirement date had he or she continued in employment with the city; provided, however, a member may elect to receive his or her deferred benefit upon attaining age fifty-five (55), or any date thereafter, the benefit in such case to be actuarially reduced as for early retirement. Provided further, in lieu of all other benefits under this amended plan, a terminated member who elected to leave his or her prior plan account balance in the fund may elect to receive immediately on termination of employment payment of an amount equal to his or her vested prior plan account balance in a lump sum. The vested interest of a member in this case shall be determined pursuant to the following (former) prior plan vesting schedule, as respects such prior plan account balances only: 
Completed Years of Participation Under Prior Plan and Amended Plan 	Cumulative Vested Interest in Prior Plan Account (percent) 
Less than 5 	0 
5 	25 
6 	40 
7 	55 
8 	70 
9 	85 
10 	100 
 
The portion of such accounts attributable to the member's own contributions shall be one hundred (100) percent vested in any event. 
(Code 1964, § 19-44; Amended, Ord. No. 95-3, 11-2-94; effective 10-1-94; Ord. No. 05-15, § 4, 6-6-05)  
Sec. 15-322. - Optional forms of benefit payments. 
Each member entitled to a normal, early or delayed retirement benefit shall have the right at any time prior to the date on which benefit payments begin to elect to have the benefit payable under any one (1) of the options as hereinafter set forth in lieu of the benefits otherwise provided herein, and to revoke any such elections and make a new election at any time prior to the actual beginning of payments. The value of optional benefits shall be actuarially equivalent to the value of benefits otherwise payable, and the present value of payments to the retiring member must be at least equal to fifty (50) percent of the total present value of payments to the retiring member and his or her beneficiary. The member shall make such an election by written request to the board, such request being retained in the board's files. 
(1)  Option 1. Joint and last survivor option. The member may elect to receive a reduced benefit during his or her lifetime and have such benefit (or a designated fraction thereof) continued after his or her death to and during the lifetime of his or her designated beneficiary. The election of Option 1 shall be null and void if the designated beneficiary dies before the member's benefit payments commence. 
(2)  Option 2. Ten (10) years certain and life thereafter. The member may elect to receive a reduced benefit within one hundred twenty (120) monthly payments guaranteed. If, after payments commence, the member should die before the one hundred twenty (120) monthly payments are made, payments are then continued to his or her designated beneficiary until one hundred twenty (120) payments in all have been made, at which time benefits cease. After expiration of the one hundred twenty (120) monthly payments guaranteed, should the retired member be then alive, payments shall be continued during his or her remaining lifetime. 
(3)  Option 3. Other. In lieu of the other optional forms enumerated in this section, benefits may be paid in any form approved by the board so long as actuarial equivalence with the benefits otherwise payable is maintained. An interest only option or an option providing guaranteed payments over a period in excess of twenty (20) years or beyond age eighty-five (85) may not be elected. The board, in its sole discretion, may make a lump sum distribution of any monthly payment with a present value not exceeding three thousand dollars ($3,000.00). 
(Code 1964, § 19-45)  
Sec. 15-323. - Buy-back for military service. 
(a)  Any member of the pension plan who is employed by the city prior to entry into military service and who takes a leave of absence for the purpose of entering into military service in the armed forces of the United States and thereafter reenters the employ of the city, and is vested, shall be entitled to purchase service credits for the period of absence by contributing three (3) percent of their annual salary on the effective date of the leave of absence, for each year being purchased. 
(b)  Any vested member who has served on active military duty but is ineligible to claim credit for service under subsection (1) shall receive credit for up to a maximum of four (4) years for the time spent in active military service in the armed forces of the United States, provided that for each year being purchased the member pays to the pension plan three (3) percent of his or her annual starting salary at the time of employment. 
(c)  The three (3) percent employee contribution shall be placed in an individual federally insured interest bearing account for each employee. Monthly retirement benefits shall be paid out of the employee's contribution account until such an account is exhausted. Thereafter, monthly retirement benefits shall be paid from the pension fund itself. In the event the employee dies prior to commencement of payments from the contribution account, the balance of the account shall be paid in a lump sum to the employee's designated beneficiary. In the event a retiree dies before the account is exhausted, any survivor benefits payable shall continue to be paid from the account until exhausted. If no survivor benefits are payable upon the death of the retiree, the remaining account balance shall be paid in a lump sum to the designated beneficiary. 
(d)  A member who is receiving, or will receive, a pension benefit for military service in any other pension plan supported by public funds, shall not use that service for this pension plan. A member who is receiving, or shall receive, any other pension in which time served in the military was used by the employee in that other pension shall not be eligible for military buy-back as provided herein. 
(e)  The contribution for military buy-back required of the employee may be made in one lump sum or may be paid by payroll deductions in installments for a time period which shall not exceed the number of years being purchased. An employee making installment payments shall complete all required payments prior to payment of any benefits. If installment payments are not completed at the time an employee retires, the employee shall not receive military service credit for the remaining period for which payments were not made. An employee making installment payments shall pay an interest rate of seven percent (7%). 
(Ord. 89-12, § 2, 11-21-88).  
Sec. 15-324. - Coordination of benefits. 
(a)  This plan will coordinate benefits with the Miramar police, fire and ICMA pension plans (hereinafter, "city sponsored plans"). In the event that a participant of this plan has earned a minimum of ten (10) years of aggregate service in one (1) or more city sponsored plans, including this plan, the participant shall be eligible for coordination of benefits from the city sponsored plans, to the extent of any service credit used to determine eligibility for benefits in such plans. Upon the commencement of a service retirement, the participant shall receive payment from this plan in an amount equal to the accrued benefit based on credited service accrued while a participant is in this plan. In addition, the participant shall also be eligible for payment from any city sponsored plans, as appropriate, of a benefit equal to the years of credited service in that plan based upon the average salary in effect at the time the participant terminated service with the City and at a formula rate in effect when the participant terminated membership in that plan. The benefits in the applicable City sponsored plan shall be available even though the participant shall not have otherwise vested under the terms of that plan. 
(b)  In the event a participant of this plan shall transfer from this plan to another city sponsored plan, and the participant shall have accrued a total of ten (10) or more years of aggregate credited service in one (1) or more city sponsored plans, including this plan, the participant shall, upon retirement from such plan, be deemed vested in this plan and eligible to receive benefits accrued in this plan based upon aggregate years of service with the city, with benefits accrued in this plan based on credited service in this plan, average salary in effect at the time of retirement and the formula rate in effect when the participant transferred from this plan. This benefit shall be available even though the participant shall not have otherwise achieved a vested benefit in this plan; provided, however, that the participant, upon termination in this plan, kept his/her contributions on deposit in this plan. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, this plan shall require an aggregate of seven (7) years of credited service in one or more city sponsored plan(s) to vest in this plan. 
(Ord. No. 01-21, § 1, 2-21-01; Ord. No. 15-11, § 1, 3-4-15)  
Sec. 15-325. - Election of city manager. 
(a)  Deferred retirement option program. A deferred retirement option program (DROP) to be administered by the board of trustees is established for the city manager, effective upon passage of this section. The city manager, after having a minimum of twenty (20) years of creditable service and upon electing to defer receipt of retirement benefits into a DROP account, shall be eligible to participate in the DROP. 
(b)  Election to participate in the DROP shall be made by using such forms and procedures as may be prescribed by the board. Election to participate in the DROP shall be irrevocable. 
(c)  The city manager will be considered to have retired for purposes of the plan upon election to participate in the DROP. 
(d)  Upon commencement of the city manager's participation in the DROP, the city manager's contribution and the city's contribution to the trust shall cease as the city manager will not earn further creditable service for pension purposes; notwithstanding the foregoing, the city shall be responsible for the actuarial impact of any benefit enhancement received by the city manager in accordance with his employment agreement. 
(e)  The city manager's monthly retirement benefit, determined in accordance with the plan based upon years of creditable service and average final compensation at the time the city manager enters the DROP, will be paid into the city manager's DROP account every month during the term of the city manager's participation in the DROP. No contributions shall be required after the city manager enters the DROP and the city manager will not accrue creditable service or any additional benefits under the plan after entering the DROP. 
(f)  The city manager shall be eligible to participate in the DROP so long as he or she continues to be employed in such capacity by the city. Under no circumstances shall the maximum term of the city manager's participation in the DROP exceed the term of his or her employment as city manager. 
(g)  Within thirty (30) days prior to commencement of the city manager's participation in the DROP, the city manager may elect to have all or a portion of the city manager's sick leave balance transferred to the city manager's DROP account. If the city manager fails to elect to transfer sick leave within thirty (30) days prior to commencement of participation in the DROP, then upon separation from service with the city, the city manager will receive payment in accordance with any applicable provisions of the City Code, his employment agreement, or any other laws, rules and regulations, and with all attendant tax consequences. 
(h)  The city manager's DROP account funds shall be invested as follows: 
(1)  Fifty (50) percent of the funds will earn interest at the same rate as the investment earnings assumption rate for the plan; and 
(2)  Fifty (50) percent of the funds will be invested in a series of investment options established by the board, by administrative rule and chosen by the city manager. Set up and oversight fees shall be considered a normal cost of the plan. Any losses, charges, or expenses incurred by the city manager in the DROP account by virtue of the investment options selected by the city manager or otherwise, shall not be made up by the city or the trust, but all of same shall be borne by the city manager. 
(i)  Upon termination of employment, the city manager may receive distribution from the DROP account in the following manner: 
(1)  Lump sum distribution. 
(2)  Periodic payments. 
(3)  Roll over of the balance to another qualified retirement plan. 
(4)  Deferral of distribution of the balance as permitted by law. 
(5)  Other distribution as permitted by law. 
(j)  DROP participation by the city manager shall not affect any other death or disability benefits provided under federal or state law or by city ordinance other than this chapter, or any other rights or benefits under any applicable employment agreement. 
(k)  If the city manager dies before the DROP account balance is paid out in full, the person(s) duly designated by the city manager shall receive such DROP account balances as may remain unpaid in accordance with the city manager's DROP election in effect at the time of death. 
(Ord. No. 01-43, § 4, 9-5-01)  
Sec. 15-326. - Benefits payable to the city manager. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this plan, any member of the plan appointed to the position of city manager shall receive normal service retirement benefits calculated by multiplying three and six tenths (3.6) percent of the member's average monthly earnings by the total number of years of credited service in the plan, whether or not all of those years of credited service were in the position of city manager. Effective February 19, 2003, an annual two (2) percent cost of living adjustment (COLA) is created for the city manager to continue compounding annually for a period of fifteen (15) years. Following the fifteenth year annual adjustment, the two (2) percent COLA shall cease, but the pension benefit as adjusted by the fifteen (15) year period of compounding COLA payments shall continue without subsequent annual increases. In the event of the death of the city manager prior to the fifteenth year COLA adjustment, the COLA adjustment shall be paid for the remaining balance of the fifteen-year period to the city manager's joint annuitant, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 02-17, § 2, 8-21-02; Ord. No. 03-07, § 1, 2-19-03; Ord. No. 05-07, § 1, 12-1-04)  
Sec. 15-327. - Deferred retirement option plan. 
(a)  A deferred retirement option plan ("DROP") is hereby created. 
(b)  A member shall be eligible to enter the DROP at the earliest date of eligibility for normal retirement. 
(c)  In no event shall total participation in the DROP exceed five (5) years. Dual service members who are also participating in another city plan shall be permitted to remain in this DROP during any period of participation in another city DROP program. 
(d)  As a condition of participation in the DROP, members agree to tender an irrevocable resignation. The resignation shall take effect not more than sixty (60) months after commencement of DROP participation. Participation in the DROP is not a guarantee of continued employment. 
(e)  A member may participate in the DROP only once and after commencement, the employee shall not have the right to be a contributing member of the pension plan. 
(f)  Upon the effective date of participation in the DROP, employee contributions shall cease and members shall no longer accrue credited service, final average compensation shall be determined and any survivorship options shall be selected. 
(g)  For the purposes of this section, a member's final average compensation and credited service shall be determined as of the effective date of commencement of participation in the DROP. 
(h)  DROP participants shall not be eligible for disability benefits from the pension plan. 
(i)  Upon the effective date of participation in the DROP, the monthly retirement benefits that would have been payable had the member elected to cease employment and receive a service retirement allowance shall be paid into a deferred retirement option account administered by the board of trustees. 
(j)  DROP account balances shall be self-directed by members participating in the DROP, using the self-directed mutual fund options available under the DROP program. By electing to participate in the DROP, members agree that they are voluntarily assuming the risk of potential investment losses, for which members hold the board and the city immune from liability. 
(k)  At the end of the specified period of DROP participation, or other termination of the DROP, the member shall receive a sum equal to accumulated DROP payments, adjusted for any applicable investment earnings or losses, and adjusted for any applicable fees. 
(l)  Payment shall be made, at the election of the member, by (1) lump sum payment, (2) periodic payments, (3) rollover to another qualified plan, or (4) any other combination of the above. 
(m)  If a member dies during the period of participation in the DROP plan, a lump sum equal to accrued DROP payments, adjusted for any applicable investment earnings or losses and any applicable fees, shall be paid to the named beneficiary or, if no beneficiary is named, to the estate of the member, in addition to any applicable survivorship benefit. 
(n)  Upon termination of service with the city, a member may receive payment within an administratively reasonable time after requesting distribution on the forms required by the pension board, or may defer payment until a time not later than the latest date authorized by Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code. In the case of retirees electing to defer payment after separation from service, DROP account balances shall continue to be invested and shall remain subject to applicable investment gains or losses, and any applicable fees. 
(o)  No distribution of DROP monies shall be made while a member is still employed by the city. 
(p)  A member's DROP account is subject to forfeiture under F.S. § 112.3173. 
(q)  For any members transferring into this plan from another city position, the coordination of benefits provisions of section 15-324 shall be applied to the DROP eligibility requirements provided in section 15-327. 
(r)  The board of trustees is authorized to adopt administrative rules necessary for the administration of the DROP. 
(Ord. No. 09-08, § 2, 4-15-09; Ord. No. 10-09, § 2, 5-5-10)  
Sec. 15-328. - Purchase of enhanced service credit; prior city service. 
(a)  Purchase of enhanced service credit. Members of the plan may purchase up to five (5) years of enhanced service credit, based on the calculations performed by the plan's actuary. Members purchasing enhanced service credit shall be required to pay the full actuarial impact to the plan of the purchased service. The contribution by the member of the actuarially determined cost of the buyback may be made (i) in one (1) lump sum payment or (ii) by payroll deductions in installments for a period of time which shall not exceed five (5) years, with interest. Enhanced service credit may not be used for vesting purposes, but will otherwise constitute service credit for purposes of normal retirement eligibility. 
(b)  Purchase of prior city service. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this plan, former members of the 401(a) plan shall be permitted to purchase prior full-time city service in the 401(a) plan. Members purchasing prior city service shall be required to pay the full actuarial impact to the plan of the purchased service. The contribution by the member of the actuarially determined cost of the buyback may be made (i) in one (1) lump sum payment or (ii) by payroll deductions in installments for a period of time which shall not exceed five (5) years, with interest. 
(c)  Rulemaking authority. The board shall have rulemaking authority to implement the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 16-07, § 1, 5-18-16)  
Secs. 15-329—15-335. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - CONTRIBUTIONS AND FINANCES 
 
Sec. 15-336. - City contributions. 
So long as this plan is in effect, the city shall make an annual contribution to the trust fund in an amount at least equal to the difference in each year as between the total of member contributions for the year and the total cost for the year as shown by the most recent actuarial valuation for the plan. The total cost for any year shall be defined as the total of normal cost plus the additional amount sufficient to amortize the unfunded accrued past service liability over a thirty-year period commencing with the effective date of the amended plan. City contributions shall be deposited in the fund on at least a quarterly basis. 
(Code 1964, § 19-46(a); Ord. No. 89-1, § 4, 10-3-88; Ord. No. 95-3, 11-2-94, effective 10-1-94)  
Sec. 15-337. - Member contributions. 
(a)  Amount. Members of the plan shall make regular contributions to the fund at a rate equal to one and one-half (1.5) percent of earnings for the period from October 1, 1994 through March 31, 1995, and a maximum of three (3) percent of their earnings thereafter. Members shall make regular contributions to the fund at a rate equal to seven and thirty-six one hundredths (7.36) percent of earnings beginning October 1, 1999 through November 28, 2018. Members shall make regular contributions to the fund at a rate equal to nine and a half percent (9.5%) of earnings after November 28, 2018. 
(b)  Duration. Contributions shall be deducted from earnings before the same are paid until the member has reached his or her actual retirement date or his or her termination date whichever occurs first. Member contributions shall be deposited in the fund on at least a monthly basis. 
(c)  Interest. Interest shall be credited to member contributions at the rates decided by the board from time to time, on an annual interest crediting date to be established by the board. In no event may such interest rate exceed five (5) percent per year. 
(d)  Guaranteed refund. All benefits payable under this plan are in lieu of a refund of accumulated contributions. In any event, however, each member shall be guaranteed the payment of benefits on his or her behalf at least equal in total amount to his or her accumulated contributions. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, members who are rehired within six (6) months of termination shall be permitted to restore service credit by repaying withdrawn member contributions, plus interest at the plan's assumed rate of return. In such case the rehired member shall have a maximum of one (1) year to repay the withdrawn employee contributions, but additional interest charges will accrue during the one-year repayment period. 
(e)  Assumption of payment by city. The city agrees to assume and pay member contributions in lieu of direct contributions by the member, and such contributions shall accordingly be paid into the fund in behalf of the members. No member subject to such agreement shall have the option of choosing to receive the contributed amounts directly instead of having them paid by the city directly to the fund. All such contributions by the city shall be deemed and considered as part of the member's accumulated contributions and subject to all provisions of this plan pertaining to accumulated contributions of members. The intent of this language is to comply with section 414(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(Code 1964, § 19-46(b); Ord. No. 89-1, § 4, 10-3-88; Ord. No. 89-12, § 3, 11-21-88; Amended, Ord. No. 95-3, 11-2-94, effective 10-1-94; Ord. No. 1163, § 1, 8-31-99; Ord. No. 02-03, § 6, 12-12-01, effective 11-20-01; Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 11-14-16; Ord. No. 19-09 , § 3, 11-28-18) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that the provisions of Ord. No. 02-03, adopted Dec. 12, 2001, are effective retroactively to Nov. 20, 2001.  
Sec. 15-338. - Fund management. 
(a)  As part of the plan there is hereby established a trust fund, into which shall be deposited all of the contributions and assets whatsoever attributable to the plan. The assets representing the account balance of prior plan members who elect not to withdraw their accounts shall become a part of the fund. 
(b)  The supervision of the fund, and assets thereof, and the responsibility for custodianship shall be vested in the board. Payment of benefits and disbursements from the fund shall be made by the disbursing agent on authorization from the board. 
(c)  The board may hire and appoint such persons, agents or entities, including corporate fiduciaries, as in its discretion may be required or advisable to the performance of custodial and investment duties under this article. The board may enter into agency, investment advisory and custodial agreements as it deems appropriate. 
(d)  All funds and securities of the plan may be commingled in the fund, provided that accurate records are maintained at all times reflecting the financial composition of the fund, including accurate accounts and entries as regards the following: 
(1)  Amounts of prior plan account balances of members entitled thereto on both an individual and aggregate account basis; 
(2)  Receipts and disbursements; 
(3)  Benefit payments; 
(4)  All monies, funds and assets whatsoever attributable to contributions and deposits from the city; 
(5)  All interest, dividends and gains or losses whatsoever; and 
(6)  Such other entries as may be properly required so as to reflect a clear and complete financial report of the fund. 
(e)  It shall be impossible, at any time prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities with respect to covered employees and their beneficiaries under the trust, for any part of the principal or income of the trust to be used for, or diverted to, purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of the employees or their beneficiaries, except for usual and customary charges and expenses associated with the operation and management of the plan and fund. 
(Code 1964, § 19-47)  
Sec. 15-339. - Fiduciaries and fiduciary responsibility. 
(a)  Fiduciary defined. A "fiduciary" shall be any person or entity who exercises any discretionary authority or control regarding regular, ongo 
ing management or administration of the plan or plan assets, and any person or entity who renders or who has authority or responsibility to render investment advice. 
(b)  Standards of responsibility. All fiduciaries shall discharge their duties with respect to the plan solely in the interest of members and beneficiaries, and more particularly as follows: 
(1)  For the exclusive purpose of providing benefits to members and their beneficiaries, and defraying reasonable plan administrative expenses; 
(2)  With the care, skill, prudence and diligence under the circumstances then prevailing that a prudent man acting in a like capacity and familiar with such matters would use in the conduct of an enterprise of a like character and with like aims; and 
(3)  By performing their duties in accordance with the documents and instruments setting forth and governing the amended plan and trust. 
(Code 1964, § 19-50)  
Sec. 15-340. - Direct transfers of eligible rollover distributions. 
(a)  General. This section applies to distributions made on or after January 1, 1993. Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this section, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the board, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Eligible rollover distribution: An eligible rollover distribution is any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include: any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten years or more; any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under section 401(a)(9) of the code; and the portion of any distribution that is not includible in gross income. 
(2)  Eligible retirement plan: An eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account described in section 408(a) of the Code, an individual retirement annuity described in section 408(b) of the Code, an annuity plan described in section 403(a) of the Code, or a qualified trust described in section 401(a) of the Code, that accepts the distributee's eligible rollover distribution. However, in the case of an eligible rollover distribution to the surviving spouse, an eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account or individual retirement annuity. 
(3)  Distributee: A distributee includes an employee or former employee. In addition, the employee's or former employee's surviving spouse is a distributee with regard to the interest of the spouse. 
(4)  Direct rollover: A direct rollover is a payment by the plan to the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee. 
(Ord. No. 95-3, 11-2-94, effective 10-1-94)  
Sec. 15-341. - Excess benefits plan. 
(a)  Establishment of plan. There is hereby created a separate, unfunded, nonqualified excess benefit plan containing the terms and provisions set forth in this subpart and intended to be a qualified governmental excess benefit arrangement as defined in Section 415(m)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(b)  Definitions. All definitions prescribed in this chapter are applicable to the plan created pursuant to this subpart unless a different definition is set forth in this subpart, or the context in which a term is used in this subpart indicates a different meaning than that prescribed elsewhere in the Code of Ordinances or the Internal Revenue Code. 
Board shall mean the Board of Trustees of the City of Miramar General Employees Pension Plan. 
Code shall mean the Internal Revenue Code as it may be amended by Congress from time to time. 
Excess benefit participant shall mean any member whose retirement benefit, as determined on the basis of all qualified plans maintained by the city without regard to the limitations set forth in the Code and comparable provisions of other qualified plans of the city, exceeds the maximum benefit under Section 415 of the Code. 
Excess benefit plan shall mean the unfunded, nonqualified plan created by the city to provide benefits to members that would be provided under the pension plan, but for the limitations imposed by Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
Maximum benefit shall mean the retirement benefit a member is entitled to receive from the benefit plan set forth in the Code of Ordinances in any month after giving effect to any provision of a qualified plan designed to conform to Section 415 of the Code. 
Unrestricted benefit shall mean the monthly retirement benefit a member, or the spouse, child, or other beneficiary of a member, would have received under the terms of all qualified plans of the city, except for the restrictions contained in the statute and any similar provisions of any other qualified plans designed to conform to Section 415 of the Code. 
(c)  Benefit provided. An employee benefit participant shall be eligible to receive benefits from the excess benefit plan after termination of employment as follows: 
(1)  A monthly benefit equal to the net of the member's unrestricted benefit under the retirement plan for the general employees, that otherwise would have been paid in absence of Code 415 limits, less the benefit actually paid under the retirement plan for general employees due to maximum benefit limitations imposed by Section 415 of the Code. 
a.  The excess benefits shall be determined on a monthly basis; when and if the benefits payable under the retirement plan for general employees increase or decrease, the amounts payable under the excess plan shall be adjusted accordingly. 
b.  Excess plan benefits are payable in the form and at the time that benefits are paid under the retirement plan for general employees. 
c.  Excess plan benefit payments shall be made by the city from its general funds to the excess benefit plan as directed by the board, or to the board for payment to the excess benefit plan, as the board in its discretion shall determine to be most appropriate. Funds, if any, provided to the board to provide excess plan benefit payments shall not be commingled with the funds of the retirement plan for general employees or any other qualified plan, nor shall this excess benefit plan ever receive any transfer of assets from the pension plan. 
(2)  A lump sum benefit equal to the accumulated value of amounts determined as the net of the member unrestricted DROP payment from the retirement plan for general employees that otherwise would have been credited to the member's DROP account in the absence of Code Section 415 limitations, less the DROP payment actually credited under the retirement plan for general employees due to maximum benefit limitations imposed by Section 415 of the Code. 
a.  As DROP payments under the retirement plan for general employees change, the amounts to be accumulated shall change accordingly. 
b.  Amounts will be determined as credited at the time DROP payments are credited under the retirement plan for general employees. 
c.  Amounts recognized under this subsection shall be accumulated by increasing each amount by an annual rate of increase equal to the assumed investment earnings rate used by the retirement plan for general employees, from date of initial credit to date of payment, with fractional years receiving prorated credit. 
d.  Distribution of the lump sum shall be made in cash as soon as is administrative feasible after termination of employment. The city, in its discretion, may establish a custodial account in its name to accumulate future payments of the lump sum amount. 
(d)  This excess benefit plan shall be administered by the board. Except as provided to the contrary in this subsection, the rights, duties and responsibilities of the board for this plan shall be the same as the retirement plan for general employees. 
(1)  The actuary retained by the board shall be responsible for determining the amounts of benefits provided under this excess benefit plan. 
(2)  The actuary and legal advisors for the retirement plan for general employees shall also provide advice to the board for this plan. 
(Ord. No. 01-43, § 5, 9-5-01)  
Secs. 15-342—15-349. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SENIOR MANAGEMENT PENSION PLAN AND TRUST FUND 
 
Sec. 15-350. - Retirement plan established; name; operative date. 
(a)  A retirement plan is hereby established and placed under the exclusive administration and management of a board of trustees for the purpose of providing retirement benefits pursuant to the provisions of this article and for defraying the reasonable expenses of the retirement plan. 
(b)  The retirement plan established by this ordinance shall be known as the City of Miramar Management Retirement Plan. 
(c)  The retirement plan shall have an effective date of October 1, 2002. No person shall be eligible to receive benefits prior to October 1, 2005. 
(Ord. No. 02-18, § 2, 9-4-02; Ord. No. 05-16, § 1, 6-6-05)  
Sec. 15-351. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases as used in this article shall have the following meanings: 
Accumulated contributions shall mean the sum of all amounts deducted from a member's compensation or picked up on behalf of a member, together with regular interest. 
Active membership shall mean membership in the retirement plan as an employee. 
Actuarial equivalent shall mean a benefit having the same present value as the benefit it replaces. The board, in consultation with the actuary, shall adopt a uniform policy. 
And shall have a conjunctive meaning. 
Beneficiary shall mean any person, other than a retired member, receiving a retirement allowance or other benefit from the retirement plan. A retired member shall be referred to as a retiree. 
Benefit shall mean a retirement allowance or other payment provided by the retirement plan. 
Board or board of trustees shall mean the board of trustees of the retirement plan. 
City shall mean the City of Miramar, Florida. 
Compensation shall mean a member's fixed monthly compensation. 
Credited service shall mean membership credit upon which a member's eligibility to receive benefits under the retirement plan is based or upon which the amount of such benefits is to be determined, measured in years and completed months. This term shall be interchangeable with covered service and covered employment. 
Early service retirement shall mean a member's withdrawal from service under circumstances permitting the payment of a retirement benefit before such member is eligible for normal service retirement under the terms of this plan. 
Employee shall mean a senior management or management employee presently employed by the city. A senior management or management employee who is reclassified in a position covered by another city sponsored plan shall be transferred to the appropriate plan for that position. Service as an employee in this plan shall also be referred to as covered employment. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, commission secretaries/legislative aides shall have the option to decline membership in the plan by making an irrevocable election, as prescribed by the board. 
Final monthly compensation shall mean a member's average monthly rate of compensation from the city during the thirty-six (36) consecutive months of employment which is greater than the total of any other thirty-six (36) consecutive months; provided that if a member has been employed for fewer than thirty-six (36) months in a position covered by this plan, such average shall be taken over the period of actual credited service. 
Fund shall mean the City of Miramar Management Retirement Fund. 
May shall mean a permissive term. 
Management shall mean a person assigned on a regular, full-time basis to a senior management or management position so designated by the city manager and shall include all FLSA exempt and Civil Service exempt positions. Employees who are members of the police or firefighter defined benefit plans, including DROP participants, are ineligible for membership in the Miramar Management Retirement Plan. 
Member shall mean a senior management or management employee actively employed by the city for whom contributions to the retirement plan are made as required by this ordinance, exclusive of commission secretaries/legislative aides who decline membership in the plan. 
Option shall mean one of several choices available to members with respect to the manner in which a retirement allowance may be paid. 
Pension shall mean a series of periodic payments, payable in monthly installments for a period of not less than the life of the member. 
Pick-up amounts shall mean employer contributions derived from a member's earnable compensation through a reduction in the member's earnable compensation. 
Plan year shall mean the period from October 1 through September 30 of the following year. 
Retirement shall mean a member's withdrawal from active service with an immediate retirement benefit granted to the member pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
Retirement allowance shall mean a pension provided by the retirement plan. 
Retirement plan shall mean the City of Miramar Senior Management Retirement Plan. 
Service retirement shall mean a member's retirement from active service under circumstances permitting immediate payment of a retirement allowance without reduction because of age or length of service. Service retirement shall be considered normal retirement. 
Trustee shall mean a member of the board of trustees of the retirement plan. 
Vested benefit shall mean an immediate or deferred benefit to which a member has gained a non-forfeitable right under the provisions of this article. 
Vesting shall mean five (5) years of credited service before the member is entitled to retirement benefits. 
(Ord. No. 02-18, § 2, 9-4-02; Ord. No. 05-16, § 2, 6-6-05; Ord. No. 07-09, § 1, 1-24-07; Ord. 17-05, § 2, 11-14-16)  
Sec. 15-352. - Administration of the retirement plan. 
(a)  The sole and exclusive administration of, and the responsibility for, the proper effective operation of the retirement plan and for making the provisions of this article is vested in a board of trustees. 
(b)  The board of trustees shall consist of five (5) voting members. The city manager shall hold one trustee position. Three (3) members of the board of trustees shall be senior management employees. Initially, the three senior management employee trustee positions shall be held by the three (3) assistant city managers. After the initial term, the three (3) senior management employee trustees shall be elected by a majority of active members of the plan. The city commission shall appoint the fifth trustee. In addition, the director of human resources, or any successor officer performing that function, shall be a nonvoting, ex-officio member of the board. The ex-officio member may participate in the discussion of all matters, but shall not vote nor be counted toward a quotum. 
(c)  All trustees shall serve a term of four (4) years. If a vacancy shall occur prior to the expiration of a member's term, a replacement member shall be chosen in the same manner as the person who has left office. A replacement trustee shall serve for the remainder of the term of the member who is being replaced. All trustees shall serve until their replacements are selected. 
(d)  The board of trustees shall prescribe a uniform election procedure for the selection of the active member trustees. 
(e)  All trustees shall serve without compensation, but they shall be reimbursed from the fund for all necessary expenses authorized by the board. The board shall be permitted to prescribe uniform rules for reimbursement for travel expenditures. 
(f)  The board of trustees shall annually select a chairman and a secretary who shall execute all documents on behalf of the board. 
(g)  A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business and shall have full power to act under the terms of the plan. Three (3) concurring votes shall be required of the board to take action. 
(h)  The board shall keep minutes of all meetings and a record of any action taken by the board shall be kept in written form and maintained by the board. 
(i)  The board of trustees shall have the authority to make such uniform rules and regulations and to take such action as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of the plan and all decisions of the board of trustees, made in good faith, shall be final, binding and conclusive on all parties. 
(j)  The board of trustees shall be deemed the named fiduciary of the plan and shall discharge its responsibilities solely in the interest of the members and beneficiaries of the plan for the exclusive purpose of providing benefits to the members and their beneficiaries and to defray the reasonable expenses of the plan. The trustees shall exercise those fiduciary responsibilities with the care, skill, prudence and diligence under the circumstances then prevailing that a prudent person acting in a like capacity and familiar with such matters would use in the conduct of an enterprise of a similar character and with similar aims. 
(k)  The board of trustees shall have the following administrative duties: 
(1)  To maintain such records as are necessary for calculating and distributing retirement benefits; 
(2)  To maintain such records as are necessary for financial accounting and reporting of retirement plan funds; 
(3)  To maintain such records as are necessary for actuarial evaluation of the retirement plan, including investigations into the mortality, service and compensation experience of its members and beneficiaries; 
(4)  To compile such other administrative or investment information as is necessary for the management of the retirement plan; 
(5)  To process, certify and/or respond to all correspondence, bills and statements received by the retirement plan, as well as all applications submitted to the board for retirement benefits; 
(6)  To establish and maintain communication with city departments and other agencies of government as is necessary for the management of the retirement plan, including preparing, filing and distributing such reports and information as are required by law to be prepared, filed or distributed on behalf of the retirement plan; 
(7)  To determine all questions relating to and process all applications for eligibility, participation and benefits; 
(8)  To distribute at regular intervals to employees, a comprehensive summary plan description and periodic reports regarding the financial and actuarial status of the plan; 
(9)  To retain and compensate such professional and technical experience as is necessary to fulfill its fiduciary responsibilities; 
(10)  To make recommendations regarding changes in the provisions of the plan; 
(11)  To assure the prompt deposit of all member contributions, city contributions, and investment earnings; 
(12)  To establish a uniform set of rules and regulations for the management of the trust; 
(13)  To take such other action as the trustees shall deem, in their sole and exclusive discretion, as being necessary for the efficient management of the plan. 
(l)  The board shall have the authority to retain its own legal counsel, accountants, actuaries and other professional advisors to assist the board in the performance of its duties. The board may act without independent investigation upon the professional advice of the advisors so retained. 
(m)  The board is authorized to prosecute or defend actions, claims or proceedings of any nature or kind for the protection of the fund assets or for the protection of the board in the performance of its duties. 
(n)  Neither the board nor any of its individual members shall have any personal liability for any action taken in good faith. The trustees individually and the board as a whole shall be entitled to the protections in F.S. § 768.28. The trustees shall also be authorized to purchase from the assets of the fund, errors and omission insurance to protect the trustees in the performance of their duties. Such insurance shall not provide protection against a trustee's fraud, intentional misrepresentation, willful misconduct or gross negligence. 
(o)  No trustee shall be responsible at his or her own expense, to take legal action to correct the misconduct of any other member of the board of trustees. A trustee shall have an affirmative obligation, however, to publicly reveal any misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance by a co-trustee, and upon making such revelation in a public meeting, shall be relieved further individual responsibility of the actions of that co-trustee. 
(Ord. No. 02-18, § 2, 9-4-02; Ord. No. 12-11, § 6, 4-4-12)  
Sec. 15-353. - Contributions. 
(a)  The city shall pick-up, rather than deduct from each member's pay, beginning with the date of covered employment, 13.515 percent of the member's compensation. The monies so picked-up shall be deposited in the fund on a bi-weekly basis. An account record shall be maintained continuously for each member. Pick-up contributions shall continue until death, disability or termination of covered service, whichever shall occur first. Contributions shall remain in the fund unless withdrawn as provided in the plan. No member shall have the option to choose to receive the contributed amounts directly instead of having them paid by the city directly to the plan. All such pick-up contributions by the city shall be deemed and be considered as part of the member's accumulated contributions and subject to all provisions of the plan pertaining to accumulated contributions of members. The intent of this provision is to comply with Section 414(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(b)  All benefits payable under this plan are in lieu of a refund of accumulated contributions. 
(c)  The city shall contribute to the retirement plan an amount which when combined with (i) member contributions and (ii) investment return, will be sufficient to maintain the plan on a sound actuarial basis. 
(d)  Expenses, charges and fees attributable to the management of the plan shall be paid from the fund. 
(e)  The city shall have no right, title or interest in the fund or in any part thereof, and no contribution made thereto shall revert to the city, except such part of the fund, if any, which remains therein after the satisfaction of all liabilities to persons entitled to benefits under the plan. 
(Ord. No. 02-18, § 2, 9-4-02; Ord. No. 08-09, § 2, 2-20-08; Ord. No. 10-12, § 3, 8-18-10)  
Sec. 15-354. - Fund management and investments. 
(a)  The plan is hereby established, pursuant to authority granted in the City Charter, as an irrevocable trust fund into which shall be deposited all of the assets of the plan of every kind and description. 
(b)  The actual custody and supervision of the fund shall be vested in the board. All assets of the plan may be commingled, provided that accurate records are maintained at all times reflecting the financial composition of the fund, including accurate accounts regarding the following: 
(1)  Current amounts of accumulated contributions of members, both on an individual and aggregate basis; 
(2)  Receipts and disbursements; 
(3)  Benefits payments; 
(4)  All contributions from the city; 
(5)  All interest, dividends, gains and losses from investment; 
(6)  Such other entries as may be required for a clear, complete financial report of the status of the fund. 
(c)  The board shall establish a written investment policy, with the advice and counsel of such advisors as the board deems necessary, and said investment policy shall set forth the types of securities and other types of investments into which shall be placed the assets of the fund. The policy shall further set forth appropriate limitations on those investments, including, but not limited to, anticipated rate of return, quality of investment, class of investment and acceptable risk. The board shall have the authority to invest and reinvest the assets of the plan in such securities or property, real or personal, as the board deems appropriate, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Bonds, notes, or other obligations of the United States or any of its agencies, or those guaranteed by the United States or for which the credit of the United States is pledged for the payment of the principal and interest or dividends thereof; 
(2)  Accounts or certificates of deposit in any bank or other financial institution incorporated under the laws of the State of Florida, or any national bank organized under the laws of the United States, or authorized to do business and situated in the State of Florida, to the extent that such certificates of deposit are secured by the deposits of securities of the United States government; 
(3)  Notes secured by first mortgages on real property insured or guaranteed by the Federal Housing Administration or the Veterans Administration; 
(4)  Interest-bearing obligations with a fixed maturity of any corporation organized under the laws of the United States, any state or organized territory of the United States and the District of Columbia; provided that such obligations are rated by at least two (2) nationally recognized ratings services in any one (1) of the four (4) highest classifications approved by the comptroller of the currency for the investment of funds of national banks or, if only one nationally recognized ratings service shall rate such obligations, such ratings service must have rated such obligation in any one (1) of the three (3) highest rating classifications as set forth in this subsection; 
(5)  Bonds issued by the State of Israel; 
(6)  Real estate, which may be in the form of commingled ownership and financial institutional futures, listed options, stock index futures, which may be used under specific instruction of mangers; 
(7)  Common stock, preferred stock and interest-bearing obligations of corporations having an option to convert into common stock issued by a corporation. Investment in foreign securities shall be limited to ten (10) percent of the total fund, at cost. 
(8)  Index funds and collective investment funds. 
(9)  Any other investment permitted by law. 
(10)  The board may also contract with any other city sponsored, defined benefit plan for a co-mingled investment portfolio, provided, however, that a separate accounting of the assets of each plan is maintained. 
(d)  The board may determine the percentage of each type of investment to be held. 
(e)  The board shall be authorized to retain one (1) or more money managers for the management of property held in the plan, and the board shall convey property of the plan to such money managers for investment and reinvestment in accordance with the terms of this article and the investment policies established by the board. Any such money manager contracting with the board for the investment of its assets shall be deemed a fiduciary of the plan. 
(f)  The board shall have a continuing duty to observe and evaluate the performance of any money manager retained by the board. The board shall, in selecting a money manager or other investment counsel, exercise all judgment and care in the circumstances then prevailing which persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs. 
(g)  The board shall require that any money manager or other agent who has custody or control of any property of the plan to keep accurate and detailed accounts of all investments, receipts, disbursements and other transactions pertaining to such trust property, and the board shall further require that all accounts, books and records pertaining thereto be open for inspecting and audit at all reasonable times by the city, the board or the designees. 
(h)  The board shall also keep accurate and detailed accounts of all investments, receipts, disbursements or other transactions pertaining to the trust property and all accounts, books and records pertaining thereto shall be open to inspection and audit at all reasonable times by the city or its designees. 
(Ord. No. 02-18, § 2, 9-4-02)  
Sec. 15-355. - Service retirement benefits. 
(a)  A member may retire on the first day of the month coincident with or next following the earlier of: the date upon which the member completes twenty (20) years of credited service, regardless of age; or the date upon which the member attains age fifty-five (55) with ten (10) years of credited service or the date upon which the member attains age sixty-two (62) with five (5) years of credited service. There shall be no mandatory retirement age. 
(b)  The normal retirement benefit shall be determined based upon the following percentages of final monthly compensation multiplied by the applicable years and completed moths of credited service: 
Five (5) years or less ..... 3.0% 
Six (6) years ..... 3.2% 
Seven (7) years ..... 3.4% 
Eight (8) years ..... 3.6% 
Nine (9) years ..... 3.8% 
Ten (10) years ..... 4.0% 
Additional service beyond ten years shall be based on two and seventy-five hundredth (2.75) percent of final monthly compensation multiplied by those years and completed months of credited service in excess of ten (10). 
In no instance shall the aggregate benefit payable from the plan exceed eighty (80) percent of final monthly compensation multiplied by the number of years and completed months of credited service. 
(c)  A service retirement benefit shall be payable on the first day of each month. The benefit shall commence on the first day of the month coincident with or next following the member's actual retirement and shall continue as provided in the optional form of payment chosen by the member. In the event that a member shall retire in the middle of the month, the retirement benefit shall commence on the first day of the following month, but the member shall receive credit for the partial month preceding the actual date that payment commenced. 
(d)  Early retirement shall be available to a member on the first day of the month coincident with or next following attainment of age fifty (50) and completion of ten (10) years of credited service. 
(e)  A member electing early retirement may receive either a deferred payment or an immediate payment under the following formula: 
(1)  A deferred payment shall commence on the normal retirement date of the member. This shall mean the date upon which the member attains age fifty-five (55) with ten (10) years of credited service. A deferred payment shall be determined in the same manner as a normal retirement, except that final monthly compensation and credited service shall be based upon the early retirement date. 
(2)  An immediate retirement benefit may commence on the first day of the month coincident with or next following the date of early retirement. The benefit shall be determined in the same manner as normal retirement and then actuarially reduced for the number of actual years and months at which the starting date of the benefit precedes the normal retirement date. The normal retirement date shall be the date upon which the member would have attained age fifty-five (55) with ten (10) years of credited service. The actuarial reduction factor applied to the benefit shall be five (5) percent for each year by which the starting date of the benefit precedes age fifty-five (55). 
(f)  The payment of the early retirement income shall be subject to the same conditions as normal retirement income. 
(g)  In the event a member elects early retirement, the benefit formula in effect on the early retirement date shall be applicable to the member. 
(h)  The standard form of benefit shall be a one hundred (100) percent joint and survivor annuity, utilizing the applicable percentage formula, assuming the joint annuitant is within three (3) years of age of the member. If the joint annuitant is more than three (3) years younger or older than the member, the benefit shall be the actuarial equivalent of a joint annuitant who is three (3) years younger or older than the member. A member with a vested interest may select one (1) of the optional forms of payment set forth below which shall be the actuarial equivalent of the standard benefit. 
The optional forms of benefit shall be as follows: 
(1)  Life annuity. A member may elect to receive an enhanced annuity payable for life. There shall be no guaranteed payment in excess of the accumulated contributions of the member, which contributions shall be paid to the member's estate or designated beneficiary should the member die prior to receiving payments equal to said contributions. 
(2)  Joint and survivor option. A member may elect to receive a benefit for life and to have the benefit (or a designated fraction of the benefit) continued after the member's death and during the lifetime of a designated survivor. A designated survivor may be any natural person. In the event that the designated survivor dies before the member's benefit payments begin, this option shall be canceled automatically and a retirement income shall be payable to the member as if the election had never been made. A member may, at that time, elect a life annuity; a ten (10) year certain and life thereafter benefit, or appoint another survivor beneficiary. 
(3)  Ten (10) year certain and life thereafter. A member may elect to receive an unreduced life annuity with one hundred twenty (120) guaranteed payments. If the member shall die prior to receiving one hundred twenty (120) payments, the remaining benefits shall be paid to the beneficiary designated by the member. In the event that no beneficiary has been designated, the member's estate shall be the recipient of the remaining balance of payments. This shall be the normal form of retirement. 
(4)  Pop-up option. For any survivorship benefit, the member may elect to purchase an option permitting the substitution of a new survivor in the event of the death of the survivor or dissolution of marriage. The board, by uniform rule, shall establish the cost and procedure for implementing this option. 
(i)  Optional actuarially equivalent COLA. Prior to retiring, members shall be permitted to select an actuarially reduced benefit with an automatic cost of living adjustment ("COLA") beginning five (5) years after commencement of retirement benefits. The actuarially reduced benefit shall be payable during the lifetime of the member with a guaranteed annual increase in the member's retirement benefit of one half (.5) percent, one (1) percent, one and one-half (1.5) percent, or two (2) percent, depending on which COLA option is selected by the member. The COLA adjustment shall take effect on the anniversary of the first benefit check payable to the member, or the first payment into the member's DROP account, as applicable. COLA benefits shall be payable to a joint pensioner or beneficiary, to the extent an optional form of benefit has been elected under section 15-355(h). The selection of a COLA option is irrevocable once monthly benefits have commenced. The cost of the actuarially equivalent COLA benefit shall be paid by the member, who shall have the option of: (i) receiving an actuarially reduced benefit, (ii) paying the lump sum cost of the COLA purchase, or (iii) such other actuarially equivalent payment method permitted by the board. Current DROP participants shall have forty-five (45) days to make an irrevocable election to purchase an actuarially equivalent COLA. 
(j)  Payment of in-service distributions to City Manager or Interim City Manager: Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, in-service distributions are payable to the City Manager or Interim City Manager, as permitted by the Internal Revenue Code and applicable Treasury Regulations. In such event, the City Manager or Interim City Manager will not earn additional service credit in the Plan. 
(Ord. No. 02-18, § 2, 9-4-02; Ord. No. 05-16, § 3, 6-6-05; Ord. No. 07-09, § 2, 1-24-07; Ord. No. 17-06, § 2, 11-14-16; Ord. No. 19-05 , § 2, 115-18)  
Sec. 15-356. - Vesting and termination; purchase of prior covered service. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, all rights to benefits under this plan shall terminate when a member's employment terminates for any reason other than normal service retirement, early service retirement, or disability retirement. Any member who completes five (5) years of credited service and whose contributions remain in the plan has a vested right to accrued benefits from the plan. No member who has completed less than five (5) years of credited service shall have a vested interest in any accrued benefit. 
(b)  A member who shall leave the service of the city prior to eligibility for normal service retirement or early service retirement, but who has completed not less than five (5) years of creditable service shall be entitled to receive retirement benefits commencing at age sixty-two (62) or, if earlier, the date the member would have completed twenty (20) years of service had the member remained continuously employed, or the attainment of age fifty-five (55), whichever shall occur later. A member who shall leave the service of the city with not less than ten (10) years of credited service shall commence eligibility at age fifty-five (55). Such benefits will be based on final monthly compensation and credited service as of the date of termination. 
(c)  Every member shall have the right to elect to receive, in lieu of all benefits under the plan, a return of the member's accumulated contributions, with interest, at the rate of six (6) percent. 
(d)  A member who elects a lump sum return of contributions releases and discharges the city and the retirement plan from the right to any other benefits from the plan. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, members who are rehired within six (6) months of termination shall be permitted to restore service credit by repaying withdrawn member contributions, plus interest at the plan's assumed rate of return. In such case the rehired member shall have a maximum of one (1) year to repay the withdrawn employee contributions, but additional interest charges will accrue during the one-year repayment period. 
(e)  Purchase of prior city service. Members who have full-time city service prior to active membership in this plan may purchase some or all of that service. For the time being purchased, the full actuarial cost of this buyback must be paid by the member. The cost of the service buyback may be made in one (1) lump sum payment or may be made by payroll deductions over a time period which shall not exceed five (5) years, with interest. For example, if an eligible member is purchasing one (1) year of prior full-time city service, that member must complete all required payments within five (5) years. A member making installment payments shall be assessed interest at the assumed investment return rate in effect at the time of the purchase. A member making installment payments shall complete all required payments prior to payment of any benefits under this plan. If installment payments are not completed at the time a member retires, the member shall not receive prior service credit for the remaining period for which payments were not made. Should a member die prior to completing any installment payments, the member's designated beneficiary or joint annuitant shall be given the opportunity to complete the buyback and receive the outstanding service by making one (1) lump sum payment of the entire balance within ninety (90) days of the date of the member's death. Members electing not to purchase prior full-time city service will be deemed to have commenced credited service on the date of active membership in the plan. Dual members of this plan and the general employees retirement plan shall be required to pay the actuarially determined cost of prior service in this plan. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this plan, in the case of an involuntary termination of a member on or before October 1, 2008, the member shall be eligible to receive retirement benefits upon the attainment of age fifty-five (55) or the date the member would have completed ten (10) years of service had the member remained continuously employed, whichever shall occur later. 
(g)  Purchase of enhanced service credit: Members of the plan may purchase up to five (5) years of enhanced service credit, based on the calculations performed by the plan's actuary. Members purchasing enhanced service credit shall be required to pay the full actuarial impact to the Plan of the purchased service. The contribution by the member of the actuarially determined cost of the buyback may be made (i) in one (1) lump sum payment or (ii) by payroll deductions in installments for a period of time which shall not exceed five (5) years, with interest. Enhanced service credit may not be used for vesting purposes, but will otherwise constitute service credit for purposes of normal retirement eligibility. 
(h)  Purchase of enhanced service credit by applicable dual members: Members who were promoted into the management plan from the general employees plan after the adoption of ordinance 07-09, prior to the adoption of ordinance 15-11, and are still actively employed shall be permitted to purchase three (3) years of enhanced service credit based on the actuarially determined cost in the year that they were promoted to the management plan. In order to purchase service under this provision, the member must make an irrevocable election within (60) days of the effective date. 
(Ord. No. 02-18, § 2, 9-4-02; Ord. No. 05-16, § 4, 6-6-05; Ord. No. 07-09, § 3, 1-24-07; Ord. No. 12-09, § 2, 2-15-12; Ord. No. 16-07, § 2, 5-18-16; Ord. No. 17-03, § 2, 11-14-16; Ord. No. 17-04, § 1, 11-14-16)  
Sec. 15-357. - Buy-back for military service. 
(a)  Any member of the retirement plan who is employed by the city prior to entry into military service and who takes a leave of absence for the purpose of entering into military service in the Armed Forces of the United States and thereafter reenters the employ of the city, and is vested, shall be entitled to purchase service credits for the period of absence by contributing the actuarially determined cost of the service. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a member who meets the eligibility requirements of the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act shall only be required to pay ordinary member contributions. 
(b)  Any vested member who has served on active military duty but is ineligible to claim credit for service under subsection (a) shall receive credit for up to a maximum of four (4) years for the time spent in active military service in the Armed Forces of the United States, provided that for each year being purchased the member pays to the retirement plan the actuarially determined cost of the service. 
(c)  A member who is receiving, or will receive, a retirement benefit for military service in any other state or local government retirement plan supported by public funds, shall not use that service to purchase service in this retirement plan. A member who is receiving, or shall receive, any other retirement benefit in which time served in the military was used by the employee in that other pension, other than a military pension, shall not be eligible for military buy-back as provided herein. 
(d)  The contribution for military buy-back required of the employee may be made in one (1) lump sum or may be made by payroll deductions in installments for a time period which shall not exceed the number of years being purchased. An employee making installment payments shall complete all required payments prior to payment of any benefits. If installment payments are not completed at the time an employee retires, the employee shall not receive military service credit for the remaining period for which payments were not made. An employee making installment payments shall pay an interest rate of seven (7) percent. 
(Ord. No. 02-18, § 2, 9-4-02; Ord. No. 08-09, § 3, 2-20-08)  
Sec. 15-358. - Membership; transfers between covered and non-covered employment. 
(a)  Membership in this plan may be elected during any time after appointment to a senior management or management position covered by this plan. If the plan is amended to create a second tier of benefit levels ("tier two"), all senior management and/or management employees who elect to join the plan on or after the date that tier two is created shall be part of tier two of the plan and shall not be entitled to the benefit levels of those in the first tier of the plan. 
(b)  (1)  Stand-alone Management Plan: Effective immediately upon adoption of this subsection, this plan shall no longer offset benefits earned under the general employees retirement plan. Upon promotion of a general employee to a management position, the newly promoted management employee shall accrue the following benefits in this plan: 
(i)  Benefits shall be calculated, without offset, based on a member's service in this plan; 
(ii)  Vesting and retirement eligibility in this plan shall be based on service credit earned under both this plan and the general employees retirement plan; and 
(iii)  Members of this plan shall contribute all member contributions set forth in section 15-353. 
(2)  Grandfathered Dual Members: Dual service members who were promoted to management positions prior to the effective date of this subsection shall be permitted upon retirement to elect one of the following benefit calculation options: 
(i)  2002 Methodology: In the event that a member enters this plan prior to the effective date of this subsection as a result of appointment from a position covered by the general employees retirement plan, the member shall have the option to continue to accrue credited service in the prior plan as well as earning credited service in this plan; provided however, that there shall be an offset of the accrued benefits earned under the general employees' plan (without reflecting adjustments for early retirement or form of payment). Dual members of this plan and the general employees retirement plan shall be required to pay the actuarially determined cost of prior service in this plan. A member of the general employees retirement plan shall be ineligible to join the management plan despite being otherwise eligible, if the employee has accrued a benefit equal to or greater than eighty (80) percent of average monthly earnings under the general employees retirement plan. 
(ii)  Stand-Alone Management Plan Methodology: Members entering this plan prior to the effective date of this subsection shall have the option to elect the Stand-Alone Management Plan Methodology set forth in subsection 15-358(b)(1); or 
(iii)  Refund of Management Plan Contributions Methodology: Members entering this plan prior to the effective date of this subsection shall have the option to elect benefits otherwise payable under the general employees retirement plan and a refund of member contributions paid to the management plan. 
(3)  Grandfathered Management Employees Participating in the General Employees Retirement Plan: Management employees who previously declined dual membership and elected to continue participation in the general employees retirement plan shall be transferred to this plan. Grandfathered management employees shall be permitted to purchase management plan service credit by contributing the actuarially determined cost of the management service pursuant to subsection 15-356(e). Grandfathered management employees shall have thirty (30) days to make an irrevocable one-time election to remain in the general employees retirement plan. 
(4)  Coordination of Benefits with 401(a) Plan for Grandfathered Members: The management plan shall coordinate benefits with the city's 401(a) plan as follows: Vesting in the management plan shall be based on service credit earned under both the management plan and under the 401(a) plan. Notwithstanding the foregoing, service in the city's 401(a) plan shall not be used to calculate management plan benefits unless the grandfathered member pays the actuarially determined cost of the service pursuant to subsection 15-356(e). 
(c)  If a member of this plan is reassigned to a position covered by the general employees plan or the city's 401 plan, benefit accrual in this plan shall cease, but vesting credit shall continue to accrue in both this plan and the plan to which the former member has transferred. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this plan, normal retirement eligibility shall be based on a member's original date of hire as a general employee for: (i) any member with a hire date of April 17, 1995; (ii) who withdrew from the general employees retirement plan prior to July 1, 2001; and (iii) who elected a lump sum payment of benefits from the general employees retirement plan pursuant to Ordinance No. 09-07. 
(e)  Irrevocable Election to Join: All management employees who are members of the City's 401(a) plan shall be permitted to join the Plan by making an irrevocable election using the ballot and forms prepared by the Board. The employee's decision shall be irrevocable. 
(Ord. No. 02-18, § 2, 9-4-02; Ord. No. 07-09, §§ 4, 5, 1-24-07; Ord. No. 08-09, § 4, 2-20-08; Ord. No. 12-09, § 3, 2-15-12; Ord. No. 15-11, § 2, 3-4-15; Ord. No. 16-01, § 2, 11-23-2015; Ord. No. 18-02, § 3, 11-27-17)  
Sec. 15-359. - Death benefits. 
(a)  In the event of the death of a vested member prior to retirement, the member's designated beneficiary shall receive the benefits which the member would have received had the member retired on the day prior to death and elected the normal form of retirement. 
(b)  In the event that a non-vested member dies and has sufficient accumulated sick, comp or vacation time to reach five (5) years of credited service, it shall be presumed that the member completed five (5) years of credited service and the member's unused leave accounts shall be reduced accordingly. Payment shall be as set forth in subsection A above. In the event that the member does not have sufficient accumulated leave to reach five (5) years of service, the member's designated beneficiary shall receive the member's accumulated contributions, with interest at the rate of six (6) percent. If no beneficiary is designated, the member's estate shall be the beneficiary. 
(c)  In the event of the death of a retiree, death benefits, if any, shall be paid in accordance with the optional form of benefit chosen at the time of retirement. 
(Ord. No. 02-18, § 2, 9-4-02)  
Sec. 15-360. - Compliance with the Internal Revenue Code. 
(a)  It is the intention of the city and of the board that the plan remain at all times a qualified plan, as that term is defined under the Internal Revenue Code. 
(b)  No member's annual benefit shall exceed the amounts permitted in Section 415 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(c)  In no event may a member's retirement benefit be delayed beyond the later of April 1st following the calendar year in which the member attains age seventy and one-half (70½), or April 1st of the year following the calendar year in which the member retires. 
When a distribution of the participant's entire interest is not made in a lump sum, the distribution will be made in or more of the following ways: over the life of the participant; over the life of the participant and designated beneficiary; over a period certain not extending beyond the life expectancy of the participant; or over a period certain not extending beyond the joint life and last survivor expectancy of the participant and a designated beneficiary. 
(d)  If the distribution has commenced before the participant's death, the remaining interest will be distributed at least as rapidly as under the method of distribution being used as of the date of the participant's death. 
The method of distribution, if the participant dies before distribution is commenced, must satisfy the following requirements: 
(1)  Any remaining portion of the participant's interest that is not payable to a beneficiary designated by the participant will be distributed within five (5) years after the participant's death; 
(2)  Any portion of the participant's interest that is payable to a beneficiary designated by the participant will be distributed either: (i) within five (5) years after the participant's death; or (ii) over the life of the beneficiary, or over a period certain not extending beyond the life expectancy of the beneficiary, commencing not later than the end of the calendar year following the calendar year in which the participant died (or, if a designated beneficiary is the participant's surviving spouse, commencing not later than the end of the calendar year following the calendar year in which the participant would have attained age seventy and one-half (70½)). 
(e)  Direct transfers of eligible distributions shall be made as follows: 
(1)  General. This subsection applies to distributions made on or after January 1, 1993. Notwithstanding any provision of the plan to the contrary that would otherwise limit a distributee's election under this subsection, a distributee may elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the board, to have any portion of an eligible rollover distribution made directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee in a direct rollover. 
(2)  Definitions. 
Eligible rollover distribution shall mean any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the credit of a distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include: any distribution that is one (1) of a series of a substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten (10) years or more; any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code; and the portion of any distribution that is not includable in gross income. 
Eligible retirement plan shall mean an individual retirement account described in Section 408(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, an Individual Retirement Annuity described in Section 408(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, an Annuity Plan described in Section 403(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, or a Qualified Trust described in Section 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code that accepts a distributee's eligible rollover distribution. However, in the case of an eligible rollover distribution to a surviving spouse, an eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account or individual retirement annuity. 
Distributee shall mean an employee or former employee. In addition, the employee's or former employee's surviving spouse is a distributee with regard to the interest of the spouse. 
Direct rollover shall mean a payment by the plan to the eligible retirement plan specified by the distributee. 
(Ord. No. 02-18, § 2, 9-4-02)  
Sec. 15-361. - Amendment or termination of the system. 
(a)  It is the intention of the city and the board that this pension plan shall constitute an irrevocable trust and no portion of the assets may revert to the employer until all other obligations of the plan, including the payment to the last surviving member and beneficiary has been paid. No amendment shall result in members receiving lower benefits than those in effect on the date the member commenced service with the city. 
(b)  In the event of termination or partial termination of the plan, each participant's accrued pension benefit shall become non-forfeitable (one hundred (100) percent vested). 
In the event that the plan is terminated, the assets of the plan shall first be distributed to retired members and their beneficiaries. If there is any asset value remaining after the apportionment to retired members and their beneficiaries, apportionment shall next be made to each member in the service who has completed at least five (5) years of credited service and has contributed to the fund for at least five (5) years and who is not otherwise eligible to retire. If there is any asset value after the apportionments to retirees and their beneficiaries and to vested members of the plan, apportionment shall lastly be made in respect of each member in the service of the city in an amount not to exceed the total value of the member's contributions. In the event that there is any asset value remaining after full apportionment to all members and beneficiaries of the plan, the excess, if any, shall revert to the city. 
(Ord. No. 02-18, § 2, 9-4-02)  
Sec. 15-362. - Distribution of marital interests in the plan. 
(a)  In the event that the board is served with a domestic relations order or other legal process purporting to require the payment of any portion of a member's benefit to another person as a result of a dissolution of marriage, the board shall cause such order to be reviewed to determine compliance with the provisions of the plan. 
(b)  The board of trustees shall be authorized to intervene in any such dissolution of marriage proceeding to ensure that such domestic relations order is otherwise consistent with the distribution of an interest in a public employees retirement plan under state law. 
(c)  Any cost associated with the modification or correction of such domestic relations orders shall be the responsibility of the plan member and payment of any such cost shall be a condition precedent to the receipt of benefits from the plan. 
(Ord. No. 02-18, § 2, 9-4-02)  
Sec. 15-363. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  The present or future right of a person to money in the pension fund or to a retirement allowance, an optional allowance, a death benefit, the return of contributions, or any other right accrued or accruing under the provisions of this plan shall not be assignable and shall not be subject to execution, garnishment, attachment, the operation of bankruptcy or insolvency law or any other process of law whatsoever, except with respect to alimony, child support or medical payments to a former spouse or minor child. 
(b)  The board shall have the power to examine into the facts upon which any pension has been granted under any prior or existing law or which may be granted in the future or obtained erroneously, fraudulently, or illegally for any reason. The board is empowered to purge the pension rolls of any person who has been granted a pension under a prior or existing law, or who is hereafter granted a benefit under this article if the granting of that pension is found to be erroneous, fraudulent, or illegal for any reason; and to reclassify any pensioner who has under any prior or existing law or who may under this article be erroneously, improperly or illegally classified. 
(c)  Should any change or error in retirement system records be discovered or result in any member or beneficiary receiving from the retirement plan more or less than he or she would have been entitled to receive had the records been correct, the board shall have the power to correct such error and, as far as possible, adjust the payments in such a manner that the actuarial equivalent of a benefit to which such member or beneficiary was correctly entitled shall be paid. 
(d)  If any member or beneficiary is a minor or is under any other legal disability, the board of trustees shall have the power to withhold payment of benefits until the board is presented with proof satisfactory to the board of the appointment of a guardian. If the board becomes aware that any member or beneficiary is incapable of personally receiving and giving a valid receipt for any payment due under the plan, the board shall cause notice to be given to that participant or beneficiary of a hearing to determine whether said benefits should continue to be paid until the appointment of a guardian. During the pendency of any such hearing, however, the board may continue to pay benefits to the member or beneficiary and that such payment shall be a complete discharge of any liability under the plan for such payment. 
(Ord. No. 02-18, § 2, 9-4-02)  
Sec. 15-364. - Deferred retirement option plan. 
(a)  A deferred retirement option plan ("DROP") is hereby created. 
(b)  A member shall be eligible to enter the DROP at the earliest date of eligibility for normal retirement. 
(c)  In no event shall total participation in the DROP exceed five (5) years. 
(d)  As a condition of participation in the DROP, members agree to tender an irrevocable resignation. The resignation shall take effect not more than sixty (60) months after commencement of DROP participation. Participation in the DROP is not a guarantee of continued employment. 
(e)  A member may participate in the DROP only once, and after commencement, the member shall not have the right to be a contributing member of the pension plan. 
(f)  Upon the effective date of participation in the DROP, member contributions shall cease and members shall no longer accrue credited service, final average compensation shall be determined, and any survivorship options shall be selected. 
(g)  For the purposes of this section, a member's final average compensation and credited service shall be determined as of the effective date of commencement of participation in the DROP. 
(h)  DROP participants shall not be eligible for disability benefits from the pension plan. 
(i)  Upon the date of participation in the DROP, the monthly retirement benefits that would have been payable had the member elected to cease employment and receive a service retirement allowance shall be paid into a deferred retirement option account administered by the board of trustees. 
(j)  DROP account balances shall be self-directed by members participating in the DROP, using the self-directed mutual fund options available under the DROP program. By electing to participate in the DROP, members agree that they are voluntarily assuming the risk of potential investment losses, for which members hold the board and the city immune from liability. 
(k)  At the end of the specified period of DROP participation, or other termination of the DROP, the member shall receive a sum equal to accumulated DROP balance, adjusted for any applicable investment earnings or losses, and any applicable fees. 
(l)  Payment shall be made, at the election of the member, by (a) lump sum payment; (b) periodic payments; (c) rollover to another qualified plan; or (d) any other combination of the above. 
(m)  If a member dies during the period of participation in the DROP, a lump sum equal to accrued DROP payments, adjusted for any applicable investment earnings or losses, and any applicable fees, shall be paid to the named beneficiary or, if no beneficiary is named, to the estate of the member, in addition to any applicable survivorship benefit. 
(n)  Upon termination of service with the city, a member may receive payment within an administratively reasonable time after requesting distribution on the forms required by the pension board, or may defer payment until a time not later than the latest date authorized by Section 401(a)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code. In the case of retirees electing to defer payment after separation from service, DROP account balances shall continue to be invested and shall remain subject to applicable investment gains or losses, and any applicable fees. 
(o)  No distribution of DROP monies shall be made while a member is still employed by the city. 
(p)  A member's DROP account is subject to forfeiture under F.S. § 112.3173. 
(q)  The board of trustees is authorized to adopt administrative rules necessary for the administration of the DROP. 
(Ord. No. 10-08, § 2, 5-5-10)  
Chapter 16 - CIVIL SERVICE RULES AND REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 91-47, September 19, 1991 repealed Sections 16-1, 16-4, 16-26, 16-27, 16-71, 16-110, 16-124, 16-125, 16-126, 16-127, 16-132, 16-136, 16-199; and enacted Articles 1 and 2, Sections 16-1.1.0. through 16.2.9.0. 
Ordinance No. 92-14, November 29, 1991 repealed Sections 16-137, 16-138, 16-139, 16-141, 16-142, 16-143, 16-145, 16-146, 16-147, 16-148, 16-149, 16-150, 16-151, 16-152, 16-153, 16-154, 16-155, 16-156, 16-157, 16-158, 16-159, 16-160, 16-161, 16-162, 16-163, 16-164, 16-165, 16-160, 16-167, 16-168, 16-169, 16-170, 16-171, 16-172, 16-173, 16-174, 16-175, 16-176, 16-177, 16-178, 16-179, 16-180, 16-181, 16-182, 16-183, 16-184, 16-185, 16-186, 16-187, 16-188, 16-189, 16-190, 16-191, 16-192, 16-193, 16-194, 16-195, 16-196, 16-197, 16-198, 16-199, 16-200, 16-201, 16-202, 16-203, 16-204, 16-205; and enacted Article 3 through 20, Sections 16-3.1.0. 
Ordinance No. 93-3, October 14, 1992 amended Sections 16-2.6.2. Holidays (Floating Holiday changed to Martin Luther King's Birthday); and repealed Sections 16-51; 16-52; 16-53; 16-54; 16-55; 16-72; 16-73; 16-74; 16-75; 16-88; 16-89; 16-90; 16-106; 16-107; 16-108; 16-109; 16-111; 16-112; 16-113; 16-114; 16-115; 16-117; 16-119; 16-120.77. 
Ordinance No. 96-25, May 15, 1996 amended Sec. 16-2.1.0; 16-2.2.1; 16-2.3.0; 16-2.4.1; 16-2.4.2; 16-2.6.1; 16-2.7.2; 16-2.7.3; 16-2.7.6; 16-2.7.8; 16-2.7.11; 16-2.8.4; 16-3.1.1; 16-3.2.0; 16-3.4.1; 16-3.5.0; 16-10.1.2; 16-10.1.3; 16-14.1.0; 16-21.1.5; 16-21.1.6; 16-21.1.7; and repealed Secs. 16-21.1.1; 16-21.2; 16-21.1.3; 16-21.1.4; 16-21.1.8; 16-21.1.11; 16-21.1.12; and 16-22.1.13; and Secs. 16-21.1.5; 16-21.6; 16-21.1.7 16-21.1.9; and 16-21.1.10 were renumbered to 16-21.1.1; 16-21.1.2; 16-21.2.3; 16-21.1.4; and 16-21.1.5, respectively. 
Subsequently, Ord. No. 05-04, § 2, adopted Nov. 17, 2004, repealed Ch. 16, in its entirety. Section 3 of said ordinance enacted provisions designated as a new Ch. 16 to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 
 
ARTICLE I. - PURPOSE, SCOPE AND DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Authority. 
Pursuant to the authority granted by the City Commission of the City of Miramar, through the City Charter and City Code, the city commission has duly read and adopted these rules and regulations and caused them to be included in the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-2. - Purpose. 
These rules and regulations are adopted to provide for the recruitment, retention and staff development of the best-qualified available employees for each position in the service of the City of Miramar. The rules and regulations establish orderly procedures for the administration of the human resources system of the city in such a way as to be consistent with the following principles of merit, efficiency, and accountability: 
(1)  Recruiting and selecting new employees, and advancing the careers of current employees on the basis of their relative knowledge, skills, and abilities, and the effectiveness of their performance, behavior, and accountability on the job. 
(2)  Assuring fair treatment of applicants and employees in all aspects of human resources administration without regard to race, religion, color, creed, age, gender, national origin, ancestry, political affiliation, disability, and sexual orientation with proper regard for their rights and privacy. 
(3)  Establishing job classifications which, in substance, fairly describe the essential functions of the work performed by city employees and establish minimum qualifications for each position in city service. 
(4)  Establish and maintain fair and reasonable pay rates for each classification in city service consistent with the principal of providing comparable pay for comparable work, attracting and retaining a skilled and effective work force, honoring obligations in collective bargaining agreements, and the ability of the city to pay. 
(5)  Providing training and development opportunities to ensure high quality performance and accountable behavior on the part of the city employees and to aid in the progressive development of employees in advancing their careers with the city. 
(6)  Retaining employees on the basis of the effectiveness of their performance, behavior, and accountability on the job correcting and improving inadequate performance and behavior and separating employees whose actions or failures to act are inappropriate as representatives of the City of Miramar. 
(7)  Establishing a procedure for the presentation, review and adjustment of employee grievances including appeals from disciplinary action, where appropriate. 
(8)  Assuring that employees are protected against coercion or retaliation based upon the exercise of their rights provided in the rules and regulations. 
(9)  Assuring that employees are protected against coercion or retaliation for political purposes and are prohibited from using their official authority for the purpose of interfering with or affecting the result of an election or nomination of an office, or the appointment of a city employee in a manner inconsistent with these rules and regulations. 
(10)  Providing for the necessary flexibility and authority for supervisors, managers, and city executives to conduct the city's business in an efficient and cost-effective manner. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-3. - Equal employment opportunity and non-discrimination. 
The human resources policy of the City of Miramar is based upon the fundamental concept that candidates are to be judged on the basis of their individual merit and fitness for city employment in relation to the requirements of a particular position and the needs of the city service. The city is an equal opportunity employer which will not condone or practice unlawful discrimination based upon any of the protected group criteria set forth in Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, and by other relevant Civil Rights laws of the United States, the State of Florida, and city policies. Employment decisions in City of Miramar will not be based upon race, religion, color, creed, age, gender, national origin, political affiliation, sexual orientation or disability of candidates, unless one (1) or more of those criteria represents a bona fide occupational qualification necessary for the safe or efficient performance of the duties of the city's position. The city recognizes the diversity of its labor market population and strives to have that diversity reflected and respected in the composition of the city's workforce. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-4. - Positions covered and excluded. 
These rules and regulations apply to all positions covered in the city's civil service system. The civil service system represents the permanent full time work force of the City of Miramar and represents the positions in city service, which must be filled following the competitive, structured practices described in these rules and regulations. Likewise, employees in the civil service of the city have rights to retain their position, rank, and pay subject to reduction in force or disciplinary actions, as set forth in these rules and regulations. The classified civil service of the city shall consist of all employees serving in positions in the City of Miramar except the following, which shall be excluded from the classified civil service. Excluded positions serve in an "at-will" capacity, serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority, and are not subject to disciplinary appeal nor shall they possess a property right to continued employment with the city. Their employment with the city may be ended for any reason or no reason, other than an illegal reason: 
The following non-exclusive list of positions shall be considered excluded: 
(1)  The members of the city commission and persons appointed to fill vacancies on the city commission. 
(2)  One (1) city commission secretary and other direct support personnel appointed as may be authorized by the city commission to provide direct staff support to them. 
(3)  The city manager, assistant city managers, and members of the city manager's executive staff as outlined in classification descriptions. 
(4)  Members of appointed boards, city attorneys and other attorneys who may serve to advise and assist in the administration of the legal affairs of the city. 
(5)  Department and division directors and assistant or deputy directors of departments and divisions. 
(6)  Persons employed on a temporary, part-time, limited term, seasonal, or special project basis whose service is of limited duration. 
(7)  Volunteers who receive no regular compensation from the City of Miramar. 
(8)  Independent contractors performing work under contract, letters of engagement or letters of understanding who are not considered employees for the purposes of payroll and tax withholding. 
(9)  Employees who may be hired into positions funded by federal or state grants which do not include ongoing funding, unless specifically approved for continuing service by the city commission, or unless mandated by the requirements of the grants. 
(10)  Positions specified in former Section 16.2.1.0.C will retain civil service rights until the current incumbent vacates the position, at which time the position will thereafter be excluded from civil service. 
The positions are as follows: 
a.  Accounting supervisor; 
b.  Building official/chief structural inspector; 
c.  Chief plant operator; 
d.  City manager secretary; 
e.  Computer programmer/operator; 
f.  Early childhood coordinator; 
g.  Executive secretary; 
h.  Fire captain; 
i.  Fire division chief; 
j.  Human resources aide; 
k.  Human resources technician; 
l.  Human resources specialist; 
m.  Membrane plant manager; 
n.  Newly appointed confidential/managerial positions created or recognized by PERC; 
o.  Planner II; 
p.  Recreation activity/special events coordinator; 
q.  Risk manager; 
r.  Special projects coordinator; 
s.  Utility coordinator; 
t.  Victim advocate. 
(11)  Any position exempt from the general civil service at the time of adoption of these rules and regulations shall remain exempt from civil service. 
(12)  Any classification or position not specified in the above exclusions as may be designated as exempt by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-5. - Interpretation. 
(a)  These rules and regulations are intended to cover most human resource issues and actions, which will arise. Those situations not specifically covered shall be interpreted by the director of human resources to affect resolutions and decision making consistent with the overall purposes of these rules and regulations. Such interpretations will be in the best interest of the city's objectives and consistent with federal, state, county or other applicable laws or regulations. 
(b)  Fringe benefits and benefit administration policies shall apply to all employees who are eligible for benefits pursuant to these rules and regulations, applicable collective bargaining agreements or otherwise by authority of the city manager. Eligibility for benefits shall not be construed so as to grant civil service exempt employees any property rights or rights to continued employment, or in any manner grievance or appeal rights regarding any term or condition of their employment. Such employees shall remain in an "at-will" service capacity. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-6. - Enforcement and administration. 
Responsibility and authority for the enforcement and administration of these rules and regulations is vested in the city manager and the director of human resources. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-7. - Authority to delegate. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of these rules and regulations which provide for centralized human resources administration, the city manager and the director of human resources are authorized to exercise their discretion to delegate the responsibility for administration of specifically enumerated human resource management functions within their areas of jurisdiction. Such functions may include but are not limited to, the conduct of recruitment, testing, classification management, an eligibility list maintenance for specifically approved classifications. In such cases of delegation, the appointing authority will be responsible for the management of the delegated human resources functions, and adherence to procedures established by these rules and regulations and the department of human resources and the appointing authority shall be subject to monitoring and oversight by the department of human resources to ensure compliance with the city's policy of equal employment opportunity and these rules and regulations. 
(b)  The director of human resources is specifically authorized to enter into contracts, letters of understanding, or other agreements with public agencies and professional human resource organizations such as the Florida Public Personnel Association (FPPA), the Florida Public Employee Labor Relations Association (FPELRA), the International Public Management Association for Human Resources (IPMA), or the Society for Human Resource Management (SHRM) to provide for the sharing of resources or the cooperative, joint conduct of human resources activities and functions. 
(c)  The director of human resources is specifically authorized to enter into contracts, letters of understanding, or other agreements with members of the Miramar Human Resources Consortium for the purpose of carrying out joint human resources activities, resource sharing, or mutual support in the best interest of the City of Miramar and consistent with the purposes set forth in these rules. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-8. - Definition of terms. 
[For the purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:] 
Anniversary date means the date an employee begins employment and the same date in following years unless the anniversary date is adjusted consistent with these rules and regulations. For the purposes of merit increases, the anniversary date, shall be that date one (1) year from the effective date of his or her last regular merit increase, change in classification, promotion, or demotion unless the anniversary date is adjusted consistent with these rules and regulations. For other purposes, such as longevity, anniversary date refers to an employee's date of hire into a full time position. 
Appointing authority means the city manager, or designee granted authority to appoint or remove employees of the city service. 
Block budgeting means non competitive promotion of incumbents occupying intern, trainee, or entry level positions to positions in a higher classification, following an established career path. 
Certification means the act of the department of human resources in supplying a department or division with the names of applicants who are eligible for appointment to the classification and positions for which certification is requested. 
Change in anniversary date means an adjustment in the anniversary date of an employee due to a promotion, demotion, change in classification, extended leave of absence, break in service, or other reason set forth in these rules and regulations. 
Classification allocation means the assignment of an individual position to an appropriate classification on the basis of the nature, difficulty, or responsibility of the work performed in the position. 
Classification means a position or group of positions that have similar duties and responsibilities, require similar qualifications, and can be designated by a single title indicative of the kind of work, and for which the same schedule of pay can be applied with equity. 
Classification and pay plan means the official schedule of pay assigning one (1) or more rates of pay to each classification title and the official or approved system of grouping positions into appropriate classes. 
Classification series means a number of classes related to each other in terms of ascending difficulties and responsibilities of work within the same occupational field, e.g., "clerk, clerk-typist, secretary" would constitute a clerical series. 
Classification specification means a written document, which generally describes a classification and includes typical examples of work of the classification as well as the qualifications and guidelines for entrance into the kind of work described. 
Classified civil service means all positions not specifically excluded under the civil service ordinance nor exempted by reason of other ordinance, act, or statute. 
Classification level means the definition and assignment of classification to reflect the degree to which the work requires mastery of subject material and relative possession of knowledge skills and abilities of the incumbent necessary to perform assigned work. Typically, classification levels assigned are trainee, entry-level, journey level, advanced or lead level and supervisory level. 
Classification title means the official designation or name of the classification as stated in the classification specification used on all personnel records and actions. 
Continuous service means employment in the classified civil service which is uninterrupted except for authorized or unauthorized leaves of absence, suspension, or on return from separation due to reduction in work force, in keeping with reduction in force procedures. Time lost due to the foregoing will be deducted from total length of continuous service. Periods of authorized paid leave shall be included as part of continuous service. 
Demotion means a change of employment status from a position of one (1) classification to a position of another classification having a lower maximum salary limit. Appropriate exceptions may be approved by the city manager upon the recommendation of the director of human resources based on a review of the supervisory versus non-supervisory responsibilities of the positions involved in the personnel action. 
Division director means an employee appointed to head an established administrative sub- division of a department, established in the budget, who answers directly to the department head. 
Eligible means a person who meets the requirements for a position and whose name is on an active employment eligibility list. 
Eligible list means a list or register of the names of persons for classifications of employment for which they have competed and are determined qualified to be appointed. 
Employee means any person holding a position of employment with the city and who is paid wholly or in part from city funds. 
Examinations means methods used to determine eligibility of applicants for employment. Examinations may be assembled or unassembled and may include but shall not be limited to written, oral, physical, or performance tests, rating of training and experience, or any combination of these. 
Exempt employee - Fair Labor Standards Act. FLSA exempt employee means employees is exempt from the overtime provisions of the Fair Labor Standard Act and does not receive overtime pay. 
Exempt employee - Civil service. Civil service exempt employee means employees that are exempt from the civil service protections and rules covered in these rules and regulations. 
Grievance means an employee-initiated allegation, made pursuant to the grievance procedure set forth in these rule and regulations, that a written city policy, procedure, rule, or regulation has been violated. 
Incumbent means the person occupying a position. 
Layoff means a separation of an employee from his or her position which has been made necessary by lack of work, lack of funds, organizational change, or for other reasons not related to fault, delinquency, or misconduct on the part of the employee. 
Limited-term appointment means an appointment excluded from classified civil service for a limited duration, made to fill a regular position during the period of an incumbent's approved leave of absence with or without pay. 
Merit increase means an increase in pay within a pay range, based upon job performance and service requirements. 
Official personnel file means the employment record maintained in the department of human resources, which contains an employee's application(s), salary information and other formal personnel transaction documents. 
Overtime means time worked in excess of scheduled work periods for those persons not working on an FLSA exempt basis. Overtime compensation shall be in accordance with the Fair Labor Standards Act. 
Overtime exempt employees means employees that are ineligible to collect overtime pay due to their exempt status from the overtime provisions of the FLSA. 
Part-time employees means employees hired on a continuing basis to work less than the regularly scheduled hours of a full-time work schedule. A part time employee may be covered by a collective bargaining agreement and may be eligible for benefits and paid leave under certain circumstances. 
Performance evaluation means a periodic report reflecting management's job-related opinion of the conduct and performance of the employee. 
Personnel cap means the maximum number of full-time and part-time budgeted positions allocated and authorized for each organizational unit. 
Position means a group of current duties and responsibilities requiring the full or part-time employment of one (1) person. A position may be occupied or vacant. 
Probationary employee means any employee appointed to a position in the classified civil service for whom a one (1) year probationary period has been assigned consistent with these rules and regulations and who has not completed the probationary period for that classification. 
Probationary period means a limited period of at-will employment, which is a part of the selection and promotion process. 
Promotion means a change of employment status from a position of one (1) classification to a position of another classification, which has a higher maximum salary. Appropriate exceptions may be approved by the city manager upon the recommendation of the director of human resources based on a review of the supervisory versus non-supervisory responsibilities of the positions involved in the personnel action. 
Promotional examination means an examination or a group of examinations for a position in a certain classification, to which admission is limited to employees in the classified civil service, who hold a regular position in another classification in which they have completed a probationary period. The city manager may waive this provision. 
Promotional eligible list means a list of persons who have been found qualified by a promotional examination for appointment to a position in a particular classification. 
Provisional employee means an employee filling a position in the classified civil service without competition pending the establishment of an eligible list. 
Reallocation means a change in the knowledge, skills, and abilities required of an existing classification which may result in an assignment to a different pay range. 
Reclassification means the reassignment of a position to a different classification, which results from a significant and permanent change in the work assignments of the position. 
Red lining means the freezing of an employee's base salary when such salary meets or exceeds the maximum of the approved salary range. Employees with redlined salaries shall not be eligible to receive salary increases, including across the board increases or consideration for merit increase, until such time as the employee's current base salary is below the maximum of the pay range of the job class. 
Regular employee means an employee who has been appointed to a full-time position in the classified civil service in accordance with the civil service rules and regulations and has satisfactorily completed a probationary period. 
Regular status means a condition, acquired by a full time employee who has completed the probationary period following initial appointment, giving rights accorded to regular employees. 
Reinstatement. Reinstated employee means a person who has worked for the city before and is being returned to the same, or lower in series, classification previously held within two (2) years of separation. 
Salary range means the minimum, maximum, and intervening rates of pay assigned to a given classification or group of classifications. 
Temporary employee means an employee appointed for a special project or other work of a temporary or transitory nature for which employment is not to exceed a period of six (6) months. 
Transfer means a change by an employee from one position to another position in the same classification. 
Vacancy means a position duly created and still existent but not occupied, and for which funds are available. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Secs. 16-9—16-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ORGANIZATION 
 
Sec. 16-21. - City commission. 
The city commission shall: 
• Appoint members of the civil service board. 
• Approve the civil service rules and regulations, including amendments or revisions. 
• Approve collective bargaining agreements 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-22. - City manager. 
The city manager shall: 
(1)  Be responsible to the city commission for the administration and maintenance of the human resources system established by these rules and regulations. 
(2)  Appoint and remove all subordinate officers and employees subject to provision of the city's Charter, except those appointed and removed by the city commission. The city manager may authorize any appointed department head to act as "appointing authority" to appoint, remove, promote, discipline, or take other human resources actions provided in these rules and regulations within that director's department or division. 
(3)  Be responsible for the preparation of proposed amendments to the civil service rules and regulations and comprehensive pay plan in cooperation with the director of human resources. 
(4)  Amend the classification plan and pay plan, in cooperation with the director of human resources, pursuant to these rules and regulations. 
(5)  Perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as are set forth in the city's Charter, the City Code, these rules and regulations or as otherwise authorized. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-23. - Director of human resources. 
The director of human resources shall: 
(1)  Be responsible to the city manager for the administration and technical direction of the department of human resources and the interpretation of these rules and regulations in an efficient, cost effective, and equitable manner. 
(2)  Represent the city manager as chief labor negotiator in the conduct of collective bargaining and other activities involving employees relations, including grievance handling and resolution, and the administration of disciplinary action. 
(3)  Administer the civil service rules and regulations and issue related operating instructions to employees and officers. 
(4)  Review actions, apply city policies, and represent the city manager, in consultation with affected department and division heads, in matters of discipline, outside employment, conflict of interest, critical workplace incidents such as workplace violence and security, and the maintenance of a safe and equitable workplace. 
(5)  Manage the city's risk management and employee benefit programs. 
(6)  Publicize through appropriate channels, job vacancies in the city to be filled by either initial appointment or by promotion, transfer, or demotion of existing employees and apply the required procedures for the administration of the job vacancy filling system. 
(7)  Develop and administer recruitment and examination programs necessary to obtain an adequate supply of competent applicants to meet the city's needs. 
(8)  Investigate periodically the operation and effect of the civil service rules and regulations and the policies and practices for their application and report findings and recommendations to the city manager as appropriate. 
(9)  Advise the city manager on matters affecting the most effective use of human resources and the status of the city's human resources program. 
(10)  Serve as executive secretary to the civil service board. 
(11)  Perform such other duties and activities with regard to human resources administration in a manner consistent with federal, state or city laws, these rules and regulations, ordinances or resolutions of the city commission as may be necessary or desirable for effective human resources administration. 
(12)  Formulate and establish forms and procedures deemed necessary to implement the provisions of these rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-24. - Duties and structure of the civil service board. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of the city's Charter, the civil service board shall: 
• Serve in an advisory capacity regarding the utilization and promotion of merit principals of human resource administration. 
• The board shall review the examination process established by the human resources department relative to the recruitment of employees. 
• The board may assist the human resources department in the administering of written examination and other examinations, as determined by the human resources department. 
• The board may monitor and oversee any examination process instituted by the human resources department. 
• The board may request that the director of human resources investigate matters concerning the enforcement and effect of these rules and regulations, and the board may thereby recommend appropriate actions within the civil service system. The board shall keep confidential all personal and family information, including health information, coming to its attention during the conduct of official board meetings or investigations as provided by the laws of the State of Florida. 
(b)  The human resources director shall advise the board members at each meeting of all civil service appointments, transfers, and promotions. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Secs. 16-25—16-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CLASSIFICATION PLAN 
 
Sec. 16-41. - Purpose. 
The classification plan shall provide for the systematic description and review of positions in the city service. The classification plan groups the various positions into classifications with a similar range of duties, responsibility, and knowledge, skills and abilities required of the incumbent. By describing and relating the various types and levels of classification throughout city service, the classification plan provides guidelines for establishing appropriate pay ranges. The classification plan shall be based on appropriate objective, job evaluation and shall be maintained on a current basis. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-42. - Content of the plan. 
The classification plan shall be structured consistent with the provisions of the City Charter, the City Code, these rules and regulations, and effective human resources administration practices. The plan shall allocate each position in city service to the appropriate classification, with each classification consisting of one (1) or more positions which: 
(1)  Require substantially similar knowledge, skills and abilities, experience or education. 
(2)  Perform work of a substantially similar value to the organization which is appropriate to be placed in the same salary range. 
(3)  Can be filled by substantially the same selection method. 
(4)  Uses a title which appropriately describes the classification, which is indicative of the work of the class and which shall be used for administrative purposes such as payroll, budget, personnel records and transaction completion. 
(5)  Consist of written classification specifications, describing the class name, and the nature of the work, examples of the central and typical tasks found in the classification, the minimum knowledge, skills, abilities, training, education and experience required, and any special qualifications necessary for entrance into classification. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-43. - Administration of the plan. 
The director of human resources shall be responsible for the administration and maintenance of the classification plan. The director of human resources may request the assistance of other city officials or delegate authority to other staff members to assist in carrying out this responsibility. The director of human resources shall periodically review the classification of positions and recommend to the city manager appropriate amendments to the classification plan in the form of new amended salary grades, new classifications, creation of classification series, revision of existing classifications, consolidation of classifications and removal of classifications that are no longer required. 
(1)  [ Generally. ] No person shall be appointed or promoted to any position in city service under a title not contained in the classification plan. 
(2)  Allocation of positions. After the establishment of a new position has been approved, the director of human resources, in consultation with the appropriate department or division director, shall cause a position classification questionnaire to be completed, describing the duties and responsibilities of the proposed position. The director of human resources shall allocate the position to one (1) of the classes in the classification plan. If a suitable classification does not exist, the director of human resources shall recommend the establishment of a new classification and shall allocate the position to it after adoption of the new classification. 
(3)  Classification allocation reviews. 
a.  If a department or division director has reason to believe that a position in a department or division is incorrectly allocated, a request in writing may be made to the director of human resources to review the allocation of the position. 
b.  If an employee has facts which indicate to him/her that the position he or she occupies is incorrectly allocated, the employee may request in writing through the chain of command that the director of human resources review the allocation of the position. Prior to any review by the human resources director, with prior approval of the affected department or division director is required prior to any review by the human resources director. 
c.  The director of human resources may conduct periodic reviews of individual positions or classifications or groups of classifications to ensure the positions are appropriately classified to investigate alleged inequities. 
d.  The director of human resources shall obtain information concerning any position believed to be incorrectly allocated by having a position classification questionnaire completed by the incumbent, the supervisor of the position, and/or the department or division director. The completed and reviewed position classification questionnaire and any subsequent investigation of the class allocation constitute a job audit, which may be conducted by the human resources department staff, if the director of human resources determines that additional information or clarification of existing information is required to make a determination regarding class allocation. After considering all the information obtained, the director of human resources shall place the position in question in the appropriate classification. 
(4)  Reclassification of positions. Established positions may be reclassified from one (1) classification to a different classification under the following conditions: 
a.  There have been significant changes to the actual duties and responsibilities of the position. 
b.  The change in duties and responsibilities are of a permanent nature and are intended by management. 
c.  The reclassification is based upon new or added elements in the job or deletion of elements and not on the performance of the individual. 
d.  Positions will not be reclassified when: 
1.  The assignment of new duties or responsibilities had the effect of creating a new position. 
2.  The added duties and responsibilities are minor in nature and the logical function of the existing classification. 
3.  The additional duties and responsibilities are to be performed for a temporary period only. 
4.  The only change involved is an increase in the workload of the employee and not in the nature of the work performed. 
5.  The primary purpose is to effectuate a promotion or an increase in salary for the employee. 
6.  The purpose is to serve as a substitute for effective disciplinary action or is retaliatory. 
(5)  Classification appeals. Classification decisions (i.e., reclassifications, title changes, salary range adjustments, etc.), are the result of judgments and analysis of trained human resources staff in the evaluation of classification and salary determinations and as such are not subject to review through the civil service grievance procedure. Instead, any appeals regarding classification or salary allocation judgments may be made to the director of human resources in writing within thirty (30) calendar days of the original decision. The appellant should indicate why he or she believes the original decision was not proper, and provide any other pertinent information in support of the appeal. Whenever possible review of the appeal determination will be made by an HR staff member other than the staff reviewer who made the original recommendation. Prior to notifying the appellant of the decision in writing, the director of human resources shall also review the appeal and render a written decision, which decision shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-44. - Classification plan maintenance. 
(a)  Use of the position classification questionnaire. 
(1)  When a new position is proposed or significant changes are occurring in an existing position, a position classification questionnaire shall be completed by the incumbent, if any, or by the department or division director when a position is vacant. The documents are to be submitted to the director of human resources for review of the position allocation. The director of human resources may waive this requirement in cases where it is determined that no material changes have occurred in the position. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of each department and division and director to submit to the director of human resources, a new position classification questionnaire for all affected positions each time the department or division is permanently or substantially reorganized, or otherwise upon request of the director of human resources. 
(b)  Reclassification; incumbent qualifications. 
(1)  Where reclassification is recommended which would advance an incumbent from one (1) classification to a different classification at a higher salary range, the incumbent will be required to qualify in an appropriate noncompetitive examination, which may consist of a formal review of the employee's knowledge, skills, abilities, experience and education by the director of human resources. 
(2)  If reclassification results in a classification grade higher than that of the original classification, or would otherwise be considered a promotion in accordance with these rules and regulations, such change shall be considered a promotion for the qualified incumbent. Should the incumbent fail a noncompetitive promotional review or for some other valid reason is not promoted, the director of human resources may allow the employee to remain in the original position until he or she can qualify for the same or another classification which may exist. If no such vacancy exists, or for good reason cannot be affected, the director of human resources, in accordance with these rules and regulations may initiate a demotion of the employee to a lower existing classification vacancy. If the demotion is made to a lower classification, no examination will be required. 
(3)  If a position is reclassified to a classification with a lower pay grade maximum or would otherwise be considered a demotion in accordance with these rules and regulations, the incumbent must be notified in writing of the proposed downward reclassification and efforts must be made to transfer the employee to another position in the same classification, if such position exists, or to any other position in the city service for which he/she qualifies. If no transfer or reassignment is available, the incumbent shall be demoted as described in the section on demotions in these rules and regulations, except that the incumbent's base salary at the time of reclassification will be "red lined" at the discretion of the director of human resources, following consultation with the affected department or division director. 
(c)  Pay range adjustments. 
(1)  In maintaining the classification plan, the director of human resources may determine that adjustment to the pay range of an existing classification is necessary. Such pay range adjustments will not entitle an incumbent to a salary increase unless the entry salary of the pay range is adjusted to a point where the incumbent's salary is below the new minimum of the pay range. In such cases, the incumbent's salary shall be adjusted to equal the minimum of the new pay range. 
(d)  Classification specifications and classification titles. 
(1)  Each time a new classification is established, a classification specification shall be written and incorporated into the classification plan and the classification title shall be added to the schematic list of titles in the city service. Likewise, an abolished classification shall be deleted from the classification plan by removing the class title from the list of titles. 
(2)  The title change of an existing classification does not reflect any significant changes to the duties or responsibilities of the position. As such title change does not require probationary period or result in a change in salary, anniversary date, or compensation for an incumbent. 
(e)  Interpretation of classification specifications. The classification specifications are general and not necessarily inclusive of all duties performed. The use of particular descriptions as the duties qualifications or other factors shall not be held to exclude others of similar kind or quality. The specifications are intended to indicate the kinds of positions, which shall be allocated to the classification established. 
(f)  Block budgeting. The director of human resources shall establish guidelines and designate classifications eligible for block budgeting in consultation with affected department or division director. This program shall allow for the noncompetitive promotion of incumbents occupying the position such as intern, or trainee, or incumbents in entry-level positions in a classification series who are performing the duties of journey level classification, provided that the established block budgeting guidelines are followed. 
(g)  Adoption and maintenance of the plan. The city manager shall periodically present the classification plan to the city commission for adoption, including at the time of the adoption of the annual budget. Notwithstanding the above, the city manager is authorized to approve reclassifications of individual positions, title changes, salary range adjustments, addition of new classifications, deletion of unused classifications with no incumbents and other actions as are necessary for the maintenance of the classification plan, as he/she deems necessary during the course of the year, in cooperation with the director of human resources. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Secs. 16-45—16-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PAY PLAN 
 
Sec. 16-61. - Purpose. 
The pay plan is designed to provide a fair and equitable basis for the payment of salaries for employees covered by these rules and regulations. It establishes a uniform basis for administration and shall be directly related to the administration of the classification plan. The pay plan sets the basic salary ranges as approved by the city commission. Each salary range shall consist of a minimum and a maximum rate of pay for all classifications in city service. 
The director of human resources shall prepare periodic amendments to the pay plan and present the amendments to the city manager for appropriate action. Approval and adoption of the proposed pay plan amendment shall be based on a majority vote of the members of the city commission and shall recognize the authority provided in Article III of these rules and regulations for the city manager to approve reclassifications and salary range changes as needed during the course of the year for the timely administration of the human resources system. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-62. - Scope. 
All employees in city service shall be employed and paid in accordance with the rates and policies established by the pay plan for specific job classifications. Salary schedules included in collective bargaining agreements will be incorporated into the pay plan, and constitute an extension of it. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-63. - Exemption from overtime. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, employees designated by the city as exempt from the provision of the Fair Labor Standards Act whether included in or excluded from the classified civil service, shall be considered to be compensated on a salaried, rather than hourly basis. Such employees shall not be subject to compensation reductions for absences of a less than a regular workday schedule, however, such absences must be approved by their supervisors. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-64. - Starting salary rates. 
(a)  The starting salary for a new employee entering city service shall be the minimum rate of pay for the appropriate classification based upon the assumption that the new employee meets the minimum qualifications stated in the classification specification and the job announcement. 
(b)  If the director of human resources and the affected department or division director concur that a selected candidate substantially exceeds the minimum qualifications as stated in the classification specification and the candidate in question will not accept appointment at the minimum salary rate for the classification, then the employee may be appointed above the prescribed minimum salary rate. No appointments shall be made in excess of ten (10) percent above the minimum of the classification salary range without specific approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-65. - Performance evaluations. 
(a)  Purpose. The performance evaluation will enable the employee to understand whether he/she is performing well or correctly, as well as where he/she stands with his/her supervisor. The object is to maintain or improve the high quality rate of performance of the city employee. In order to carry out the performance evaluation, each employee shall be evaluated according to the procedures outlined below. This article does not apply to employees holding positions contained in Article II, [former] Section 16-2.1.0(a), (b) and (c) [current section 16-4]. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-66. - Probationary employees. 
(a)  All appointments to positions made from outside city service shall be subject to a one (1) year probationary period. All promotional appointments shall be subject to a six-month probationary period. 
(b)  Prior to the expiration of the probationary period, the employee's immediate supervisor shall evaluate the employee's performance by completing the employee performance evaluation form, incorporated herein by reference. The department head will review and sign the evaluation form and provide written recommendations, if necessary, to the city manager for his/her approval. A copy of this evaluation shall be furnished to the employee, and the original shall be given to the human resources department for filing in the employee's personnel file. 
(c)  Probationary employees receiving unsatisfactory evaluations at the expiration of the probationary period shall be subject to separation from of service by the city manager with the consultation of his/her department head. In every case, the department head shall notify the city manager in writing of said action and of the reasons for same. Upon approval of the city manager, a probationary employee who receives an unsatisfactory evaluation at the expiration of the probationary period may be granted an extension not to exceed sixty (60) days in order to improve his/her performance. If at the end of the extended probationary period the employee's performance is still rated unsatisfactory, the employee shall be subject to discontinuance of service. 
(d)  Probationary employees terminated due to the unsatisfactory performance during the probationary period shall have no right to a statement of cause, or the reasons for rejection, or to a hearing and/or appeal. 
(e)  If the employee so released was promoted or transferred to the position form within the city service and his/her work was satisfactory prior to the transfer or promotion, he/she may be returned to his/her previous position or to another suitable position in the same classification as previously held, if available, and if appropriately provided for in the budget. 
(f)  Probationary employees who receive satisfactory performance evaluations shall, after one (1) year of employment with the city, attain civil service status. Such employees shall be eligible for all benefits and provisions of the city's civil service system, and become permanent employees of the city. 
(g)  Employees must maintain a satisfactory standard of performance during and after the probationary period, and it shall be a responsibility of the department head to periodically converse with the employee during and after said employee's probationary period to determine whether or not said employee needs assistance for purposes of obtaining satisfactory performance. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-67. - Permanent employees. 
(a)  All employees of the City of Miramar shall be evaluated annually from their date of hire or promotion by the use of the employee performance evaluation form. Fifteen (15) days prior to an employee's anniversary date, his/her supervisor shall evaluate the employee's performance. The department head shall review the evaluation with the employee and shall provide written recommendations of same to the city manager. Each employee, shall sign the evaluation form, although the signature of the employee shall not be interpreted agreement with the evaluation. 
(b)  An evaluation rating received by a permanent employee prepared by his/her supervisor may be, if he/she so wishes, appealed to his/her department head. All appeal requests must be made in writing within five (5) days following notification of the employee's evaluation rating by his/her supervisor. If the employee is not satisfied with the department head's answer, he/she may then appeal the decision of the city manager with in five (5) days of the department head's answer. The city manager's findings shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-68. - Progress reports. 
(a)  A department head, supervisor, or city manager may, evaluate an employee other than at the time of the anniversary date to indicate to the employee that improvement is needed in the performance of his/her duties, or that he/she has demonstrated outstanding performance. 
(b)  Such an evaluation shall be done using the performance evaluation from, and the evaluator shall indicate that it represents a progress report. This report shall be placed in the employee's personnel file. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-69. - Merit increases. 
(a)  Pay ranges are established to provide a means of rewarding an employee for meritorious performance and behavior on the job, to encourage career development for city employees, to provide incentives and to recognize individual differences in job related performance behavior. Increases within the pay range are not automatic but must be based upon formal performance evaluations of the employee in accordance with procedures developed by the department of human resources. 
(b)  Effective on an employee's anniversary date, the salary of each employee in classified civil service, whose performance and behavior are rated at least satisfactory or above, shall be advanced to the next higher step in the classification salary range not to exceed the salary range maximum. Across the board increases, including those which may be negotiated in a collective bargaining agreement or those otherwise approved by the city commission, will not affect the employees' anniversary dates. Special increases within range may also be granted upon specific approval of the department director and the city manager. 
(c)  An employee whose performance or behavior on the job is less than satisfactory shall not be eligible to receive a merit increase. Such an employee shall receive written notice of performance or behavior deficiencies in the form of a corrective action plan with specific time frames for the supervisor and affected department or division director to determine that an improvement in behavior or performance has occurred to at least satisfactory levels. Failure to see the job related improvement called for will result in appropriate disciplinary action, which may include termination, or demotion to a lower paying job classification. A step increase may also be delayed based upon a less than satisfactory evaluation and corrective action plan, and may be authorized prospectively upon a finding by the department's director that performance or behavior has improved to at least satisfactory level. An employee's anniversary date is not affected by such action following a corrective action plan. 
(d)  Part-time employees are eligible for merit increase consideration as specified in the comprehensive pay plan. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-70. - Performance excellence awards. 
The objective of this program is to provide the city manager and department and division directors with authority and discretion to recognize individuals whose performance and behavior on the job is exceptional on either a sustained basis or in the performance of a particular assignment. Such recognition may take the form of monetary payments in addition to merit increases. The awards may also take the form of additional authorized paid time off. These awards will be granted only to those individuals who clearly demonstrate outstanding performance and behavior level. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-71. - Salary change on promotion. 
When an employee is promoted from one (1) classification to another classification with a higher salary range maximum, the employee pay rate shall be increased by a minimum of seven and one-half (7.5) percent above the current salary and the employee shall be placed in the appropriate step of the higher salary range, which achieves this minimum level of increase. In the case of classifications without individual steps, the amount of increase within the salary range shall be seven and one-half (7.5) percent, provided that there is room within the new salary range to accommodate such an increase. In the absence of such room, the employee shall be promoted to the top step of the new salary range. In the case of an employee promoted to a classification with a minimum salary range higher than seven and one-half (7.5) percent above the amount currently received by the employee, the employee shall be advanced to the minimum step of the new salary range. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-72. - Salary change on demotion. 
When an employee is demoted, whether the demotion results from a voluntary request by the employee, or disciplinary action or is in lieu of a reduction in force, the employee shall be paid at a rate which is in the approved salary range of the classification to which the employee is demoted, unless the director of human resources makes the discretionary determination that the employee's base salary amount is above the maximum of the lower paying classification and should be maintained, and further, that the prior base pay amount of the employee's salary is red-lined. The rate of pay and the lower paying job classification to which the employee is demoted shall be established by the director of human resources in consultation with the employee's department or division director, taking into consideration the circumstances surrounding the reasons for the demotion and the employee's performance rating. In no case shall the employee be paid less than he or she would receive had the employee's original appointment been to the lower pay grade. The department or division director, in consultation with the director of human resources, may require an employee to serve a new probationary period upon demotion. The anniversary date of an employee demoted shall be the effective date of the demotion. The employee shall be eligible for consideration for a merit pay increase one (1) year after the effective date of the demotion, unless the salary of the employee is at the top step or the employee has been red lined. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-73. - Salary upon downward range reallocation. 
When an employee's position is reallocated to a classification in a lower salary range, the employee shall be permitted to continue at the base pay rate immediately prior to the downward reclassification and shall continue to be eligible for merit increases up to the maximum amount of the lower salary range. If the employee's present salary is above the maximum of the lower classification, the employee shall be permitted to continue at the present salary range amount during the period of incumbency in the classification (i.e., red lined), but shall not be entitled to a merit increase beyond the maximum of the lower salary range. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-74. - Salary upon transfer. 
An employee may be transferred by order of the city manager or upon a request from an employee, approved by the city manager from a position in a specific job classification to another position in the same job classification. Upon such transfer, neither the employee's base pay amount, salary range, or anniversary date for consideration of a subsequent merit increase shall change. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-75. - Temporary work at a higher classification. 
If a vacancy exists, or an employee is absent on approved leave (with or without pay) in a higher classification, or as otherwise determined by the department or division director, a qualified employee working in a lower classification may be authorized to work in a higher classification on a temporary, incidental, or emergency basis. An employee must meet at least the minimum qualifications for employment in the higher classification, except in an emergency situation, in order to be selected for work in a higher classification. In cases of such emergency, the department or division director, following consultation with the director of human resources, may approve the temporary work by an employee who does not fully meet the minimum qualifications. Appointment to perform the temporary work in a higher classification shall be in writing and, other than an emergency situation; the selection shall be made by a method determined in consultation with the director of human resources so that any similarly situated employees in the affected work group may have an opportunity to be considered for such assignment. If the employee is required to perform the work in a higher classification for a period of two (2) full pay periods or longer, the employee shall receive a temporary pay increase to the pay rate that the employee would have received had the employee been promoted to the higher classification for the time worked in the higher classification beyond the initial two (2) pay periods. At the conclusion of the assignment, the employee's base pay rate shall revert to the authorized rate established for his or her regular position Periods of temporary work at a higher rate shall not affect the employee's eligibility for consideration for merit or other forms of salary increase. If such eligibility occurs during the period of the temporary upgrade, and the merit increase is authorized at the lower salary range, the rate of pay for the temporary upgrade shall also be proportionately increased. Temporary work in a higher classification shall not continue for a period longer than six (6) months. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-76. - Overtime. 
Overtime is work authorized by the department or division director beyond the normal full time work schedule. For most employees working a forty-hour or thirty-seven and one-half-hour regularly scheduled work week, overtime means work authorized in excess of the employee's regularly scheduled seven-day work week. In any department or division, overtime shall be authorized or directed by the director only when it is in the interest of the city and is the most practical and economical way of meeting unusual workloads or deadlines. As a general rule, the requirement of frequent and considerable overtime in a department or division shall be cause for the department or division director, in consultation with the director of human resources and budget director, to review the level of staffing in the organization. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-77. - Work week for fair labor standards act purposes. 
The department and/or division director, in consultation with the director of human resources shall establish the starting time and ending time of the work week of the organization. For most employees, the work week will be a consecutive one hundred sixty-eight-hour period of time (seven (7) calendar days). In the absence of a differently established work week in a particular department, the default work week for city employees will be one hundred sixty-eight (168) hours beginning at midnight on Thursday and ending immediately prior to midnight on the following Wednesday. The work week for emergency service may be modified by the city manager 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-78. - Payment for overtime. 
The standard method for compensation for overtime hours worked shall be cash payment at the rate of time and one-half time the employees' regular rate of pay. A department and/or division director may approve, in writing, the limited accrual of compensatory time off hours at the rate of time and one-half. Approved compensatory time off is subject to a maximum accrual limit of one hundred twenty hours (120). Any hours accrued beyond the limit are subject to cash payment by the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-79. - Living wage. 
All full and part time employees of the city shall be paid a living wage, which is the minimum hourly income that the City Commission determines to be necessary for an individual to support himself or herself and to pay basic living expenses such as food, medical care, housing and transportation costs. The living wage shall be determined by the City Commission by resolution. The City Commission may amend the living wage at any time, subject to collective bargaining, if required. 
(Ord. No. 15-12, § 2, 5-6-15)  
Secs. 16-80—16-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RECRUITMENT AND APPLICATIONS 
 
Sec. 16-101. - Recruitment. 
Recruitment of candidates (in positions covered by these rules and regulations) will be conducted, consistent with these rules and regulations, in order to identify the most qualified and available candidates for positions in city service. Recruitment will be based upon the principles of equality of opportunity and the avoidance of unlawful discrimination. 
(1)  All recruitment announcements and publicity shall include reference to the city as any equal opportunity employer. 
(2)  All recruitment will be carried out consistent with these rules and regulations, and be based upon a written recruitment plan, created jointly by the department of human resources and the appointing authority, in advance of the commencement of the recruitment, and based upon the contents of the job announcement. 
(3)  The director of human resources shall determine the appropriate sources of advertising for the particular recruitment and shall give weight in the selection of advertising media to a focus, when possible, on local Miramar area advertising. 
(4)  Recruitment will be conducted on the basis of either open competitive solicitation of candidates from within and outside of the city service, or promotional recruitment soliciting applications from qualified city employees from within the entire city service or within segments of the city service, such as departments or divisions, as defined in the job announcement. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-102. - Recruitment plan. 
The director of human resources and the appointing authority shall agree on a written recruitment plan in advance of the announcement of a vacancy to be filled in the city service. The recruitment plan shall be completed on a form prepared by the director of human resources, which form shall include the following information: 
(1)  Classification title, salary range, and application filing period. 
(2)  Classification description, which shall be attached to the recruitment plan. 
(3)  Essential elements of the position that may be unique to a particular situation. 
(4)  Any specific criteria which may relate to alternative selection rules when the recruitment is complete. 
(5)  Any specific criteria which may relate to selective certification when the recruitment is completed, such as requirements for shift work, second language capability, possession of specific licenses or certificates, etc. 
(6)  The certification rule to be followed in the particular recruitment. 
(7)  The duration and type of the eligible list. 
(8)  Any other information specifically relevant to the proposed recruitment. 
(9)  The selection examination method to be used, including the relative weighting of multiple components of the process such as a written and an oral examination, if applicable. 
(10)  Identity of oral panel or rating panel members to insure the presence of supervisors, subject matter experts, a human resources representative and an overall panel membership, reflecting the city's ethnic and gender diversity. 
(11)  The responsible department personnel assigned to work with human resources staff in coordinating recruitment. 
(12)  Other information relevant to examination coordination and process. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-103. - Job announcement. 
The establishment of all eligible lists for the filling of vacancies in classified service not otherwise being filled by transfer, demotion, reinstatement or noncompetitive examination shall be based upon the publicly posted open competitive or promotional job announcement created by the director of human resources. The official posting of the job announcement shall occur in the public area of the department of human resources' office. Job announcements shall also be sent to the appropriate department and division directors for posting on bulletin boards and in other places as deemed advisable by the director of human resources. Announcements shall specify: 
(1)  Classification title and salary range of the position to be filled. 
(2)  Minimum qualifications for eligibility or for admission to the written, oral, or performance test, if required. 
(3)  The manner of submitting an application. 
(4)  The closing date for receipt of applications in those cases where the recruitment is not on a continuous basis. 
(5)  A notice that the City of Miramar is an equal opportunity employer. 
(6)  The duration of the eligible list and the applicable certification rule. 
(7)  Other pertinent information. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-104. - Continuous recruitment. 
When there is an urgent need for eligible applicants and past experience or knowledge of the labor market by the department of human resources indicates a probable scarcity of qualified eligibles, applicants may be examined and certified as received until such time as the vacancy is filled. This procedure is known as continuous recruitment, and may be authorized by the director of human resources in consultation with the department and division directors and noted on a recruitment plan. Notice of continuous recruitment will be included in applicable job announcements as well as in other advertising media. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-105. - Applications. 
(a)  All applications for positions in the city service shall be made on a standard form prescribed by the director of human resources. The form shall require details covering training, experience, personal contact information, responses to job related questions and acknowledgement by applicant's signature of requirements for honesty and authorization for reference and background verification. 
(b)  In lieu of a standardized application form, the director of human resources may authorize the acceptance of resumes and the submission of supplemental questionnaires. 
(c)  All applications shall be signed by the applicants attesting to the truth of all statements contained on the application form. 
(d)  All applications must be received prior to the closing date during the period of application filing as stated on the job announcement. All applications submitted shall be deemed accepted if received by the department of human resources within the filing period. The director of human resources may approve exceptions based upon unusual circumstances, including delays in receipt of the mail, or as otherwise approved by the director of human resources. 
(e)  Incomplete applications may, at the discretion of the director of human resources, be returned to the applicant to provide an opportunity to complete the application. 
(f)  Consistent with the requirements of the job announcement, no individual shall be denied the right to apply for a position in the city's service. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-106. - Minimum qualifications and information verification. 
Recruitment for all positions in the city service shall be open to all persons who meet the minimum qualifications as listed on the job announcement. All information on the application is subject to verification by the city, consistent with the procedures established by the director of human resources. No person shall be certified as eligible for a position without meeting at least the minimum qualifications set forth in the classification specification and the job announcement. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-107. - Rejection or disqualification of applications. 
The director of human resources may reject any application or disqualify an applicant when it has been determined that: 
(1)  The application was not received in a timely manner. 
(2)  The application was not completed on the prescribed form. 
(3)  The applicant failed to sign the application form. 
(4)  The applicant does not possess one (1) or more of the minimum qualifications or requirements as set forth in the job announcement. 
(5)  The applicant falsified or failed to complete the application form or provide accurate and correct information in response to any of the questions on the application form, including omitting material facts. 
(6)  Fraud has been committed in an attempt to secure employment with the city on either the application form, in any employment test or otherwise. 
(7)  The applicant has been convicted of, pled guilty to, or pled nolo contendere (no contest) to a felony or misdemeanor. Applicants having such criminal history will be reviewed on a case by case basis by the director of human resources with due regard given to the nature of responsibilities to the position involved, the relevance and resensy of the criminal history and the applicant's veracity in completing application forms. 
Whenever an application is rejected, or a candidate is disqualified, notice of such action shall be mailed to the applicant at the address noted on the application form. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-108. - Postponement, cancellation, or extension of examination. 
The director of human resources may extend filing deadlines or other recruitment activity deadlines, postpone or cancel the recruitment. In case of postponement or cancellation, each applicant shall be notified by the department of human resources. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-109. - Retention and access to recruitment documents. 
Recruitment documents including applications, recruitment planning documents, examination materials, etc., shall be maintained by the city, pursuant to public records law retention requirements and shall not be returned to the applicant. Notwithstanding the above, recruitment materials with the exception of examination materials, and answer keys, shall be made available to applicants or other members of the public only upon request. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Secs. 16-110—16-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - EXAMINATIONS 
 
Sec. 16-121. - General. 
Filling of positions covered by these rules and regulations shall be accomplished by selection from among those eligible candidates certified by the human resources department to the appointing authority. Placement on an eligible list shall be accomplished through job related competitive examination processes open to all candidates who meet at least the minimum qualifications as described on the job announcements. Notwithstanding the above, the director of human resources shall have the authority to designate classifications which may be filled through a non-competitive qualification process when appropriate. Examinations shall be impartial and job related, designed to fairly test the ability, knowledge and skills of the applicants to effectively perform the duties of the position to be filled. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-122. - Open competitive examinations. 
Open competitive examinations shall be prepared and conducted under the direction of the director of human resources. Applicants for open competitive examinations may be current city employees or any member of the general public, meeting at least the minimum qualifications for the classification as set forth in the job announcement. One (1) or more of the following examination types may be selected based upon the classification involved, the number of candidates anticipated, or other factors determined by the director of human resources: written, oral, performance test, assembled ratings of education and experience, assessment center, or any combination of these as determined in the examination planning document. The examination process may take into account such factors as candidate education, experience, knowledge, skills, abilities, or other qualifications which are job-related and may be applied in an equitable manner to aid in the determination of the relative merit and fitness of applicants in relation to the needs of the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-123. - Promotional examinations. 
Positions in the city service shall be filled by promotion from within when the appointing authority and the director of human resources determine it to be in the city's best interest to do so. Promotional job announcements may be prepared and distributed to all affected departments and divisions consistent with the recruitment plan document. Promotional examinations will be opened to all eligible city employees who meet at least the minimum qualification for the job classification, as set forth in the classification specification and the job announcement. The director of human resources may limit certification of eligibles for promotional appointments to qualified candidates in specific departments or divisions. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-124. - Fraudulent conduct or false statement. 
Fraudulent conduct or false statements by an applicant or other parties with the applicant's knowledge in any examination or in preparation of application materials shall be deemed cause for exclusion of the applicant from an examination or removal of his/her name from all eligible lists or discharge from city service after appointment. In addition, applicants and employees falling under the above bases for disqualification may be excluded from taking subsequent examinations. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-125. - Evaluation process confidentiality. 
All examination materials and ratings earned by applicants are to be treated as confidential information during examination processes by staff members of the department of human resources and others involved in the examination process. It is the policy of the city that no employee may participate directly or indirectly in the rating or examination of an applicant in which there is a conflict of interest situation, such as situation relating to the employment of relatives. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-126. - Identity of examinees in written examinations. 
The director of human resources shall prescribe procedures to be used in examinations whereby the name of any examinee will not be identified until after the examination papers have been graded or evaluated. Any papers bearing the name of the applicant or other identification marks that otherwise identifies the applicant prior to the time that written examination papers are graded may be disqualified. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-127. - Method of rating. 
(a)  As part of the recruitment plan document, the director of human resources, following consultation with the department or division director, shall determine the examination techniques and procedures to be applied in the examination. This determination shall include the methods of evaluating experience and training, the test devices to be used, and the relative weighting to be assigned to the various parts of the examination. 
(b)  For all examinations, whether by written tests, interview, evaluation of educational experience, or performance examination, a rating system will be established by the director of human resources to determine the final result of the examination. Such system may be numerical, a relative ranking of candidates' qualifications, or a "pass, fail" rating. The rating system shall be specifically described in the job announcement. The minimum qualifying overall rating shall be established in the examination. Final ratings shall used as the basis for qualification to be on a list of eligibles. The assignment of veteran preference points or City of Miramar resident points shall occur only after the applicant has achieved at least a minimum passing score, exclusive of such additional points, in a numerical rating system. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-128. - Preference points. 
(a)  All qualified applicants covered by these rules and regulations shall be eligible to receive Miramar resident preference points added to their overall qualifying rating when competing in open competitive and promotional examinations with a numerical rating basis. 
(b)  Veterans of the Armed Forces of the United States, upon presenting their honorable discharge together with proper credentials from the Veteran's Administration, will be entitled to five (5) points which will be added to their total war time era, or to three (3) points if not a war time era (as defined in the Rules of the Department of Administration Division of Veteran's Affairs Chapter 22 VP-1). Other veteran points classifications are as follows: 
(1)  Five (5) points awarded to the unmarried widow or widower of a veteran who died of a service-connected disability. 
(2)  Ten (10) points awarded to disabled veterans who are receiving compensation, disability retirement benefits, or pension by the Veteran's Administration or Department of Defense. 
(3)  Ten (10) points awarded to the spouse of any person who has a total and permanent service-connected disability and who, because of the disability, cannot qualify for employment, or to the spouse of any person who is missing in action or is a prisoner of war. 
(c)  Veterans preference. Credit can be allowed only once, at either the initial or entrance examination. A veteran's preference can be claimed and successfully used to obtain employment with any public employer only once after October 1, 1987. 
(d)  Veterans preference will be allowed only after obtaining a passing score on all examinations. 
(e)  Miramar resident preference points. Applicants who are residents of the City of Miramar will be given credit of four (4) points when competing in a civil service examination with a numerical basis of scoring. This credit can be allowed only once, that being at the initial or entrance examination. The additional points will be allowed only after obtaining a passing score on all examinations. 
(f)  Permanent employees will be given credit of one (1) point for each year of completed service, not to exceed five (5) points, when competing by examinations for a civil service position in the same department in which he/she is employed. The additional points will be allowed only after obtaining a passing score on all examinations. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-129. - Notification of examination results. 
Each person who is examined shall be notified in writing as to whether or not he or she received a qualifying score on the examination. The examination results and ratings for all competitors shall be released at the same time. Eligible candidates shall be advised of their ratings or their initial relative position on the eligible list. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-130. - Inspection of examination papers. 
The department of human resources shall permit any applicant to make one (1) inspection of his/her own examination papers and other related documents for a period of thirty days (30) after the establishment of the eligible list. However, examination papers and score sheets shall not be opened to inspection by the general public. Inspections shall be made at the department of human resources offices during regular business hours. A manifest error in examination scoring shall be corrected if called to the attention of the director of human resources within the inspection period. However, any such correction shall not invalidate an appointment previously made from an eligible list. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-131. - Appeal from ratings. 
(a)  Original examination ratings are subject to review or appeal by the director of human resources upon written request from a candidate. The candidate shall provide reasonable cause as to why the candidate believes the examination has been incorrectly rated. The director of human resources has the discretion to accept an oral request if warranted by the circumstances. In all cases, review of the rating will be accomplished by a professional staff member, other than the examiner, who made the original rating decision. The director of human resources shall also review the case prior to notifying the applicant of the decision concerning the appeal. The decision of the director of human resources is final. 
(b)  Appeals from ineligible ratings will be considered only if submitted within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the register is established. Request for review of eligible ratings shall be considered at any time during the life of the register. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-132. - Confidentiality of the examination materials and retention of records. 
All applications, examinations and tests materials, and other examination records shall be regarded as privileged and confidential information, available for public inspection only in accordance with the State of Florida law. All examination materials will be retained in accordance with the Florida law. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Secs. 16-133—16-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - ELIGIBLE LIST 
 
Sec. 16-151. - General. 
Vacancies in the classified civil service shall be filled from the eligible list established by a competitive process determined by the director of human resources, by either internal transfer, demotion, reassignment, or by non-competitive qualification as provided elsewhere in these rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-152. - Establishment of eligible lists. 
(a)  The director of human resources shall establish and maintain eligible lists as necessary to meet the needs of the city. Each list shall contain the names of those eligibles who have been determined to be qualified for appointment to the particular classification by the competitive or non-competitive qualification processes. 
(b)  The names of eligible candidates shall be placed on eligible lists in the order of their numerical rating when such a basis of rating is utilized. Placement of such names on an eligible list utilizing numerical ratings shall include all additional points, which may be awarded based upon veteran's preference or Miramar residents' preference. 
(c)  The director of human resources in consultation with appointing authorities shall have the option to certify eligible for a vacancy in one (1) classification from the eligible list established for that classification, for an equal or lower classification in the same job series, in the same classification series, or from classifications determined to be related. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-153. - Types of eligible lists. 
(a)  Re-employment eligibility list. 
(1)  A re-employment eligible list shall be containing the names of any employees in the classified civil service who have been laid off as a result of a reduction in force, and the accompanying elimination of positions. Placement on a preferred re-employment list shall be made based upon the determination of the director of human resources that the person meets the minimum qualifications for the eligible list for the particular qualification. Names shall be placed on re-employment list in the order of total continuous service with the city, which the laid off employee possesses. 
(2)  When a vacancy occurs in the same classification and department from which an employee was laid off and the department director wishes to fill the vacancy, the most senior employee on the re-employment eligible list for that classification and department shall be re-employed in that position provided that the employee meets the minimum qualifications in effect at the time of the re-employment. Refusal of an offer of re-employment shall cause the employee's name to be removed from the re-employment eligible list. 
(3)  The eligibility for re-employment of any person on re-employment eligible list shall expire eighteen (18) months from the day upon which the employee's layoff from the city service occurred. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-154. - Promotional eligible lists. 
(a)  Whenever it is determined by the director of human resources, in consultation with the department and division director, a promotional eligible list may be established. Such list shall consist of qualified employees from among regular employees of the city who have successfully completed probation in a lower classification covered by these rules and regulations. The director of human resources may establish a promotional eligibility list for vacancies within a specific department or division consisting only of applicants from that organizational unit. 
(b)  All promotions will be made on the basis of merit from the best qualified of the candidates on the promotional list. A promotional candidate's position on the eligible list shall be based upon numerical or non-numerical qualification, as set forth in the recruitment plan and may be based upon evaluation of training and experience, written examinations, interviews, supervisory appraisals, assessment centers, performance tests or other rating or ranking methodology determined by the director of human resources. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-155. - Open competitive eligible list. 
(a)  The director of human resources, in consultation with the appropriate department or division director, may establish an open competitive eligible list consisting of qualified candidates from within or outside of the city service. The names of qualifying candidates shall be placed on an open competitive eligible list in the order of their numerical score or their non-numerical rating depending upon the qualification method set forth in the recruitment plan established prior to the commencement of the recruitment. Open competitive eligible lists may include city employee candidates as well as candidates from the general public. 
(b)  The duration of an eligibility list shall be determined in accordance with the selection methodology set forth in the recruitment plan. In the absence of a recruitment plan specification as to the duration of a particular eligible list, an eligible list shall remain in effect for a period of one (1) year, unless sooner exhausted or extended by the director of human resources. When deemed necessary in the best interest of the city service, the director of human resources may extend the duration of any eligible list for up to an additional period of more than one (1) year from the date of its exhaustion. 
(c)  An eligible list may be declared exhausted prior to its duration when the list contains the names of fewer than five (5) eligible candidates available for appointment or for other reasons determined appropriate by the director of human resources. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-156. - Removal of names from eligible list. 
Names may be removed from eligible list for any one (1) or more of the following reasons. 
(1)  At the written request of the eligible. 
(2)  Upon the eligible's refusal of an offer for employment in the same, higher, or substantially similar job classification. A written statement by an eligible or preparation of a memorandum by the director of human resources shall be filed attesting to the fact that an eligible has confirmed that he or she is not willing to accept the appointment. Such statement of unwillingness may be restricted to a limited period of time, to a geographical location, to a particular shift, or related to other terms and conditions of employment. The name of the eligible may then be removed from the eligible list, or passed over for certification of vacancies for a particular period of time as determined by the director of human resources. 
(3)  Failure to report for an interview or respond within the time specified in the notice to the candidate to respond. 
(4)  Failure to report for work after accepting the appointment. 
(5)  Notice by postal authorities of their inability to locate an eligible candidate at the last known address provided to the city. 
(6)  Death of the eligible. 
(7)  The candidate is no longer qualified for appointment since the establishment of the eligibility list for various reasons, included but not limited to the loss of a required license, certification or other requirement. 
(8)  Dismissal for cause from the city service or from the service of another public agency in the same or similar job classification, or series. 
(9)  The name of an eligible on a promotional eligible list shall be removed from the promotional list upon his or her separation from the city or from a position in the department or division specified in the establishment of the eligible list. 
(10)  Determination of the candidate's eligibility was based upon fraud, willful misstatement of material fact, evasion of questions or other dishonesty or inaccuracy determined to be a substantial failure by the director of human resources. 
(11)  Any other cause pursuant to these rules and regulations for rejection of an applicant may be cause for removal of the applicant's name from any and all eligible lists. 
(12)  Upon the decline of an offer of appointment by an appointing authority, applicants will be removed from the eligible list and will not be eligible for consideration in the same classification for the duration of the eligible list unless otherwise determined by the director of human resources. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-157. - Restoration of names to an eligible list. 
Whenever any person's name is removed from an eligible list, pursuant to these rules and regulations he or she shall be notified in writing by the director of human resources. Notification shall be sent to the last address provided to the city by the eligible on the application form. Such person may, during the life of that eligible list, submit a written request to the director of human resources requesting the restoration of his/her name to the eligible list for the duration of the life of such list. The request will set forth reasons for the conduct or conditions resulting in the removal of the name and will further specify the reasons for the restoration of the name. The director of human resources, after consideration of the request, has the authority to determine whether the name should be restored to the eligible list or the request should be declined. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Secs. 16-158—16-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - CERTIFICATION OF ELIGIBLES AND APPOINTMENTS 
 
Sec. 16-171. - Request for certification. 
Department and division directors shall request a certification of eligibles from the director of human resources in order to fill any vacancy in the classified civil service. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-172. - Anticipation of need. 
Insofar as possible, vacancies in the classified civil service shall be anticipated sufficiently in advance to permit the director of human resources to establish an eligibility list. If a new classification is established, sufficient time should be allowed for the preparation of the new classification specification and recommendation of an appropriate salary range for the classification. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-173. - Priority order of list. 
Eligibles shall be certified from an existing list. However, whenever a re-employment list is available for a specific classification, such list shall be the only list certified until that list is exhausted or expired. If there is no active re-employment eligible list for a classification, certification may be made from a promotional or open competitive eligible list as determined by the department and division director, in consultation with the director of human resources. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-174. - Alternative list. 
Certification shall ordinarily be made from an eligible list established for the particular classification in which the vacancy exists, however the director of human resources shall have the option to certify names from other appropriate eligible lists if such lists are available. Such lists shall be for classifications in the same or higher pay range and with requirements equal to or superior than the classification in which the vacancy exists, e.g., Clerk II eligibles willing to accept a Clerk I position may be certified for consideration by the appointing authority. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-175. - Number of names to be certified; flexible certification. 
(a)  Consistent with the provision of the recruitment plan established prior to the commencement of the recruitment activity, the number of eligibles to be certified and the duration of the eligible list shall be established by the director of human resources, in consultation with the department or division director. In the absence of any certification rule to the contrary in a recruitment plan, the certification "rule of five" shall be utilized in all classifications in the classified civil service. That is, the director of human resources shall certify to the department or division director four (4) more candidates than the number of vacancies specified in the request for certification of eligibles. In the case of one (1) vacancy, the director of human resources shall certify to the names, addresses, telephone numbers, and application documents for the five (5) candidates with the highest standing on the eligible list and any additional candidates tied for the fifth position. 
(b)  All candidates certified shall be in order of score or rank on the eligible list and shall only include candidates who have expressed a willingness to accept employment in the department or division and under the terms and conditions of employment described in the job announcement or described by the department or division director. 
(c)  The foregoing certification "rule of five" shall also apply in the case of promotional examinations unless specified differently in the recruitment plan. 
(d)  If the number of names on an eligible list is fewer than five (5), the department or division director may select from among those certified, or may request that a new list be established. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-176. - Alternative selection rules. 
If a certification rule other than the "rule of five" is specified in the recruitment plan, the director of human resources shall certify the number of eligibles provided in the recruitment plan. For example, if the selection "rule of three" is established, the director of human resources shall certify two (2) more eligibles than the number of vacancies in the manner described in the foregoing section. If a certification "rule of rank" is utilized, the director of human resources shall certify the names of all candidates on the eligible list in the highest rank on the list. For example, if the selection criterion specifies scoring of candidates based upon "most qualified", "qualified" and "unqualified", the director of human resources shall first certify to the appointing authority the names of all candidates achieving a ranking of "most qualified". 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-177. - Selective certification. 
A department or division director may specify necessary or desirable job-related qualifications for candidates for appointments to a specific position. These may include requirements for shift work, second language capability, possession of specific licenses or certification, etc. Upon receipt of a request for selective certification, the director of human resources may certify from the appropriate eligible list only those candidates possessing such qualifications. In all cases of selective certification, the director of human resources shall approve the request only upon a finding that the request is based on job related criteria and not based upon the desire to appoint a specific candidate who would not otherwise be available for certification or otherwise circumventing the spirit of these rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-178. - Elimination of ineligible candidates. 
Candidates may be removed from the a certification or eligible list when: 
(1)  The person declines an offer for employment in the classification. 
(2)  Fails to reply, or when notification of certification is returned undelivered by United States Postal Service, when sent to the address shown on the application form. 
(3)  The person has already accepted a position in the same, comparable, or higher job classification. 
(4)  The person was separated for cause or resigned during or following disciplinary action, such as suspension. 
(5)  A candidate against whose eligibility a department or division director has submitted an objection, which is sustained by the director of human resources. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-179. - Objection to an eligible. 
Certification of a particular candidate for employment may be suspended or revoked in a particular certification when the appointing authority submits a written objection, which is sustained by the director of human resources, indicating that the candidate is disqualified for some or all of the positions to be filled in the eligible list, is not available in a reasonable time frame to accept employment or for any other job-related reason including those associated with the disqualification of applicants as set forth in these rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-180. - Consideration of applicants. 
All candidates certified to the appointing authority shall be considered by the appointing authority through review of the candidate application materials, personal interview with the appointing authority or designee, or other reasonable steps applied in a consistent manner to all certified candidates. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-181. - Notice of certification. 
Whenever an eligible candidate has been certified, the candidate shall receive written, telephonic, or e-mail notification of the certification and shall be provided with a time limit within he or she must confirm their continued interest and/or must report for an interview or other meeting with the appointing authority. Eligibles may waive certification for a particular position upon filing a written notice to the director of human resources, who may approve the waiver or reject it. In the case of rejection of a waiver request, the name of the eligible candidate may be removed from the list. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-182. - Cancellation of a certification. 
If at any time after eligibles have been certified, the department or division director decides not to fill the position or to fill the position at a lower level in a different classification or otherwise make organizational changes, the request for certification may be cancelled. In such cases the director shall advise in writing the director of human resources who shall notify the eligibles of the cancellation. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-183. - Selection from among certified eligibles. 
The appointing authority, following a review of the qualifications of each certified eligible, may select the candidate considered by the appointing authority to be the best qualified and available candidate and shall make a conditional job offer to the selected candidate. Such conditional job offers are subject to completion of all required in processing, including background verification, medical review and other requirements established by the city. Once the conditional offer of employment is accepted, the candidate will be directed to report for completion of appropriate documents prior to commencing employment. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-184. - Pre-employment, post offer requirements. 
No candidate shall begin city employment prior to completion of processing requirements established by the department or division and the department of human resources. Such requirements shall include completion of all necessary forms for the completion of benefit, payroll, and risk management purposes, and shall include verification of social security identification, proof of education or licensure, job related medical and substance abuse screening, depending on the nature of the position. They shall also include background and reference verification, including criminal history, and driving history, as appropriate. Any exception to the procedures set forth in this section may be recommended by the department or division director and must be approved by the director of human resources. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-185. - Probationary appointment. 
All appointments in the classified civil service shall be made initially as a probationary appointment, and shall be subject to successful completion of the probationary period as described in these rules and regulations. Upon successful completion of the probationary period, the employee shall acquire regular status within the city's classified civil service. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-186. - Temporary and seasonal employment. 
Temporary or seasonal appointment may be made for special projects or other temporary or transitory work and shall not continue for a period longer than six (6) months without approval by the city manager. No temporary appointment shall be made of a person who does not meet at least the minimum qualifications for the classification. All temporary appointments shall be dependent upon successful completion of any required medical screening, substance abuse screening, criminal history, or driving history, and is further subject to other verification of any information provided by a candidate. Temporary employees may be drawn from the eligible list or from special recruitments conducted by the department of human resources. Temporary or seasonal appointments do not convey any assumptions of rights or privileges provided to classified civil service employees of the city. Temporary employees are at will employees who accrue no property rights to continued employment with the city, and are excluded from the provisions of these rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-187. - Emergency appointment. 
In cases of emergency involving real or likely serious impairment of the public's business, the department or division director, subject to review and approval by the director of human resources, may appoint any qualified person to a vacant position in order to prevent stoppage of the public's business or loss or serious inconvenience to the public. An emergency appointment shall not last beyond ninety (90) calendar days: however, if circumstances warrant, the director of human resources may authorize extension of the emergency appointment for an additional ninety (90) days. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-188. - Provisional appointment. 
(a)  Whenever there are urgent reasons for filling a regular position in the classified civil service, and an appropriate eligible list or sufficient qualified candidates on that list are not available at the time, then the director of human resources may authorize the vacancy to be filled by a provisional appointment. 
(b)  Any candidate for provisional appointment must meet the minimum qualifications established for the classification being filled. 
(c)  An appropriate eligible list for the classification shall be established at the earliest possible date and the person serving in the provisional appointment shall be given an opportunity to compete. 
(d)  Should the provisional employee be subsequently appointed to the regular position, the time spent in the provisional appointment shall count towards the determination of continuous service. 
(e)  Provisional appointments shall not be made for a period in excess of six (6) months. However, in exceptional circumstances, the director of human resources may authorize an extension not to exceed an additional six (6) months. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-189. - Exempt appointment and return rights. 
An employee in the classified civil service who has successfully completed the probationary period for the classification, and is, thereafter, appointed to an "at will" position excluded from these rules and regulations may be removed from the excluded "at will" position at any time and for any reason or no reason, as long as the reason is not an illegal reason. Should the appointment of such an employee to the "at will" position terminate, that person shall have the right of return to a position in the classification, in the department or division formerly held. Notwithstanding the above, if the basis for terminating the "at will" employment also constitutes grounds for disciplinary action, pursuant to these rules and regulations, the appointing authority may institute such disciplinary action which could result in the suspension, demotion or discharge of the employee from the position in the classified civil service. Should the exercise of the return right, as described in this section result, in the displacement of another employee, the provisions of the reduction in force section of these rules and regulations shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-190. - Probationary period. 
All appointments to the classified civil service shall be subject to satisfactory completion of a probationary period. This applies not only to original appointment as a city employee, but also to any subsequent appointment to a position covered in the classified civil service. Regardless of whether the employee had previously completed a probationary period in another classification, the director of human resources, in consultation with the affected department or division director, may waive the probationary period for appointments resulting from reclassification, transfer, demotion, or reinstatement. The probationary period shall be regarded as an integral part of the selection process and it shall be utilized to closely observe the employee's behavior and performance in order to secure the most effective adjustment for the new or promoted employee to the position. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-191. - Duration. 
The probationary period for appointments in classified civil service shall be twelve (12) months in duration and shall be subject to extension or rejection of probation as set forth in these rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-192. - Extension of probationary period. 
Upon the written request of the department or division director and approval by the director of human resources, the duration of the probationary period may be extended. Such extension must be reviewed with the affected employee and submitted prior to the expiration of the probationary period. No extension shall be allowed to make the total probationary period longer than eighteen (18) months. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-193. - Rejection during probationary period. 
(a)  At any time during the probationary period, the department or division director shall have the discretion to reject an employee if, in his or her opinion, the working test period indicates that the employee is unable or unwilling to perform the duties of the position or that his or her work habits or lack of dependability do not merit continuation in that position. 
(b)  The termination of a probationary period for an employee shall be reviewed in advance with the director of human resources. 
(c)  Such termination of probation represents a discretionary "at will" judgment by the department or the division director and are not subject to appeal unless the employee alleges that the basis of the rejection of probation was unlawful. In such cases, the employee shall notify the director of human resources within thirty (30) days of receiving notice of the rejection of probation so that the matter can be reviewed appropriately and expeditiously. 
(d)  Upon rejection of a probationary period, the employee shall receive a written notification of the action. Failure to provide such notification to the employee or to the person's address as stated on the job application, prior to the expiration of the probationary period, shall automatically grant the employee regular status in the classified civil service. 
(e)  If an employee is removed during the probationary period, following a promotion, transfer or demotion, and the employee had previously successfully completed the probationary period in the city service immediately prior to the promotion, transfer or demotion, the employee shall be returned to the position in the classification held prior to the action or to a similar position in the city service. Should an appropriate vacancy not exist, the employee shall be restored to the position held prior to the promotion transfer or demotion in the provisions governing reduction in force. A probationary period rejection following promotion, transfer or demotion, does not affect an employee's regular status or rights in a classified civil service acquired through the prior position, unless the basis of the rejection was also a basis upon which disciplinary action is implemented. 
(f)  There shall be no expectation or right to continuation of a probationary period and no right of appeal from a decision by the city to reject or extend the probationary period other than as described elsewhere in this section. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-194. - Reinstatement. 
A reinstatement is the non-competitive appointment of a person formally employed in a classified service of the city who had satisfactorily completed probation and whose service record was at least satisfactory prior to his/her voluntary resignation or separation from city service. Any former regular employee as described above, who resigned or was separated in good standing may, within two (2) years of the effective date of his or her resignation or separation, upon written approval by the appointing authority and the director of human resources, be reinstated to a vacancy in the same or lower classification held at the time of the resignation or separation subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The former employee was separated or resigned for reasons other than discharge. 
(2)  There are no regular employees who have been laid off and whose names remain on the re-employment eligible list for the classification. 
(3)  The employee seeking reinstatement meets all of the requirements currently in effect for the classification. 
(4)  Reinstatement is an appointment requiring a new probationary period, completion of a new and up to date employment application form and completion of other pre-employment processing requirements previously described. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-195. - Transfer. 
A regular employee may be transferred to a position in the same classification within or between departments and divisions to meet the needs of the city or upon request of the employee and approval by the appointing authority. The employee remains in the same status in the new position that he or she held in the previous position except that the employee may be required to serve a new probationary period if the transfer involves a move to another department. An employee who is transferred shall continue at his or her same pay rate. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Secs. 16-196—16-210. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - SEPARATION FROM CITY SERVICE 
Separations or terminations from employment in classified civil service be designated as one (1) of the following types: 
 
Sec. 16-211. - Resignation. 
To resign in good standing an employee shall give written notice to the affected department or division director at least fourteen (14) calendar days in advance of the proposed date of resignation. Failure to comply shall be entered under the employee's service record and may result in denial of re-employment. The foregoing requirement may be waived by the appointing authority and the director of human resources. A notice of resignation accepted by the department or division director may not be withdrawn without specific written approval by that director. Such approval shall be included in the employee's personnel file. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-212. - Lay-off or reduction in force. 
(a)  An employee may be laid off when the city determines it necessary to abolish one (1) or more positions by reason of shortage of funds or lack of work, changes in the organization of the city, or for related reasons which are outside the employee's control and which do not reflect discredit upon the employee's service. 
(b)  The duties performed by an employee laid off may be re-assigned to other employees who hold positions in appropriate classifications. 
(c)  No regular full time employees shall be laid off while another person is retained on a provisional, temporary, seasonal or part-time basis, in the same classification within the affected department or division without the employee being laid off having the right to move to such other position. 
(d)  Whenever a layoff becomes necessary, the appointing authority shall notify the director of human resources at least twenty (20) days in advance of the effective date of the intended action. The director of human resources shall thereafter certify to the appointing authority the names of the employees to be laid off, in the order in which such layoff shall be affected. Employees will be laid off from the affected classification and from within the affected division or department in the inverse order of their total length of continuous time in the classified service of the city. The employee with the least amount of service shall be laid off first. In the event that two (2) or more employees affected have the exact same length of service, the employee with the best overall performance on the evaluation history in the city service, most recent performance evaluation, as determined by the director of human resources, shall be given preference for retention purposes. 
(e)  Layoff may involve regular employees who have a right to "retreat" within the effected department or division. If a regular employee is serving a probationary period in an affected classification, such employee shall have the right of retreat within the affected division and shall return to the same or comparable classification from which he or she was promoted. A regular employee subject to layoff has the right to retreat to a lower classification in the same classification series within the affected division. The layoff shall then be made from the next lower applicable classification. 
(f)  Regular employees shall have preference for re-employment as provided elsewhere in these rules and regulations, for a period of eighteen (18) months from the date of the layoff. 
(g)  When a department or division director believes that the skills or qualifications of a certain individual are essential to the efficient operation of the department or organizational unit because he or she possesses special knowledge, skills or abilities, and the department or division director wishes to retain this individual in preference to a person with more seniority as described above, a written request from the director shall be submitted to the director of human resources. Such request as set forth with specific knowledge, skills and abilities or other qualifications possessed by the individual and the reasons why these skills are essential to the effective operation of the organization. If the director of human resources concurs, then that individual may be retained and a more senior employee laid off. 
(h)  If a regular employee is scheduled to be laid off, he or she shall be offered a demotion in lieu of layoff to a position in a lower classification if such a position exists in the employee's division or department and he or she is qualified to fill the position in the lower classification. 
(i)  Regular employee affected by layoff shall receive written notification from the director of human resources at least fourteen (14) calendar days prior to the effective date of the layoff. If fourteen (14) calendar days notice cannot be provided, the employee shall receive compensation for the balance of that period. 
(j)  Layoffs shall be affected only after other personnel actions aimed at avoiding a layoff have been considered to no avail, such as transfer or reassignment. 
(k)  Separations by layoff or reduction in force are not considered disciplinary in nature. As with other types of separations, employees affected by layoff or reduction in force, shall have the right to appeal to the director of human resources. However, such an appeal shall not be subject to evidentiary hearing and shall be limited in scope to allegations regarding a violation of the established layoff procedures, such as an allegation that a less senior employee should have been laid off but was not affected. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-213. - Disability. 
The director of human resources may direct, or approve a department or division director's request, to have an employee examined by a licensed physician or psychologist designated by the city, with such an examination paid for by the city, to determine the fitness for duty of an employee. Such request shall be based upon cause to believe that symptoms of impairment, which affect or could affect the ability of the employee to satisfactorily perform his or her job, have appeared or that the employee's continuation on the job may represent a threat to the safety of the employee or others. Following receipt of such a request, and consistent with the city's concern for equality of opportunity for employees who are or may be qualified individuals with disabilities within the meaning of the Americans with Disabilities Act, the following action may be taken: 
(1)  If a medical condition is temporary in nature, is determined to exist, and is not a covered disability under the Americans with Disability Act, the director of human resources may authorize a specified period of time for a modified work schedule or modified work requirements in order to enable the employee to overcome the condition. Any such time off shall be based in part on operational need determined by the department or division director. Such time off is to be charged as sick leave or, if no or insufficient sick leave has been accrued, to annual leave or other paid leave, or thereafter to leave without pay. In unusual circumstances, administrative leave may be approved. 
(2)  If the condition is sufficient to meet the criteria for disability within the meaning of the Americans with Disability Act, as determined by the city, and the employee remains otherwise qualified, the city will endeavor, with the employees' cooperation, to reasonably accommodate the impact of employees' disability. Such accommodations are determined on a case by case basis and only to the extent that they enable the otherwise qualified employee with a disability to perform essential functions of the job without creating an undue hardship for the city. 
(3)  If, notwithstanding reasonable accommodation, the employee cannot perform essential functions of the job or will not cooperate by taking available steps to correct or modify the job related impact of the disability, then the department or division director may take the steps necessary to separate the employee from city service. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-214. - Loss of job requirement. 
An employee who is unable to perform the duties of the job because of the loss of a necessary license or other minimum requirement shall not be permitted to continue to perform in that position and may be separated from city employment or provided with a notice of corrective action and requirement to act in specific ways to correct the loss of the job requirement within a limited period of time. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-215. - Dismissal. 
Dismissal is a forced separation from city employment made for job-related reasons and under procedures set forth in these rules and regulations. All employees in classified civil service who have successfully completed probation shall, receive written notice prior to the implementation of proposed disciplinary action involving reduction in rank, loss of pay, or loss of employment receive written notice. 
Such written notice shall provide a reasonable opportunity for the employee to present to the appointing authority information as to why the proposed action should not be taken, or should be modified. Consideration of the information provided shall be done prior to the approving authority taking final action with regard to the proposed discipline. The provisions of collective bargaining agreements or these rules and regulations shall govern actions and appeals from disciplinary action for employees in the classified civil service. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-216. - Retirement. 
City employees shall be eligible to receive retirement benefits pursuant to the provisions of the retirement plans established for employees. There shall be no mandatory retirement age for city employees, except as may be required for sworn law enforcement and fire/rescue personnel. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-217. - Death. 
Separation from city employment shall be effective as of the date of the death of an employee. All compensation owed to the employee, as of the effective date of separation, shall be paid to the surviving spouse, or to the estate of the employee as determined by law or by executed forms such as beneficiary designations. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Secs. 16-218—16-230. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - DISCIPLINARY ACTION 
 
Sec. 16-231. - Intent. 
It is inherent in the authority of the city manager and designees to take disciplinary action when warranted, when employees fail to perform or behave in relation to their employment in an effective, ethical and positive manner consistent with their obligations and responsibilities. Any disciplinary action affecting non-probationary employees in the classified civil service which results in the loss of employment property for that employee including, dismissal from employment, reduction in pay or rank, or suspension without pay, shall be based upon good cause and completed in a manner which provides appropriate due process for the affected employee. Disciplinary action shall not be based upon unlawful discrimination. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-232. - Reasons for disciplinary action. 
The following non-exclusive list of activities or actions may result in disciplinary action: 
(1)  Conviction, plea of guilty, or plea of nolo contendere, whether or not adjudication was withheld, of a felony, misdemeanor, or criminal infraction which is job related, a crime involving moral turpitude or failure to disclose a conviction, plea of guilty or plea of nolo contendere whether or not adjudication was withheld, for a felony, misdemeanor, or criminal infraction within five (5) regularly scheduled working days following such conviction or plea. 
(2)  Absenteeism. 
(3)  Absence without leave for three (3) or more consecutive working days or failing to report to work after a leave of absence has expired. 
(4)  Excessive tardiness. 
(5)  Abuse of sick leave. 
(6)  Insubordination or breach of discipline including failure or refusal to comply with a job-related verbal or written directive of a supervisor or manager. 
(7)  Incompetence or inability to perform work required for the position. 
(8)  Misuse or theft of city property or failure to permit inspection of or turn in city property under the control of the employee upon request. 
(9)  Loss of job requirement, such as loss of necessary licenses or certification which prevents adequate or legal performance of assigned duties. 
(10)  Willfully providing false information, making false statements or failing to disclose material facts to supervisors, officials, the public, or an agency of the city government. 
(11)  Violation of city rules and regulations, including departmental or division rules, or these rules and regulations. 
(12)  Misuse or unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possessing or using controlled substances, including alcoholic beverages, on duty or off duty if such behavior affects or impairs on duty performance. 
(13)  Making any false statements in a job application, omission or misrepresentation of pertinent or material information from an application or other intent to deceive the city in an application or examination for employment. 
(14)  Violation of ethics, laws or rules, including those provided in these rules and regulations, relative to conflict of interest, acceptance of gifts, nepotism or other policies established by state laws, the city commission or the city manager. 
(15)  Refusal to be examined by a city-designated licensed medical professional once so directed. 
(16)  Harassing or wantingly offensive conduct or language toward the public, supervisor, or fellow employees, including but not limited to language or conduct reflective of sexism, racism, or bigotry, such as the use of ethnic slurs disparaging comments or unwelcome harassing behavior based upon race, religion, national origin, disability, gender, sexual orientation, or other personal characteristic protected by city policy or state or Federal Civil Rights Law. 
(17)  Violence or the threat of violence by any employee of the city directed towards another employee or any other person. 
(18)  Possession, use, or threat to use a deadly weapon, including all firearms and explosive devices, in or on city property including city vehicles, unless carrying such weapon is a necessary or approved requirement of the job. 
(19)  The foregoing is not a complete list of all activities, which could result in disciplinary action but is intended as a general disciplinary guide for employees and supervisors. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04; Ord. No. 11-11, § 3, 9-21-11)  
Sec. 16-233. - Types of disciplinary action. 
The types of disciplinary action outlined in this section are not intended to prescribe required progressive steps, but rather to list various types of actions available to the appointing authority. In all cases, the level and type of discipline to be taken shall be based upon the specific facts relevant to failures of performance or behavior or the resulting outcomes of such failures on the part of an employee, consistent with the principles and intent described above. 
(1)  Oral admonition. An oral admonition is an interview with an employee, conducted in private by his or her supervisor, who may or may not have another supervisor present, in which the employee's failure to perform or behave in compliance with work rules or regulations are discussed along with suggestion for improvement or directions. A simple reminder to an employee that he or she has committed an isolated minor infraction is not an admonishment. 
(2)  Written warning. A written warning is an internal memorandum to an employee, which directs the employee's attention to performance, or behavior failures, which have not been corrected through previous oral admonishment or other actions which re-emphasizes in writing a discussion with the employee and sets forth the expected results in terms of the employee's future improvement. The memorandum also includes a warning of the consequences should the employee fail to improve or correct the job-related shortcomings identified. 
(3)  Formal reprimand. Formal reprimand is a written notice to an employee describing his or her breech of standards, conduct, regulations or other job-related failures of behavior or performance. A formal reprimand is a more severe type of disciplinary action than the written warning and may be used in cases where past written warnings or verbal admonition has not been effective or where an offense has been committed which requires more severe action than an admonishment. An official reprimand puts the individual on notice that more severe disciplinary action will result unless improvement is demonstrated. A copy of the written reprimand is placed in the employee's personnel file, as well as provided to the employee. Formal reprimands are to be reviewed in advance with the director of human resources. 
(4)  Suspension without pay. Suspension without pay is a release from duty without pay for a specified period of time based upon a job-related performance or behavior failure. A written statement setting forth the reasons for and the duration of the suspension shall be furnished to the effected employee and a copy placed in the employee's personnel file. Suspensions without pay are to be reviewed in advance with the director of human resources. 
(5)  Disciplinary demotion. Disciplinary demotion is a reduction in rank and/or pay of an employee. A written statement setting forth a reason for the disciplinary action shall be provided to the employee and a copy placed in the personnel file. Disciplinary demotions are to be reviewed in advance with the director of human resources. 
(6)  Dismissal. Dismissal represents the forced separation or discharge of an employee from city service. A dismissed employee may be ineligible for subsequent city employment as provided by these rules and regulations. Dismissals are to be reviewed in advance with the director of human resources. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-234. - Actions pending discipline. 
The department or division director may, following consultation with the director of human resources, order the suspension with/without pay of an employee pending completion of an inquiry, review, or investigation of alleged behavior or performance failures which, if sustained, would lead to serious disciplinary action including possible termination. Such suspension with/without pay will allow for completion of an investigation and a reduction in potential liability of having an employee continue to perform work for the city during the pending investigation. A change in assignment, work location or other actions may also be taken pending a determination about disciplinary action. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-235. - Pre-disciplinary appeals. 
Prior to implementing any disciplinary action which results in the loss of employment property for an employee past probation and covered by these rules and regulations, the appointing authority, in consultation with the director of human resources, shall provide reasonable notice in writing to an employee of proposed disciplinary action and the basis for such action. The employee will be provided with the option to submit information in writing or in person, to the appointing authority as to why the proposed disciplinary action or proposed basis for disciplinary action is incorrect or why the action should not be taken or should be modified. An employee shall have the right to be represented by the person of their choice in meeting with the appointing authority for the purpose provided in this section. An employee shall also have the discretion to decline to provide such information. Following such an opportunity for the employee, the appointing authority shall consider the information provided, if any, and may then take the disciplinary action deemed job-related, and appropriate to the nature of the circumstances and the employee's past employment history. After any such disciplinary action is implemented, an employee will have the option to appeal the disciplinary action pursuant to procedures established through collective bargaining agreements, if applicable, or by appeal to the civil service board pursuant to the authority of that body to hear disciplinary appeals from unrepresented employees covered by these rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Secs. 16-236—16-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - CIVIL SERVICE GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 16-251. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the grievance procedure is to provide an orderly and consistent process for employees to bring forward allegations that written policy, procedure, rule, or regulation of the city has been violated by an action of a supervisor or manager or fellow employees. The grievance procedure permits such allegations to be aired in a non-retaliatory manner so that the matter can be reviewed and, if necessary, corrective action can be taken. By the same token, a grievance procedure is not established for the purpose of providing an additional vehicle or substitute for collective bargaining or to diminish the authority or need for supervisors or managers to make job-related decisions. 
It is the policy of the City of Miramar that every employee at all times be treated in an equitable, job-related and respectful manner. Conversely, each employee has an obligation to perform and behave in the workplace in an effective, respectful, and efficient manner in relation to fellow employees, supervisors, managers, clients and members of the general public. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-252. - Grievance procedure. 
When an employee has reason to believe that a written city policy, procedure, rule or regulation has been violated, the following procedure will apply: 
(1)  First step—Verbal grievance. An employee will present to the immediate supervisor a verbal description of the grievance including a citation of the policy, procedure, rule, or regulation alleged to have been violated along with recommended corrective action. Such verbal grievance will be presented within fourteen (14) calendar days of the time the employee first knew or should have known about the alleged violation. The immediate supervisor will meet as needed with the employee informally and attempt to clarify whatever events occurred in an effort to resolve the grievance. Such efforts shall be extended for a period of up to four (4) calendar days from the date when the verbal grievance is first presented to the supervisor. 
(2)  Step 2—Written grievance. If the action described in the first step of the grievance procedure fails to resolve the matter, the employee shall have the right to submit a written grievance to the immediate supervisor within fourteen (14) calendar days of receipt of the verbal response of the supervisor provided in the first step of the procedure. Such grievance shall include a citation of the policy, procedure, rule or regulation alleged to have been violated along with recommended corrective action. The supervisor shall provide a copy of the written grievance immediately to the department director and shall meet with the employee and further attempt to resolve the grievance. The supervisor shall provide a written response to the grievance to the employee within fourteen (14) calendar days of the date when the written grievance was first received. A copy of the response shall be provided to the department director and the director of human resources. 
(3)  Step 3—Department head appeal. If the employee is not satisfied with the written response of the immediate supervisor, the employee may, within fourteen (14) calendar days of the day of receipt of the written response of the supervisor submit a written appeal of the grievance to the department director. The department director shall, within fourteen (14) calendar days of the date of receipt of the written grievance, review the matter, meet with the employee or others as needed and provide a written response to the employee. The written response will affirm, amend, or revoke the action taken, which led to the grievance. 
(4)  Step 4—City manager appeal. If the employee is not satisfied with the written response of the department head, the employee may within fourteen (14) calendar days of receipt of the department head's response, submit a written appeal to the city manager for final decision making. The employee shall also submit a copy of the written appeal to the department head and the director of human resources. The city manager or his designee shall, within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of receipt of the written appeal of the employee, review the matter, meet with any of the parties deemed to be appropriate to the review of the grievance, and provide the employee with a written response which affirms, amends or revokes the action taken which led to the grievance being submitted. A decision of the city manager shall be the final step in the grievance procedure. 
(5)  Advisory opinion of the director of human resources. At any time during the grievance procedure, up to, but not including submission of a grievance to arbitration, the director of human resources may, upon request by either party or upon his or her motion, review the grievance and prepare a written advisory opinion on the matter. The advisory opinion of the director of human resources shall not be binding upon either party, but may be useful in alternative dispute resolution or helpful, as information which may be submitted to the employee, or the department head, or the arbitrator. 
(6)  At any point during the grievance procedure, the employee may be represented in the process by the person of his/her choosing. 
(7)  At any time during the grievance procedure, up to the filing of a discipline-related grievance through arbitration, the parties may agree to an extension of time deadlines herein set forth as long as such agreement is submitted in writing and signed by both parties. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Secs. 16-253—16-270. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - MANAGEMENT OF CRITICAL WORKPLACE INCIDENCES 
 
Sec. 16-271. - Policy and intent. 
Violence, threat of violence, sexual or other inappropriate harassment, or unlawful discrimination has no place in the workforce of the City of Miramar. It is a goal of the city to rid worksites of any such violent, threatening or inappropriate behavior. It is a shared obligation of all employees, law enforcement agencies, and employer organizations to individually and jointly act to prevent or defuse actual implied, threatening, violent or inappropriate behavior at work. Such behavior is contrary to city policy and will subject the perpetrator to serious disciplinary action and possible criminal charges. The city will work with law enforcement to aid in the prosecution of any person who commits such acts against employees. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-272. - Coordination. 
The director of human resources is designated as a workplace critical incident coordinator to ensure that appropriate resources, including the employee assistance program, insurance benefit providers, city attorney, law enforcement or others as needed are coordinated in their support and response. In pursuit of this objective, the director of human resources is authorized to establish relevant policies or take appropriate actions providing for intervention and mitigation of violent, threatening or inappropriate behavior. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-273. - Retaliation prohibited. 
Any employee acting in good faith who reports real or implied violent, threatening or inappropriate behavior, including sexual harassment, shall not be subject to disciplinary action or other adverse personnel action or harassment as a result of reporting their concerns through established city procedures. 
The director of human resources shall ensure that city policies relative to violent or threatening behavior, unlawful discrimination, and inappropriate harassing conduct, including reporting procedures are distributed to all city employees and that training is also available. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Secs. 16-274—16-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - UNION REPRESENTATION AND LABOR RELATIONS 
 
Sec. 16-301. - Non-discrimination. 
The city will not discriminate against employees based upon membership in a collective bargaining unit or the individual's choice to join or not to join a labor union. No employee shall be required to become or remain a member of a labor union as a condition of employment with the City of Miramar. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-302. - Civil service rules and regulations versus union contracts. 
Civil service rules and regulations prevail over collective bargaining agreement provision except in areas of conflict. When these rules and regulations conflict with the terms of collective bargaining agreements, the collective bargaining agreements prevail. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-303. - Bargaining procedures. 
The director of human resources shall serve as the city's chief labor negotiator with recognized labor unions. When a labor union request a meeting with the city to bargain collectively, the director of human resources shall meet at reasonable and agreeable times with the representatives of the labor union for the purpose of good faith collective bargaining pursuant to Florida Statute Chapter 447 and other applicable laws and procedures. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Secs. 16-304—16-320. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - ETHICS AND CONFLICT OF INTEREST 
 
Sec. 16-321. - Gifts prohibited. 
No employee or member of an employee's immediate family, as defined in sections of these rules and regulations defining employment of relatives shall accept gifts, gratuity, loans, or services from individuals, business entities or organizations with whom the employee has official relationships in his or her role as an employee or official in the City of Miramar. These limitations are not intended to prohibit the acceptance of articles of negligible value which are distributed generally, nor to prohibit the employees from accepting loans or purchasing goods and services under the same terms or conditions as would be available to members of the general public. The purpose of the foregoing provision is to protect against the reality or appearance of relationships which might be construed as evidence of favoritism, coercion, unfair advantage, collusion, or conflict of interest for city employees whose primary mission is to objectively serve the citizens in the conduct of city business on an equitable and discrimination free basis. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-322. - Solicitation. 
No employee shall solicit or offer contributions, services, or goods from another employee as a gift to an employee in a superior, official position, nor shall any such official in a supervisory or managerial position accept a gift presented as a contribution from employees receiving a lower salary. However, the foregoing does not prohibit a voluntary gift from of a nominal amount when made as part of the social courtesy of celebration of an anniversary, birthday, or well wishes in case of illness, accident or death. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-323. - Conflicts of interest. 
No employee shall use his or her city position for unauthorized personal gain. Any conflict between personal interest and official responsibility is to be resolved by the employee consciously avoiding possible conflicts, or disclosing the basis of such real or possible conflicts to a supervisor. The foregoing policies are aimed at ensuring that the public's business is faithfully and ethically carried out, and not intended to stand in the way of active participation in community or professional organizations, or the pursuit of an individual's affairs. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-324. - Employment of relatives. 
Except as to persons employed as of the effective date of these rules and regulations, no person shall be employed in a position in city service who has a relative, as defined below, who is also an employee of the city where such employment would create a conflict of interest. 
(1)  A relative is defined as a person related by blood, marriage, legal guardianship or adoption to the first degree of relationship to another employee. Such relationships include parents, step parents, in-laws, children, brothers, sisters, grandparents, grandchildren, step children, aunts, uncles, and first cousins. 
(2)  A relative for the purpose of these rules and regulations also extends to other members of the employee's immediate household or persons who stand in loco parentis. 
(3)  A conflict of interest relationship will be deemed to exist when one (1) employee - relative is in a position to exercise authority over job related decisions or effectively recommend such decisions, affecting the other employee/relative. Such matters will include authority to act or effectively recommend the appointment, promotion, assignment, evaluation, transfer, disciplinary action, salary or compensation changes, supervision or other human resources actions which the director of human resources may deem to constitute a conflict of interest. 
(4)  If a supervisory employee marries or otherwise becomes related to a subordinate employee, the city shall attempt, if possible, to transfer either party to a different work assignment not involving a conflict of interest. If the transfer of either party is not possible, or the party to be transferred does not wish to accept another work assignment, or if one (1) of the parties does not resign, the city shall terminate the employment of the relative with the least total service with the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-325. - Conflicting or incompatible outside employment enterprise, or business. 
(a)  Employment with the City of Miramar is deemed to be an individual's primary employment. Outside employment, enterprise, or business activity is permitted as long as there is no incompatibility or conflict of interest with the employee's city responsibilities. An employee who wishes to engage in paid employment in addition to city employment or who owns or has an interest in a business activity, or economic enterprise outside of city employment shall disclose such employment or activity to the city, on a form provided by the director of human resources. The department or division head and the director of human resources shall review such outside employment, enterprise or business activity in relation to the following criteria: Such activity shall not interfere with the efficient performance of the employee's responsibility with the city. 
(b)  Such activity shall not cause the reality or the perception of conflict of interest with the employee's duties. 
(c)  Such activity shall not involve the performance of duties which the employee should perform as part of city employment. 
(d)  Such employment shall not occur during the employee's regular or assigned working hours unless the employee is on paid or unpaid leave of absence, or is exempt from the Fair Labor Standards Act and works on a flexible status. An employee engaging in outside employment shall recognize the obligation to, and be available for city work when called to work by the supervisor for an emergency or for the performance of overtime work required by the city. 
(e)  The work shall not be incompatible or conflicting with the responsibilities of the person as a city employee. 
(f)  The director of human resources shall review with the affected employee any request for outside employment, or business activity or enterprise which is not approved, and provide the employee with an opportunity to amend or modify the request to be compatible with these rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-326. - Reporting ethical violations or wrong doing; no retaliation. 
It is the policy of the City of Miramar that employees, applicants for employment, and members of the general public have open opportunities to bring to the attention of city government, allegations of malfeasance, wrong doings, or violation of the City Charter, ordinances, resolutions or policies on the part of the city, its officers, employees, and independent contractors. Such wrong doing or malfeasance would include violations of law, abuse or gross neglect of duties, or gross waste or misuse of public property or funds. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-327. - Procedure. 
Any person wishing to bring such allegation of malfeasance or wrong doing to the attention of the city may do so by sending a written and signed statement of the allegations, with as much detail as possible to the city manager. All such allegations will be reviewed and a written response provided to the employee or citizen making the allegation. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-328. - Retaliation prohibited. 
No employee shall be discharged, suspended, demoted or subject to other adverse personnel action because he/she acted in good faith to bring to the attention of the city allegations of malfeasance or wrong doings pursuant to this policy. No applicant for employment with the city shall be denied employment solely because he/she brought such allegations to the attention of the city or participated in the investigation of the allegations. Notwithstanding the above, employees who it is determined have willfully filed complaints based upon information known by the employee making the allegations to be false, inaccurate, misrepresents such allegations, or who are themselves parties to the violations complained of in the allegations, shall be subject to disciplinary action in accordance with these rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Secs. 16-329—16-340. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - HOLIDAY AND LEAVE TIME 
 
Sec. 16-341. - Meal periods. 
Meal periods and duration shall be scheduled by the department, division, or office director in a manner to best serve the public. Employees are expected to utilize their meal period during the hours designated by their supervisor and this time cannot be accumulated. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-342. - Attendance. 
Each department, division, and office director shall be responsible for the attendance of all persons in his-her department, division, or office and shall keep complete attendance records including annual leave, sick leave, overtime, etc. Records of attendance shall be reported as provided in these rules and regulations. Employees in positions covered under the provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) shall be required to complete such timesheets and other attendance records as may be required by the finance department. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-343. - Holidays. 
(a)  Employees as defined herein shall be eligible for the following schedule of paid holidays. When a holiday falls on a Saturday, the previous Friday will be observed, and if the holiday falls on a Sunday, the following Monday will be observed. 
½ New Year's Eve Day 
New Year's Day 
½ Christmas Eve Day 
Christmas Day 
Washington's Birthday 
Independence Day 
Martin Luther King Day 
Thanksgiving Day 
Friday following [Thanksgiving Day] 
Labor Day 
Memorial Day 
Veteran's Day 
Columbus Day 
(b)  Where it is necessary to maintain regular services requiring an FLSA covered employee to work on an official holiday, the employee shall receive an extra days pay for the holiday, and for all hours worked exceeding the normal work week will be paid at the overtime rate. This section only applies to employees who are eligible for overtime pay as outlined in these rules and regulations. 
(c)  If an employee is on an authorized leave when a holiday occurs, that holiday shall not be charged against leave (authorized leave refers to vacation, illness, injury, compensatory time, etc.). 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-344. - Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA). 
The leave policies and procedures described in these rules and regulations provide benefits equal to, or greater than, the benefits of the FMLA. However, benefits of these rules and regulations shall not be construed to entitle the employees to a length of leave greater than to which an employee may be entitled under the FMLA. (see appendix A). 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-345. - Vacation leave. 
(a) Paid vacation shall accrue at the following schedule: 
Years of Service 	Days Per Year 
Less Than 4 Years 	10 days 
4 Through 10 Years 	15 days 
Over 10 Years 	20 days 
Over 20 Years 	25 days 
 
(b)  Vacation leave shall be cumulative; however, the following limitations shall be placed on the amount of vacation leave remaining to an employee's credit at the end of the calendar leave year (December 31), which can be carried over to the following year. 
Years of Service 	Days Per Year 
Less Than 4 Years 	10 days 
4 Through 10 Years 	15 days 
Over 10 Years 	20 days 
Over 20 Years 	25 days 
 
(c)  At the end of the calendar leave year (December 31), vacation leave credits in excess of the amount that can be carried over from shall be credited to the employee's sick leave account. Credits will be accumulated from January 1 to December 31. 
(d)  The city manager may waive the limitation of vacation leave carried over to the following year as stated above because of emergency or unusual circumstances arising where an employee was unable to take his/her earned vacation leave. In lieu of waving the limitation of vacation leave carry over because of a city emergency or unusual circumstance, which resulted in an employee not taking the required vacation time, the city manager, at his/her discretion, may authorize cash payment of vacation leave in excess of the limitation. 
(e)  Vacation leave for new employees will begin to accrue from the first month of employment. However, new employees will not be eligible to take accrued vacation leave until they have been in the employ of the city for three (3) consecutive months. 
(f)  Employees shall be permitted to take vacation leave as approved by the agency director or his/her duly authorized representative. If the employee is of department head rank, his/her vacation leave will be taken at such time as will least interfere with efficient operation of the department and only with the approval of the city manager. Requests for vacation leave shall be made by the use of the leave request form signed by the employee and approved by the department head at least ten (10) days prior to the start of the vacation. Under exceptional circumstances may warrant vacation leave may be approved with less notice. 
(g)  Employees shall, under no circumstances, be allowed to use sick leave for vacation leave except as otherwise provided in these rules and regulations. 
(h)  An employee who becomes seriously ill while on vacation may request that sick leave be substituted for vacation leave while under the care of a physician. Such care must be certified by the physician in writing. 
(i)  Vacation leaves already approved may be canceled or postponed by the agency director or his/her designee or the city manager in cases of emergency wherein subject employee's services are deemed necessary for public interest. 
(j)  Accounting for leaves shall be reported on payroll time cards and initialed by the department head prior to being submitted to the finance department. 
(k)  Employees scheduling vacation of one (1) full week or more may request vacation pay in advance, provided they have the necessary accumulation of vacation leave to cover the period of the vacation, and provided they do so by the use of the leave request form submitted to the department head or his/her designee at least ten (10) days prior to the leave commencement date. 
(l)  An employee who has resigned or has been terminated, and who has been employed for at least one (1) month, shall be entitled to and shall be paid or given leave for all accrued vacation leave, providing that those employees who resign shall give two (2) weeks notice. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-346. - Sick leave. 
(a)  An employee shall accrue sick leave at the rate of one (1) day of "sick leave" per month. Sick leave shall be used on an hour for hour basis. 
(b)  Sick leave for new employees will begin to accrue from the first month of employment; however, new employees will not be eligible to take accrued sick leave until they have been in the employee of the city for three (3) consecutive months. There shall be no limit on the amount of accumulation, accept for payout purposes. 
(c)  Sick leave will be granted to employees only when they are unable to perform their duties because of sickness or injury. Visits to a physician or dentist are chargeable to sick leave. Proof of such must be supplied to the department or division director upon request. 
(d)  In every case of unscheduled absence resulting from sickness or injury, the employee's department head, or designee, shall be notified promptly. Upon return to work, the employee and his/her department head must fill out a leave request form with the necessary information and submit it to the human resources department with the related time card. Failure to comply with the above provisions may be considered grounds for denial of sick leave and the employee will not be paid for the absence. 
(e)  A statement from the attending physician must be presented if requested by the department head upon return to work in cases where the period of sick leave extends beyond three (3) days and may be requested for lesser periods of absence of the department head believes sick leave is being abused. Should it be discovered that an employee is taking sick leave under false pretenses, that time off shall be without pay and the employee will be subject to disciplinary action. 
(f)  In absences when the illness of an employee extends beyond his/her sick leave credits, he/she may elect to apply earned compensatory time, holiday time, and upon exhaustion of the foregoing, vacation leave credits towards sick leave to the extent available, with the approval of the department head. Days lost because of illness after both vacation and sick leave credits are exhausted shall be without pay. 
(g)  Upon retirement, resignation with two (2) weeks notice, and layoffs, accumulated sick leave will be paid on the basis of the following schedule, provided the accumulation is no more than twelve hundred (1,200) hours for employees hired before October 1, 1992, six hundred (600) hours for employees hired after October 1, 1992 and four hundred (400) hours for employees hired after July 1, 1996 and that employee has been here for at least one (1) year. All employees shall be paid for their accumulated sick leave prior to the effective day in accordance with the following schedule: 
Years of Service 	% of Sick Leave Paid 

at Break in Service 
Less than 5 years 	25% 
Over 5 years 	100% 
Accumulated sick leave percentage will be paid based on the closest year 
 
(h)  Any employee who does not use any sick leave within one (1) of the below described six-month period, shall, for each six-month period for which no sick leave is used, earn one (1) day of vacation with pay at the employee's then existing salary level. For the purposes of this section the first six-month period shall begin on October 1 and terminate on March 31, with the next six-month period to commence on April 1 and terminate on September 30, to repeat each year. 
(i)  At the option of the employee, following the accrual of fifty (50) days of sick leave, any additional earned sick leave may be added to the employee's vacation time to a maximum of forty (40) hours per fiscal year. If election is made to add these hours to vacation, they will be deducted from the sick leave accruals. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-347. - Family illness leave. 
(a)  Family illness leave consists of the use of an employee's accrued sick leave in the case of actual sickness or disability of an immediate family member. Immediate family shall be defined as the employee's spouse, father, mother, one (1) who has stood in the place of a parent (in loco parentis), child, and stepchild domiciled in the employee's household. Approval of the department head is required for family illness leave. 
(b)  Employees who have successfully completed an initial probationary period and who are otherwise eligible to earn and use sick and annual leave may be allowed to use up to a maximum of forty (40) hours of their accrued sick leave in any one (1) calendar year for an ill immediate family member. Use of such leave shall be in accordance with the provisions specified in these rules and regulations. Leave in excess of the forty (40) hours may be granted by the city manager is cases of extraordinary circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-348. - Parenting leave. 
(a)  Time off under this section is a period of approved leave pursuant to these rules and regulations, which may be requested by a parent for the purpose of pregnancy complications, postpartum recovery, assistance in that recovery related to temporary disability, illness of a new child, bonding with a new child by either or both parents, other related medical conditions, or other reasonable need associated with adjustment to the addition of a child to a parental family. The child may arrive as a result of childbirth, adoption, legal guardianship, or assumption by an employee of an "in loco parentis" relationship. Leave requested in relation to an "in loco parentis" relationship must receive the prior approval of the director of human resources. 
(b)  Parenting leave may consist of a combination of paid time off and unpaid leave of absence. Portions of the time off may be charged to accrued sick leave, family illness leave, accrued vacation leave, or leave without pay consistent with the leave provisions of these rules and regulations and the requirements of the FMLA. Normally, an employee requesting sick leave as part of the overall parenting leave will be permitted to use sick leave throughout any medically valid temporary disability of the employee, prior to the use of annual leave. Requests for the use of paid sick leave or family illness leave are subject to the same terms, conditions and restrictions as is the case for any other use of these benefits. Accumulated leave will be exhausted prior to granting of leave of absence without pay. 
(c)  The employee desiring parenting leave shall request specific amounts of leave time with as much advance notice as possible, e.g., early in pregnancy so that the department, division, or office director may have maximum opportunity to plan for any needed office or workload adjustments. 
(d)  The length of parenting leave will be determined on an individual basis and will include consideration by the employee and the city of the reason for the leave, the nature of the job, the personal objectives of the employee, and any Family Medical Leave Act entitlements. The city will work with employees requesting parenting leave to identify any possible work or job modifications. Considerations may include the dates that the leave will begin and end, any medical verification required concerning an employee's or family member's condition, and any medical judgments as to the ability of an employee to safely and effectively perform the required work prior to and upon return from leave. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-349. - Military leave. 
All military leave requests will be made based upon the procedure specified in the city's current military leave policy. (see appendix A), 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-350. - Civil leave. 
An employee shall be granted civil leave with pay when performing jury duty, when subpoenaed to appear before any public body or commission on a job-related matter when performing emergency civilian duty in connection with national defense. An employee regularly scheduled to work the evening or midnight shift may receive civil leave, as described above, for their regularly scheduled shift when their court-ordered service occurs immediately before or after their scheduled shift. An employee subpoenaed in the line of duty to represent the city shall either be paid per diem or travel expenses by the city or may retain witness fees and mileage received from the court. Employees will be granted up to one (1) hour off for voting on election days when it is not feasible to vote before or after working hours. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-351. - Bereavement leave. 
(a)  Bereavement leave of up to five (5) regularly scheduled work days for in state funerals and six (6) regularly scheduled work days for out of state funerals of paid leave will be granted for absence from duty of a full-time employee or part-time employee that accrues leave time in the event of death in his-her immediate family and up to two (2) additional regularly scheduled work days of paid leave to attend a funeral outside of Florida. Any absence in excess of these amounts shall be charged to vacation leave, if accrued, or to leave without pay if the employee has no vacation leave accumulated. The employee's immediate family shall be defined as the employee's spouse, father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, step-parent, step-child, step-sister, step-brother, grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, persons determined in loco parentis (in the place of the parent) by the director of human resources, or any relative who is domiciled in the employee's household. Bereavement leave shall not be charged to annual or sick leave or to compensatory time. 
(b)  The employee shall provide upon request of the department, division, or office director sufficient proof of a death in his-her family as defined above before compensation is approved and paid. 
(c)  The granting of bereavement leave for relatives not listed above shall require the specific approval of the director of human resources. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-352. - Employment examinations. 
Employees may be allowed to participate in city employment examinations during working hours, subject to supervisory approval, without loss of pay. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-353. - Leave of absence without pay. 
(a)  A department, division or office director, in consideration of operational needs, may grant a employee a leave of absence without pay for a period not to exceed ninety (90) calendar days. Leaves of absence without pay exceeding ninety (90) calendar days may be granted with the approval of the city manager, however, in no case shall the total period of a leave of absence without pay exceed one (1) year. Subject to operational needs, every effort will be made to accommodate leave of absence requests greater than ninety (90) calendar days for the purpose of parenting leave. 
(b)  All departments, divisions and offices are required to adhere to the following practices regarding leaves of absence without pay 
(c)  Leave without pay shall be granted only when the employee has exhausted all applicable paid leave beginning first with the exhaustion of any accrued compensatory time. 
(d)  Failure of an employee to return to work at the expiration of approved leave shall be considered as unapproved absence without leave and grounds for dismissal. 
(e)  An employee granted leave of absence without pay who wishes to return before the leave period has expired, may be required to give his/her department division/office director at least two (2) weeks notice. Upon receipt of such written notice, the employee may be permitted to return to work provided, however, that the employee remains eligible for the particular job classification. 
(f)  No sick leave or vacation leave shall be earned for the time that an employee is on leave without pay. Employees on leave of absence without pay will not receive holiday pay or credit toward a bonus sick leave day. Credit towards anniversary date driven compensation increases shall not be earned for time spent on leave without pay in excess of forty (40) consecutive hours or any forty (40) hours, which accumulate in a pay period, unless the leave is due to a work related injury. Leave of absence without pay beyond these limits will cause the employee's anniversary date to be adjusted accordingly. 
(g)  A benefits eligible employee on approved leave without pay will continue to receive any applicable city provided insurance benefit funding for the first seven (7) full pay periods of the approved leave of absence. Employees are responsible to pay any applicable excess premiums above the city's insurance benefit contributions based on the employee's selected plan. Failure to pay for any excess premium applicable for the employee's coverage and/or the premium for dependent coverage may result in termination of insurance coverage during the leave. 
(h)  After the first seven (7) full pay periods that a benefits eligible employee is on approved leave without pay, the city will discontinue the city provided insurance benefit contributions for the employee. If the employee wishes to continue his/her benefits during the leave, he/she will be required to pay the total premiums for the employee's selected coverage and any applicable premiums for dependent coverage. 
(i)  An employee who is on leave of absence as a result of a work-related illness or injury will continue to receive city provided insurance benefit contributions during the period of leave. However, the employee is responsible for any premiums which exceed the city's contributions for the employee's selected coverage and/or the premium for dependent coverage. 
(j)  An employee while on authorized leave of absence without pay, who obtains employment elsewhere automatically forfeits his/her position with the city, unless the leave of absence is for the purpose of allowing the employee to be a candidate for public office in which case said employee may engage in outside employment which does not conflict in any manner with said employee's city employment, as determined by the city manager. 
(k)  An employee returning from leave of absence without pay shall be entitled to employment in the same department, division or office in the same or comparable class in which the employee worked when leave began so long as the employee remains qualified. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Sec. 16-354. - Absence without approved leave. 
An absence from duty, including any absence for a single day or part of a day, that is not authorized by a specific grant of leave of absence under the provisions of these rules and regulations shall be deemed to be an absence without approved leave. Any such absence may be without pay and may subject the employee to disciplinary action. 
(Ord. No. 05-04, § 3, 11-17-04)  
Chapter 17 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Assessment of court cost for law enforcement education fund, § 2-223; police and fire impact fees, § 2-227; alarm systems, Ch. 3; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 4; miscellaneous offenses, Ch. 13; pensions, Ch. 15; police officers' retirement plan and trust fund, § 15-166 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 17-1—17-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESERVE POLICE 
 
Sec. 17-26. - Generally. 
(a)  Established. There is hereby established the Miramar Reserve Police. 
(b)  Primary function. The primary function of the reserve police is to assist the police department in their duties as a law enforcement agency, particularly during emergencies and times of disaster. 
(c)  Duties generally. The duties of the reserve police shall be such duties as are designated by the chief of police or his or her designated representative. 
(d)  Performance of duties. In performing these designated duties a reserve police officer will be governed by the following: 
(1)  Members of the reserve police in the performance of their duties, shall be subject to the direction and supervision of their superior officers, and officers of the regular police force. 
(2)  Members shall properly perform such duties as are assigned to them by their superior officers. 
(3)  When reporting for regular patrol duty, members shall be assigned to duties by the immediate shift supervisor, at his or her discretion. 
(4)  Members shall not engage in any special duty, plain clothes duty, or group duty, unless the same has been authorized by a rated officer of the police department, and whenever possible, by both the commanding officer of the reserve police and the chief of police. 
(5)  Only those members who hold the rating of patrolperson first class or higher will be eligible for assignment to patrol units without a regular police officer. 
(6)  The rules and regulations for the reserve police shall govern all reserve police officers. 
(e)  Applicability of police department rules and regulations. Members of the reserve police shall be governed by such rules and regulations of the police department as in the opinion of the chief of police are applicable to them. 
(Code 1964, § 17-23)  
Sec. 17-27. - Appointment as police officers. 
(a)  A reserve police officer who has been a member of the police reserve in good standing for at least eighteen (18) months shall be eligible for appointment as a police officer provided he or she meets the following criteria: 
(1)  Be at least nineteen (19) years of age. 
(2)  Obtain a passing grade on an entrance examination for the position of police officer in the city, as prescribed by the civil service board. 
(b)  A reserve police officer who meets the requirements of subsection (a) may be appointed to a vacant civil service position for police officer despite the existence of an eligible register established pursuant to sections 16-177 through 16-187. 
(Code 1964, § 17-25)  
Sec. 17-28. - Police reserve cadet corps; created; compensation; rules and regulations. 
(a)  The police reserve cadet corps of the city is hereby created. 
(b)  The compensation for each member of the police reserve cadet corps shall be one dollar ($1.00) per year. 
(c)  The chief of police has authority, subject to approval by the mayor and city administrator, to draft the rules and regulations that will govern the police reserve cadet corps. 
(Code 1964, § 17-12)  
Secs. 17-29—17-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PROCEDURE FOR COMPLAINTS AGAINST OFFICERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Police officer bill of rights, F.S. § 112.531 et seq. 
 
Sec. 17-46. - Filing of complaints authorized. 
A complaint may be made against a law enforcement officer by filing in the office of the chief of police a form to be prescribed by the chief. The complaint form shall contain the name and address of the person making the complaint, the names and addresses of all witnesses known by the complainant and a short statement of the alleged actions which are the subject of the complaint. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the chief of police from initiating a complaint. 
(Code 1964, § 17-31)  
Sec. 17-47. - Investigation of complaints. 
All complaints received shall be investigated by the chief of police or his or her designated agent or agents. Any such investigation shall be made in conformance with F.S. ch. 112. 
(Code 1964, § 17-32)  
Sec. 17-48. - Disciplinary action. 
Upon completion of the investigation, the chief of police shall review all of the evidence and may take whatever disciplinary action he or she deems appropriate. Any such disciplinary action shall be taken in conformance with the collective bargaining agreement in effect at the time. 
(Code 1964, § 17-33)  
ARTICLE IV. - MISCELLANEOUS REGULATORY POLICE FEES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 91-11, adopted Dec. 17, 1990, amended the Code by adding Art. III, §§ 17-49—17-51. In order to avoid duplication of Article numbers, the editor has included the provisions as Art. IV, §;s 17-49—17-51. 
Cross reference— Police and fire impact fees, § 2-227. 
 
Sec. 17-49. - Established. 
The following regulatory police fees to be charged to users of police services set forth herein are hereby adopted and instituted. These fees are payable by the user(s) of the specified materials and services on or before the time the materials or services are provided. The fees are adopted to recoup some of the city's regulatory costs as identified in the section dealing with police in the "Fees for Services: A Cost/Revenue Study," prepared by David M. Griffith & Associates, Ltd., dated October, 1990, for the city. This report is available as a public record from the city clerk's office and its findings are deemed as being incorporated by reference herein as though set forth in full. 
(Ord. No. 91-11, § 1, 12-17-90)  
Sec. 17-50. - Payment of fees. 
Payment will be made promptly by cash, check, or U.S. Postal money order to the cashier at the police department when such services are provided or in such other manner as may be prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 91-11, § 1, 12-17-90)  
Sec. 17-51. - Schedule of fees. 
The city hereby adopts and institutes the following regulatory use fees for the specified services and materials furnished by the police department as are set forth below: 
(1)  Fingerprints, per perso ..... $4.00 
(2)  Accident (scene) photographs: 
Black & White 	Color 
3 × 5 	$3.50 	3 × 5 	$5.00 
5 × 7 	$6.00 	5 × 7 	$7.00 
8 × 10 	$7.00 	8 × 10 	$8.50 
 
(3)  Background checks ..... 5.00 
(4)  Copies of police reports: 
1—10 pages ..... 3.00 
Over 10 pages ..... 5.00 
Except that up to five (5) copies will be provided to crime victims who are Miramar residents at no charge. 
(5)  Retrieval, disposition, storage, custody and control of evidence in cases involving flammable, hazardous, or otherwise environmentally dangerous or contaminated materials. Overtime hourly rate established by current FOP and PBA collective bargaining agreements (plus a five (5) percent regulatory service fee payable to the city). 
(Ord. No. 91-11, § 1, 12-17-90; Ord. No. 91-19, § 1, 2-19-91)  
Chapter 18 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Local improvements special assessments procedure, § 2-266 et seq.; animals, Ch. 6; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; open burning restrictions, § 9-2; health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 10; sanitary nuisances, § 10-26 et seq.; junked, wrecked, abandoned property, § 10-46 et seq.; rodent control, § 10-66 et seq.; weeds and debris, § 10-91 et seq.; property maintenance, § 10-118 et seq.; utilities, Ch. 21; rates, charges, billing and collection procedures for utilities, § 21-221 et seq.; buildings and building structure regulations, Ch. 22; planning and development, Ch. 22.5; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23; subdivisions, Ch. 24; vegetation, Ch. 25; zoning, Ch. 26. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial establishments shall mean any hotel, motel, apartment house, rooming house or tourist court which contains three (3) or more service units, and any other building, business or establishment of any nature or kind whatsoever other than a residential unit. 
Garbage shall mean every refuse accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter that attends the preparation, use, cooking and dealing in, or storage of edibles, and any other matter, of any nature whatsoever, which is subject to decay, putrification and the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors, or which, during or after decay, may serve as breeding or feeding material for flies or other germ-carrying insects. 
Garbage can shall mean a galvanized metal or durable plastic container of the type commonly sold as a garbage can, of a capacity not less than twenty (20) gallons and not to exceed thirty (30) gallons, having two (2) handles upon the sides thereof, or a bail by which it may be lifted, and a tight-fitting metal or plastic top with handle, and so constructed as to permit the free discharge of its contents. 
Garbage receptacle or container shall mean a garbage can or plastic bag. 
Garden trash shall mean all accumulation of leaves, grass or shrubbery cuttings, and other refuse attending the care of lawns, shrubbery, vines and trees. 
Industrial wastes shall mean the waste products of canneries, slaughterhouses or packing plants, condemned food products, agricultural waste products, wastes and debris from brick, concrete block, roofing shingle or tile plants, debris and wastes accumulated from land clearing, excavating, building, rebuilding and altering of buildings, structures, roads, streets, sidewalks or parkways, and any waste materials which, because of their volume or nature, do not lend themselves to collection and incineration co-mingled with ordinary garbage and trash, or which, because of their nature or surrounding circumstances, should be, for reasons of safety or health, disposed of more often than the city collection service schedule provided for in this chapter. 
Noncombustible refuse shall mean refuse materials that are unburnable at ordinary incinerator temperature (eight hundred (800) degrees to one thousand eight hundred (1,800) degrees Fahrenheit) such as metals, mineral matter, large quantities of glass or crockery, metal furniture, auto bodies or parts, and other similar material or refuse not usual to housekeeping or to the operation of stores or offices. 
Plastic bag shall mean a two (2) mil thick bag or liner of plastic material not exceeding fifty (50) pounds gross weight. 
Residential unit shall mean any structure or shelter or any part thereof used, or constructed for use, as a residence for one (1) family. 
Rubbish shall mean refuse accumulation of paper, excelsior, rags or wooden or paper boxes or containers, sweepings and all other accumulations of a nature other than garbage, which are usual to housekeeping and to the operation of stores, offices and other business places, and also any bottles, cans or other containers which, due to their ability to retain water may serve as breeding places for mosquitoes or other water-breeding insects; rubbish shall not include noncombustible refuse. 
Waste shall mean and include garbage, rubbish, garden trash, noncombustible refuse and industrial wastes. 
(Code 1964, § 11-1)  
Sec. 18-2. - Prima facie evidence of accumulation of waste. 
The fact that any residential unit or any commercial establishment located in the city is occupied shall be prima facie evidence that garbage or other refuse is being produced or accumulated upon such premises. 
(Code 1964, § 11-3)  
Sec. 18-3. - Plans for waste storage on certain premises to be approved before issuance of building permit. 
Before building permits may be issued for construction of shopping centers, multiple-family dwellings of three (3) or more dwelling units, and supermarkets, plans for storage of refuse must be approved by the building department as to location, accessibility and adequacy. 
(Code 1964, § 11-4)  
Sec. 18-4. - Duty to dispose of trash and prevent accumulation. 
It shall be the duty of each person to prevent the continued, excessive and unsightly accumulation of garbage, garden trash and other types of trash, waste, rubbish or refuse upon the property occupied by such person. Any failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1964, § 11-5)  
Sec. 18-5. - Method of transporting waste. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to haul, convey, or cause to be hauled or conveyed, any waste including discarded building material or discarded furniture upon or along public streets, roads or alleys except when the material transported is adequately secured in such manner as to prevent the material from falling or being blown from transporting vehicles. 
(Code 1964, § 11-7)  
Sec. 18-6. - City collection and disposal of waste. 
The city manager, upon approval of the city commission, shall have the power to establish the type, frequency and amount of waste collections and disposal service needed and to be provided in the city and to promulgate rules and regulations not inconsistent herewith. 
(Code 1964, § 11-9; Ord. No. 91-22, § 13, 3-4-91)  
Sec. 18-7. - Solid waste franchise. 
(a)  The city has granted a solid waste franchise to Waste Pro of Florida, Inc. ("Waste Pro") and has entered into a solid waste and recycling collection services agreement with Waste Pro (the "agreement"). Waste Pro shall pay a franchise fee equal to a set percentage of gross revenues, as set forth in the agreement, derived from the residential and commercial solid waste and residential recycling collection and disposal services it performs within the city. 
(b)  Any person or entity who collects and disposes of, or causes the collection and disposal of, garbage, construction debris, rubbish and refuse accumulated in the city in contravention of the agreement and without having first received authorization from the city, if required, shall be deemed to have violated this subchapter and shall be subject to code enforcement activities that may result in fines, costs or other penalties being imposed, as provided in Chapter 2, Article XI of this Code. If there is a continuing violation, each day's violation shall be a separate offense. The provisions of this subchapter may also be enforced by injunction or other civil court action when appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 04-18, § 2, 7-7-04; Ord. No. 13-07, § 2, 4-3-13)  
Secs. 18-8—18-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RECEPTACLES 
 
Sec. 18-26. - Residential garbage. 
(a)  All residential garbage shall be placed in a garbage receptacle, which shall be a garbage can or plastic bag. 
(b)  All garbage cans shall be tightly covered with a lid at all times and all plastic bags shall be securely tied at the top. 
(c)  No garbage cans or any other containers or garden trash shall be placed outside for pickup prior to 4:00 p.m. the night before the day on which garbage pickup is scheduled. 
(Code 1964, § 11-2)  
Sec. 18-27. - Standards for refuse bins; unstable refuse bins prohibited. 
(a)  Title 16, chapter II, subchapter B, part 1301, Code of Federal Regulations, as amended, is hereby adopted as an ordinance of the city as if more fully rewritten herein. 
(b)  "Unstable refuse bins," as defined in title 16, chapter II, subchapter B, part 1301, Code of Federal Regulations, are hereby prohibited within the city limits. 
(Code 1964, § 11-2.1)  
Sec. 18-28. - Enclosure of dumpsters and trash bins. 
Refuse bins and dumpsters shall be screened from view by an enclosure in a design approved by the engineering department. Such enclosure shall be throughout as high or higher than the highest portion of the refuse bin or dumpster. 
(Code 1964, § 11-2.2)  
Sec. 18-29. - Placing dangerous materials in waste containers prohibited. 
It shall be a violation of this article to place or cause to be placed in any regulation garbage or refuse container for collection any acid, explosive material, inflammable liquids or any dangerous or highly corrosive material of any kind. 
(Code 1964, § 11-8)  
Sec. 18-30. - Provision of refuse container. 
(a)  All commercial establishments within the city are required to provide for garbage collection and disposal and shall arrange for garbage collection and disposal solely through the city or its designee. Each owner of a commercial business, or the tenant in a commercial building, within the city shall provide refuse dumpsters on-site of a size, and in an amount, adequate to meet the sanitation needs of the establishment located on the site. 
(b)  The city or its designee shall make the determination as to the number and size of the dumpsters that are needed to collect the refuse generated at commercial establishments. The size and number required may be adjusted if it is deemed necessary by the city or its designee. 
(c)  Each property owner or tenant shall advise the city in writing whether the property owner or tenant shall be responsible for paying the garbage collection fees. 
(d)  In those cases where the tenant shall be responsible for providing for the dumpster and there is more than one (1) tenant, several tenants may share a refuse dumpster, or dumpsters, and the cost of service. Such dumpsters shall be of an adequate size and number to meet the needs of those tenants. The property owner or tenants shall advise the city, in writing, as to who shall be sharing the dumpster and who shall be paying the garbage collection fee. 
(e)  No person or business shall place refuse in a dumpster without the consent of the person or business leasing or owning such dumpster. 
(Code 1964, § 11-10)  
Sec. 18-31. - Responsibility for removal of certain waste. 
Industrial waste and noncombustible waste shall be disposed of in the manner and at such location as is described by the city manager. Removal of industrial waste and noncombustible waste shall be the responsibility of the owner, occupant, operator or contractor, creating or causing the accumulation of such material. Upon approval of the city manager, collection and disposal of the waste may be undertaken by the city at the expense of the owner, occupant, operator or contractor, provided that such collection and disposal does not interfere with other waste collection operations. The city shall not be responsible for collecting or hauling discarded building material, dirt, rock or discarded furniture from private property, nor shall it be responsible for collecting or hauling trees, bushes, or other vegetation cut on private property before a certificate of occupancy is issued. 
(Code 1964, § 11-11; Ord. No. 91-22, § 14, 3-4-91)  
Sec. 18-32. - Disposal of waste on commercial property. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any property containing a commercial establishment to fail to provide adequate receptacles for the removal of all waste from such property. Receptacles shall be of sufficient size and number to prevent the accumulation of trash outside the receptacles. The owner shall also make sufficient provisions for the collection of sanitation in order to prevent the accumulation of waste on such property. 
(Code 1964, § 11-19)  
Secs. 18-33—18-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FEES AND CHARGES 
 
Sec. 18-51. - Fee for bulk collection of trash and waste, not including garbage. 
The service charge to all residential customers for bulk collection of trash and waste, not including garbage, shall be twenty-five cents ($0.25) per month. 
(Code 1964, § 11-12.1)  
Sec. 18-52. - Fees and rules for use of transfer station. 
(a)  Each person depositing material at the transfer station shall pay the following fees: 
(1)  Car ..... $ 1.00 
(2)  Station wagon ..... 2.50 
(3)  Utility trailer ..... 3.00 to 4.50 
(4)  Van ..... 4.50 to 7.50 
(5)  Large trailer ..... 4.50 to 7.50 
(6)  Pickup ..... 4.50 to 7.50 
(7)  Boat ..... 4.50 to 7.50 
(8)  Pickup w/s ..... 7.50 
(9)  Large truck ..... 20.00 
(10)  Alternate fees, bags ..... 0.60 
(11)  Thirty-gallon cans ..... 0.60 
(b)  The following rules are hereby established for use of the transfer station: 
(1)  All leaves must be placed in bags. 
(2)  Only residents of the city may use the transfer station. 
(3)  Commercial dumping shall not be permitted. 
(Code 1964, § 11-13)  
Sec. 18-53. - Special assessment liens against improved real property. 
Except as otherwise provided by this article, all owners of improved real property in the city are required to have accumulations of garbage, trash and waste removed and disposed of by the city, and for such governmental service of garbage, trash and waste collection and disposal, or the availability of such service, all such improved real property shall be liable for the payment of the waste fees. All waste fees becoming due and payable shall constitute, and are hereby imposed as liens against the real property aforesaid, and until fully paid and discharged, or barred by law, shall remain liens superior in rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, titles and claims in, to or against the real property involved. Such waste fees shall become delinquent if not fully paid within ninety (90) days after due date. All delinquent waste fees shall bear a penalty of twelve (12) percent per annum from the due date and shall also bear a lien fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) to cover the city's administrative and recording costs for the lien. Such liens for waste fees and penalties may be enforced by any of the methods provided in Florida Statutes. 
(Code 1964, § 11-14) 
State Law reference— Restriction on liens, F.S. § 180.135.  
Sec. 18-54. - Waste fee receipts. 
Receipts evidencing the payment of waste fees, in such form as may be approved by the city manager, shall be retained by the occupant of the premises covered thereby, and shall be exhibited upon demand of any employee of the city. Failure to exhibit such receipt upon demand shall constitute a violation of this article. Waste fee receipts issued for one (1) property, residential or commercial, may not be transferred to another. 
(Code 1964, § 11-15; Ord. No. 91-22, § 15, 3-4-91)  
Sec. 18-55. - Payment of fees; effect of failure to pay. 
It shall be the duty of the owner of each lot, tract or parcel of land in the city where waste collection and disposal service is provided by the city, having a residential unit or commercial establishment situated thereon, except as may otherwise be provided herein, to pay or cause to be paid the waste fee or fees due for each residential unit, or commercial establishment, as the case may be. Failure on the part of such owner to make such payment shall constitute a violation of this article. Waste collection may be discontinued from premises for which waste fee has not been paid and the owners or occupants thereof may be subject to the provisions of section 18-53. 
(Code 1964, § 11-12)  
Sec. 18-56. - Multiple occupancy of premises. 
A commercial establishment located in the same building with a residential unit or with another commercial establishment, even though under the same ownership, shall not be considered a part of such residential unit or other commercial establishment, but shall be treated as a separate commercial establishment upon which a separate waste fee shall be due. 
(Code 1964, § 11-16)  
Secs. 18-57—18-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - RECYCLING PROGRAM[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Former Art. IV, §§ 18-76—18-80, was repealed by § 2 of Ord. No. 92-08, § 3 of which enacted a new Art. IV in lieu thereof to read as herein set out. The repealed provisions pertained to the disposition of salvageable paper and derived from Code 1964, §§ 11-40—11-44. 
 
Sec. 18-76. - Collection of recyclable waste. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Recyclable waste shall consist of newspapers; clear, brown and green glass; aluminum beverage containers; tin cans; plastics 1,2,3 (two liter beverage containers, plastic milk jugs, PVC plastic shampoo and laundry detergent bottles) and cardboard boxes generated by single-family homes and multi-family buildings consisting of more than 50 units. 
Recycling containers shall mean containers provided by the city to individual residents or multi-family dwelling units for the purpose of collecting Recyclable Waste. 
(b)  Recyclable waste shall be segregated from other waste and placed in recycling containers. Recycling containers shall be placed at curbside or in designated areas on collection days as scheduled by the city. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person, firm or corporation not authorized by the city to collect or remove any recyclable material which has been specifically placed for collection in the recycling program in residential areas of the city. 
(d)  Penalties for unauthorized collection of recycling materials or the lack of compliance in the recycling program shall be to the extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 92-08, 11-06-91; Ord. No. 94-04, 10-20-1993).  
Secs. 18-77—18-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SOLID WASTE FLOW CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 87-13, §§ 2, 3, adopted March 23, 1987, has been included herein as Art. V at the request of the city. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 18-91. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the definitions contained in the interlocal agreement shall apply unless otherwise specifically stated in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular and words in the singular number include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
Contract communities. The term "contract communities" shall refer to the municipal corporation or corporations existing under the laws of the State of Florida located within the county that from time to time enter into the interlocal agreement. 
County. The term "county" shall refer to Broward County, Florida, a political subdivision of the State of Florida. 
District. The term "district" shall refer to the Broward Solid Waste Disposal District created by the county and approved by the governing bodies of the contract communities pursuant to the interlocal agreement. 
Hauler. The term "hauler" shall refer to those persons, firms or corporations or governmental agencies responsible (under either oral or written contract, or otherwise) for the collection of solid waste within the geographical boundaries of the contract communities and transportation to the resource recovery system. 
Interlocal agreement. The term "interlocal agreement" shall refer to that certain interlocal agreement, dated November 25, 1986, by and among the county and the contract communities, as amended or supplemented from time to time pursuant to the provisions of the interlocal agreement. 
Resource recovery system. The term "resource recovery system" shall refer to the resource recovery facilities which are constructed, operated and maintained or caused to be constructed, operated and maintained or caused to be constructed, operated and maintained pursuant to the interlocal agreement. 
Solid waste. The term "solid waste" shall have the meaning set forth in Chapter 403, Part IV, Florida Statutes, as amended from time to time, as limited or expanded by the terms "processable waste, unprocessable waste and unacceptable waste" set forth in the interlocal agreement. 
(Ord. No. 87-13, § 2, 3-23-87)  
Sec. 18-92. - Waste flow control. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this article to require all inhabitants and persons within the City of Miramar, Florida to use exclusively the resource recovery system identified in the interlocal agreement for the disposal of all solid waste generated within the City of Miramar for the purpose of ensuring that the resource recovery system receives an adequate quantity of solid waste from solid waste generated within its boundaries. 
(b)  The city hereby directs that all solid wastes generated within the city be delivered to the resource recovery system transfer or disposal facility or facilities designated in the plan of operation under the interlocal agreement and further hereby relinquishes any and all title and interest in solid wastes collected or generated within its geographical boundaries upon delivery of such solid waste to the resource recovery system transfer or disposal facility or facilities designated in said plan of operations. 
(c)  The city will conform the terms and conditions of any agreement that is may have with a hauler of solid waste to the terms and conditions of the interlocal agreement. 
(d)  Nothing herein is intended to either discourage or prohibit either voluntary or locally ordained solid waste segregation programs segregating scrap or new or used materials at the point of generation and held for purposes of recycling. 
(e)  Waste generated within the City of Miramar which is shown to be destined for transportation to any destination outside of the State of Florida, based upon a sworn affidavit of a hauler delivered to the city reciting facts which evidence the transportation and disposal of waste outside the State of Florida, is excluded from the flow control provisions set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 87-13, § 3, 3-23-87; Ord. No. 00-01, § 2, 10-6-99)  
Secs. 18-93—18-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - COMMERCIAL SOLID WASTE RECYCLING SERVICES 
 
Sec. 18-100. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
Certified recovered materials dealer means a dealer certified under F.S. § 403.7046 
Commercial establishments means a property or properties zoned or used for commercial or industrial uses, or used by an entity exempt from taxation under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, and excludes property or properties zoned for single-family residential or multi-family residential uses. 
Fiscal year means October 1 to September 30 of each calendar year. 
Person means any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual, firm or association, partnership, joint venture or other entity of any kind, type or description engaging in the conduct or activity with which this article is concerned. 
Recovered materials means metal, paper, glass, plastic, textile or rubber materials, that have known recycling potential, and that can be feasibly recycled and have been diverted and source-separated or have been removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use or reuse as raw materials, whether or not the materials require subsequent processing or separation from each other, but does not include materials destined for any use that constitutes disposal. Recovered materials as described above are not solid waste. 
Registrant means a certified recovered materials dealer who has registered with the city in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
Source-separated means the recovered materials that are separated from solid waste where the recovered materials and solid waste are generated. The term does not require that various types of recovered materials be separated from each other and recognizes that de minimis solid waste, in accordance with industry standards and practices, may be included with recovered materials. Materials are not considered source-separated when two or more types of recovered materials are deposited in combination with each other in a commercial collection container located where the materials are generated and such materials contain more than ten (10) percent solid waste by volume or weight. For purposes of this article the term "various types of recovered materials" means metals, paper, glass, plastic, textiles and rubber. 
(Ord. No. 02-15, § 2, 6-19-02)  
Sec. 18-101. - Registration and application. 
(a)  Registration and application. Any person who engages in the purchasing, transporting and processing of recovered materials at commercial establishments shall register with the city in accordance with the requirements of this article. The registrant shall submit an original and one (1) copy of all required information to the city's department of operational services, public works division. The registration required by this section shall be in addition to and not satisfied by any business tax receipt that may be required. Applications for registration required by this section shall be made to the city upon such form and in such manner as prescribed by the city. The application shall be in such form to elicit the following information and such other information as may be required from time to time: 
(1)  Registration fee. To be acceptable for filing, an application for registration shall be accompanied by a registration fee in the following amount, as appropriate: 
Initial registration application or re-application ..... $200.00 
Annual renewal of registration ..... 200.00 
Transfer of registration ..... 100.00 
(2)  Name and address of the registrant, including the identification of the owner or operator for the dealer; if the applicant is a business entity, its general partner or limited partners, its corporate officers and directors. Any applicant that operates under a fictitious name shall submit information that such fictitious name is registered with the State of Florida and held by the applicant 
(3)  Registrant's permanent place of business, and mailing address, if different; 
(4)  A copy of the registrant's recovered materials certification under F.S. § 403.7046. 
(5)  Certification that the recovered materials will be processed at a recovered materials processing facility satisfying the requirements of F.S. § 403.7046, as amended from time to time. 
(b)  Signatures and submission. 
(1)  The registration and application for hauling recovered materials shall be signed by the individual submitting the application or, in the case of a corporation, by a corporate officer thereof or, in the case of a partnership or other association, by a member of the partnership or association. Provided, however, that for a publicly held corporation which has twenty-five (25) or more shareholders, the signatures of the local managing officer shall be sufficient. The completed registration shall be submitted to the public works administrator of the operational services department. 
(2)  An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the application, acknowledging the enforceability of application commitments, and certifying that the application meets all federal, state, and local law requirements. 
(3)  A signed statement by the applicant as part of the process that it is understood that the mixing of recovered materials with garbage or trash contaminates the product and renders it garbage or trash. Thus, garbage and trash shall not be mixed with recovered materials and shall be source-separated. 
(c)  Once it has been determined by the public works administrator, or designee, that the registration application is complete, upon approval of the registration, registrants shall be entitled to operate for a period of up to one (1) year from the date of issuance; provided, however, the registration shall be for the period of October 1st through September 30th of each fiscal year. 
(d)  In addition to the above, the registrant shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Registrant must provide to the city a copy of the recovered materials reporting forms, as submitted to the State of Florida Department of Environmental Protection ("FDEP"). 
(2)  The reporting format, and reporting frequency shall be established by the city pursuant to F.S. § 403.7046, which shall, at a minimum, include requiring the dealer to identify the types and approximate amount of recovered materials collected, recycled or reused during the reporting period; the approximate percentage of recovered materials reused, stored or delivered to a recovered materials processing facility or disposed of in a solid waste disposal facility; and the locations where any recovered materials were disposed of as solid waste. Information reported under this section that, if disclosed, would reveal a trade secret, as defined in F.S. § 812.081(1)(c), is confidential and exempt from the provisions of Section 24(a), Article I of the State Constitution and F.S. § 119.07(1). The above notwithstanding, any and all required reports shall be in accordance with Chapter 62-722, Florida Administrative Code, as amended from time to time. Nevertheless, such reports shall occur no less than quarterly and include all information required to be reported to the State of Florida. 
(3)  Source-separate all recovered material. Containers of mixed types of recovered materials that contain more than ten (10) percent solid waste shall not be deemed to be source-separated. 
(4)  Vehicles used to transport recovered materials shall meet all applicable regulations of the Florida Department of Transportation ("FDOT") and shall be capable of preventing spillage or accidental release of recovered materials during transport. 
(5)  The registrant shall provide service to any commercial property between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(6)  The registrant shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations and ordinances. 
(7)  Registrant shall conduct all collection, handling and processing of recovered materials in accordance with the requirements of this section and the certification issued pursuant to Chapter 62-722, Florida Administrative Code, as amended from time to time. 
(8)  In no event shall the registrant perform commercial solid waste services under the guise of collecting, transporting, processing or disposing of recovered materials. 
(9)  Registrant shall not deliver recovered materials to a facility that is permitted as a solid waste management facility unless the registrant has given prior notification to the city's public works administrator or designee, and registrant has received authorization to utilize such facility. 
(10)  Registrant shall provide a copy of its certification and registration to any commercial generator of recovered materials, the registrant's agents and contractors, or to customers who request such proof of registration. 
(e)  If any of the registration information submitted by the registrant changes during the term of the registration, the registrant shall report those changes to the city within thirty (30) calendar days of the change. 
(f)  The registrant shall pay the city the required annual renewal of the registration fee between September 1 and September 30 of each fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 02-15, § 2, 6-19-02; Ord. No. 07-10, § 3, 2-21-07)  
Sec. 18-102. - Transferability. 
No registration issued pursuant to this article may be assigned or transferred without the prior written approval of the city. 
(Ord. No. 02-15, § 2, 6-19-02)  
Sec. 18-103. - Inspection of books and records. 
The city shall have the right at all times upon reasonable notice to inspect the relevant books and records of registrant. The inspection shall be for the purpose of verifying that the registrant is in compliance with the requirements of this article. The books and records of the registrant shall be maintained at a location within Broward County, Florida, or produced at such location upon request of the city. 
(Ord. No. 02-15, § 2, 6-19-02)  
Sec. 18-104. - Violation and penalty. 
(a)  Each violation of this article is deemed a separate and distinct infraction of this Code; however, for the first violation of operating without a registration the hauler or dealer shall be given a written warning and allowed ten (10) calendar days to apply for and receive the required registration. 
(b)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be punishable as provided herein: 
(1)  Fine. Each violation of this article shall be punishable by a minimum civil penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). A maximum civil penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation may be assessed plus the costs associated with investigation and prosecution together with any equitable remedies deemed reasonable and property the court. 
(2)  Revocation. The occasion of three (3) violations by a hauler of the terms and conditions of this article in any given calendar year shall be cause for revocation of the registration. A registration shall be revoked and shall be immediately and automatically declared null and void and, upon such declaration, the hauler issued the registration shall immediately cease all operations and shall be considered to have forfeited such registration and the rights acquired thereunder. Should a registration be so revoked, the city shall provide the hauler with notice of such revocation and the reasons therefore. Such notice shall be sent certified mail, return receipt requested. Upon receipt of such notice, the hauler may appeal such revocation to the city commission, and the appeal and hearing thereon shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedures: 
a.  Should a hauler seek appeal from the revocation of the registration, the applicant shall furnish notice of such request for appeal to the city clerk no later than twenty (20) calendar days after the date of receipt of the certified letter advising applicant of revocation of the registration. 
b.  Upon receipt of a request for appeal, the city clerk shall thereupon fix the date and time at which the city commission shall hear the appeal, such hearing to be held not less than ten (10), nor more than sixty (60) calendar days subsequent to the date upon which such request for appeal was filed with the city clerk. Upon setting the matter for hearing, the city clerk shall notify the applicant of the date and time of such hearing. at the conclusion of the hearing, the city commission shall either sustain the decision of the city manager or direct the city manager to issue a registration. 
(3)  Other enforcement. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from enforcing this article by other means. 
(Ord. No. 02-15, § 2, 6-19-02)  
Sec. 18-105. - Exemptions. 
The registration requirements required of this article shall not be required by persons exempt under Chapter 62-722, Florida Administrative Code, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 02-15, § 2, 6-19-02)  
Secs. 18-106—18-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - DEBRIS REMOVAL FROM PRIVATE STREETS, ROADS, ROADWAYS, AND PRIVATE PROPERTY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 10; special hurricane provisions, § 22-86; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23. 
 
Sec. 18-126. - Intent and purpose. 
After declaration of a disaster in accordance with Code section 22-86, the primary mission of the city will be to protect lives and property, restore governmental services and clear public streets. Depending on the magnitude of the disaster and after accomplishment of the primary mission, resources may be available to the city that may not be available to a private property owner. The intent and purpose of this part is to establish a process by which the city may evaluate and, if necessary, remove debris from along privately owned streets, roads, roadways, and other private property in the event of an immediate threat to life, public health and safety after a significant disaster. While the city recognizes that, as a general proposition, the removal of debris from private property is the responsibility of the property owner, there are occasions when, because of the magnitude of the disaster and the threat posed to life, health, and safety, there may be a compelling need to remove debris from private streets, roads, and roadways and other private property as described herein. 
(Ord. No. 13-13, § 2, 7-3-13)  
Sec. 18-127. - Definitions. 
As used herein, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly otherwise requires: 
Access properties means access to the properties depicted on the map entitled "Maintained Roads Map", as it may be amended from time to time, maintained by and in the custody of the city public works department. Access shall be provided if: (1) the city is undertaking to clear and push debris in accordance with section 18-131, and (2) it is reasonably possible with respect to the equipment used to provide access under the circumstances. The Maintained Roads Map represents the best efforts of the city to set forth a complete listing; however, due to the nature of the roadway system and the historical problems relating to documentation and memorialization of roadways and rights-of-way, the listing may not be all inclusive. 
Debris shall include, but is not limited to, displaced, broken, or discarded building and construction materials, garbage, vegetative matter and spoiled or ruined household goods or materials. 
Private property means all property that is not owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
Private streets, roads and roadway shall include the rights-of-way as well as the improved surface that provides access to residential and commercial areas as identified as "private roadways" in the Maintained Roads Map. 
(Ord. No. 13-13, § 2, 7-3-13)  
Sec. 18-128. - Private roadways. 
The city shall remove debris from private roadways when such debris is determined to pose an immediate threat to the health, safety and welfare of the community. Pursuant to Code section 22-86, the city manager shall determine whether there is an immediate threat to the public health, safety, and welfare sufficient to warrant removal of debris in accordance with any one of the following standards: 
(1)  There is a significant likelihood that rescue vehicles will be significantly hindered from rendering emergency services to residential and commercial property should the debris be allowed to remain in place absent city removal. 
(2)  The type of debris is such that it may reasonably cause disease, illness, or sickness which could injure or adversely affect the health, safety, or general welfare of those residing and working in the area if it is allowed to remain. 
(3)  The clearing is necessary to effectuate orderly and expeditious restoration of city-wide utility services including, but not limited to, power, water, sewer, and telephone. 
(4)  The debris is determined by the city building official to be dangerous or hazardous. 
(5)  The debris prevents garbage collection thereby creating a public health hazard. 
(6)  The debris contains contaminants which have a reasonable likelihood of leeching into the soil and/or aquifer of the city. 
(7)  The debris has a substantial negative impact in preventing or adversely affecting emergency repairs to buildings and/or property. 
(8)  The debris presents a reasonable danger of being transported by wind and/or water into the surrounding areas of the city and thereby increasing the cost of recovery and removal. 
(9)  The debris poses a significant likelihood of, if left over time, producing mold which would be injurious to public health. 
(10)  The presence of the debris significantly adversely impacts the county's recovery efforts. 
(11)  The debris significantly interferes with drainage or water runoff, so as to be a significant hazard in the event of significant rainfall. 
(12)  The sheer volume of the debris is such that it is impractical and unreasonable to remove in an orderly and efficient manner absent action by the city. 
(13)  The type, extent and nature of the debris is such that it would cause much greater damage if the debris was not removed immediately. 
(14)  Commercial or other specific areas will be cleared if, in the opinion of the city manager, the clearance will aid the city's recovery operations or aid the health, safety, or welfare of the residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 13-13, § 2, 7-3-13)  
Sec. 18-129. - Waiver. 
With regard to eligibility for federal funding, the Federal Emergency Management Administration ("FEMA") may waive the requirement for the city to establish the criteria listed in Code section 18-128 as a condition precedent to city action, depending on the severity of the situation. 
(Ord. No. 13-13, § 2, 7-3-13)  
Sec. 18-130. - Indemnification and hold harmless. 
Prior to removal of debris by the city as contemplated herein on private roadways and private property, or clearance by the county of private property as provided herein, the private property owner shall indemnify and hold harmless, to the maximum extent permitted by law, the federal, state, and local government and all employees, officers and agents of the federal, state, and local government connected with the rendering of such service. 
(Ord. No. 13-13, § 2, 7-3-13)  
Sec. 18-131. - Emergency roadway clearance. 
Nothing herein shall preclude a first response by the city to clear and push debris from all roadways (both public and private) including access properties necessary for the movement of emergency vehicles including police, fire and ambulance within the first seventy (70) hours after a disaster declaration. 
(Ord. No. 13-13, § 2, 7-3-13)  
Sec. 18-132. - Private property. 
Nothing herein shall require the city to remove debris from private property other than the private roadways identified above except where the severity of the situation is of such magnitude or the debris is so widespread that it is determined by the city manager to be a significant immediate threat to the health, safety and welfare of the city and in the overriding public interest of the city to remove debris from such areas. 
(Ord. No. 13-13, § 2, 7-3-13)  
Chapter 18.5 - SOUTH FLORIDA SPORTS AND ENTERTAIMENT SPECIAL DISTRICT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The establishment of the South Florida Sports and Entertainment Special District within Dade County and Broward County pursuant to CS/CSHB 1994 Florida Legislature known as Chapter 94-338, Laws of Florida, was conditioned upon the adoption of an Ordinance by Dade County, City of Miramar, and Broward County approving the establishment of such District. 
 
Sec. 18.5-1. - South Florida Sports and Entertaiment Special District. 
The city commission of the City of Miramar, Florida, approves the establishment of the South Florida Sports and Entertainment Special District as described in Section 31 of CS/CS/HB 1875 1994 Florida Legislature, Chapter 94-338, Laws of Florida, pursuant to all the provisions set forth in CS/CS/HB 1875 1994 Florida Legislature known as Chapter 94-338, Laws of Florida.  
Sec. 18.5-2 - Filing with the office of special districct information. 
A certified copy of Ordinance 94-41 shall be filed with the office of special district information within fourteen (14) days after adoption. 
(Ord. No. 94-41, 8-18-94)  
Chapter 19 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; business taxes, permits and business regulations, Ch. 11; business tax, § 11-26 et seq. 
State Law reference— Taxation, F.S.§ 166.101 et seq.; ad valorem tax procedure, F.S. ch. 192 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 19-1—19-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - INSURANCE COMPANIES 
 
Sec. 19-26. - Casualty insurance businesses. 
(a)  In addition to any other lawful license or excise tax levied by the city, an excise or license tax be, and the same is hereby assessed and imposed on every insurance company, corporation, or other insurer engaged in or carrying on the business of casualty insuring as shown by the records of the state insurance commission, in the amount as provided in F.S.§ 185.08 of the gross amount of receipts of premiums from the policyholders on all premiums collected on casualty insurance policies covering property within the city. 
(b)  In the case of multiple peril policies with a single premium for both property and casualty coverages in such policies, such premiums shall be used as the basis for the above tax. 
(c)  The excise license tax shall be payable annually March first of each year. 
(d)  The excise tax herein provided for shall be payable and collected in the manner provided for by F.S. § 185.08. 
(e)  All money received by the city under the provisions of this section shall be paid immediately into the retirement plan and trust fund for police officers provided in section 15-166 et seq. 
(Code 1964, § 19-33) 
Cross reference— Police officers' retirement plan and trust fund, § 15-166 et seq.  
Sec. 19-27. - Property insurance businesses. 
(a)  Tax levied. There is hereby assessed, imposed and levied on every insurance company, corporation or other insurer now engaged in or carrying on the business of property insurance, as shown by the records of the department of insurance, an excise or license tax in addition to any lawful license or excise tax levied by the city pursuant to F.S. § 175.101 on receipts of premiums from policyholders on all premiums collected on property insurance policies covering property within the city. The tax shall be in accordance with F.S. § 175.101. 
(b)  Report. The city clerk is directed to file a certified copy of this section with the department of banking and finance and the department of insurance. Thereafter, every insurance company, association, corporation or other insurer carrying on the business of property insurance on real or personal property, on or before March 1, shall report fully in writing and under oath to the department of banking and finance and the department of insurance a just and true account of all premiums by such insurer received for property insurance policies covering or insuring any real or personal property located within the city during the twelve-month period of time preceding March 1. Such report shall include all information as required by F.S. § 175.111. 
(Code 1964, § 13-41) 
Cross reference— Firefighters' pension plan and trust fund, § 15-76 et seq.  
Secs. 19-28—19-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TAX ON PURCHASE OR USE OF SPECIFIED PUBLIC SERVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 90-18, § 1, adopted Jan. 15, 1990, amended Art. III, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. III pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 19-41. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Bottled gas means all types and kinds of natural, liquefied petroleum and manufactured gas for lighting, heating, cooking, power or any other purpose delivered to any purchaser thereof within the city. 
Electricity means All electric current or energy for lighting, heating, cooking, power or any other purpose delivered to any purchaser thereof within the city. 
Fuel oil means all bunker C oil, No. 1 and No. 2 fuel oil and kerosene or any combination thereof for lighting, heating, cooking, power or any other purpose delivered to any purchaser thereof within the corporate limits of the city. 
Local telephone service means: 
(1)  The access to a local telephone system, and the privilege of telephonic-quality communication with substantially all persons having telephone or radio telephone stations constituting a part of such local telephone system; or 
(2)  Any facility or service provided in connection with a service described in subparagraph (a) hereof. 
The term "local telephone service" does not include any service which is a toll telephone service, private communication service, cellular mobile telephone or telecommunication service, specialized mobile radio, or pagers and paging service, including but not limited to "beepers" and any other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communication or teletypewriter or computer exchange service. 
Metered gas means all types and kinds of natural and manufactured gas for lighting, heating, cooking, power or any other purpose delivered to any purchaser thereof within the city. 
Private communication service means: 
(1)  A communication service furnished to a subscriber or user that entitles the subscriber or user to exclusive or priority use of a communication channel or groups of channels, or to the use of an intercommunication system for the subscriber's stations, regardless of whether such channel, groups of channels, or intercommunication system may be connected through switching with a service described in paragraph (4), subparagraph (13), or subparagraph (14) thereof: 
(2)  Switching capacity, extension lines, and stations or other associated services which are provided in connection with, and which are necessary or unique to the use of channels or systems described in subparagraph (a) hereof; or 
(3)  The channel mileage which connects a telephone station located outside a local telephone system area with a central office in such local telephone system. 
Purchase as to all public services except telecommunications services means every act or transaction whereby possession of, utilization of, control over or title to electricity, water, metered gas, bottled gas, or fuel oil, and the duty and obligation to pay therefor, become vested in the purchaser within the city. 
Purchase within the municipality as to telecommunications services means (a) all local recurring service charges for services originating within the city; and (b) all charges for Florida intrastate telecommunications services which charges are paid within the city upon receipt of service within the city or are billed to a telephone number within the city or a telecommunications or other billing number or device within the city, or (c) if the location of the telecommunications services provided cannot be determined, the total amount billed for such telecommunications services to a telephone or telephone number, a telecommunications number or device, or a customer's billing address located within the municipality. 
Purchaser means every person legally liable for the payment for electricity, metered gas, bottled gas or fuel oil delivered to him, or telecommunications service or water service rendered to him, by a seller. 
Seller means every person delivering electricity, metered gas, bottled gas or fuel oil, or rendering telecommunications service or water service to any purchaser thereof. 
Telecommunications service means: 
(1)  Local telephone service, toll telephone service, telegram or telegraph service, teletypewriter or computer exchange service, or private communication service; or 
(2)  Cellular mobile telephone or telecommunication service, specialized mobile radio, and pagers and paging service, including but not limited to "beepers" and any other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communication, but does not include services or equipment incidental to telecommunications services enumerated in this paragraph such as maintenance of customer premises equipment, whether owned by the customer or not, or equipment sales or rental for which charge are separately stated, itemized, or described on the bill, invoice, or other tangible evidence of the provision of such service. 
Telegraph service means all types and kinds of service as are rendered by telegraph companies to any purchaser of such service within the city. 
Teletypewriter or computer exchange service means the access from a teletypewriter, telephone, computer, or other data station of which such station is a part, and the privilege of intercommunication by such station with substantially all persons having teletypewriter, telephone, computer, or other data stations constituting a part of the same teletypewriter or computer exchange system, to which the subscriber or user is entitled upon payment of a charge or charges, whether such charge or charges are determined as a flat periodic amount, on the basis of distance and elapsed transmission time, or some other method. The term "teletypewriter or computer exchange service" does not include local telephone service or toll telephone service. 
Toll telephone service means: 
(1)  A telephonic-quality communication for which there is a toll charge which varies in amount with the distance and elapsed transmission time of each individual communication; or 
(2)  A service which entitles the subscriber or user, upon the payment of a periodic charge which is determined as a flat amount or upon the basis of total elapsed transmission time, to the privilege of an unlimited number of telephonic communications to or from all or a substantial portion of the persons having telephone or radio telephone stations in a specified area which is outside that local telephone system area in which the station provided with this service is located. 
The term "toll telephone service" includes wide-area telephone service charges. 
Water service means the water supply furnished to all consumers of the city, for retail use and not for resale. 
(Ord. No. 90-18, § 1, 1-15-90)  
Sec. 19-42. - Levy; rate and amount of public service tax on telecommunications services; amount of tax. 
(a)  Telecommunications service. There is hereby levied and imposed by the city a public service tax upon every purchase within the municipality of telecommunications service which originates and terminates in this state, in the amount of seven (7) percent of the total amount charged for any telecommunications service, exclusive of governmental charges and taxes, shown on any bill rendered by the seller. 
(b)  Amount of tax; electricity, metered gas, bottled gas, fuel oil, and water service. There is hereby levied and imposed by the city upon every purchase of electricity, metered gas, bottled gas, fuel oil, and water service, included in or reflected by any bill rendered by the seller to the purchaser, a public service tax which shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  When the seller, in accordance with his rules and regulations, renders a bill to the purchaser to cover purchases made during the period of time to which the bill is applicable, the amount of public service tax shall be ten (10) percent, exclusive of governmental charges and taxes, shown on any such bill, due and payable on account of such purchases, of such total amount, provided, however, that fuel oil shall be taxed at a rate not to exceed four cents ($0.04) per gallon. 
In the use and application set out in this section, purchases of electricity, metered gas, bottled gas, fuel oil, and water service shall be considered and treated as constituting and being distinct and unrelated classes of purchases, and in the event that more than one (1) such class shall be shown upon the same bill, the amount of public service tax payable under this article shall be determined and computed for each such class separately. 
(2)  The tax herein imposed shall be in compliance with F.S. § 166.231, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 90-18, § 1, 1-15-90)  
Sec. 19-43. - Duty of seller as to collection of tax; duty of purchaser as to payment of same; remittance by seller. 
It shall be the duty of every seller of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), fuel oil, water service, local telephone, telegraph service, and cable television service to collect from the purchaser, for the use of the city, the tax hereby levied, at the time of collecting the selling price charged for each transaction, and to report and pay over, on or before the twentieth day of each fiscal month, unto the finance director of the city, all such taxes levied and collected during the preceding fiscal month. It shall be unlawful for any seller to collect the price of any purchase of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), fuel oil, water service, telecommunications service, and cable television service, without, at the same time, collecting the tax hereby levied in respect to such purchase or purchases, unless such seller shall elect to assume and pay such tax without collecting the same from the purchaser. Any seller failing to collect such tax at the time of collecting the price of any purchase, where the seller has not elected to assume and pay such tax, shall be liable to the city for the amount of such tax in like manner as if the same had been actually paid to the seller, and the city shall cause to be brought all suits and actions and to take all proceedings as may be necessary for the recovery of such tax; but the seller shall not be liable for the payment of such tax upon uncollected bills. The city shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorney's fees, court costs and interest in any such action. If any purchaser shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay to the seller, the seller's charge, and the tax hereby imposed and as hereby required, on account of the purchase for which such charge is made, or either, the seller shall have and is hereby vested with the right, power and authority to immediately discontinue further service to such purchaser until the tax and the seller's bill shall have been paid in full. 
Every seller is hereby required to execute and file not later than the twentieth day of each month at the office of the finance department a sworn statement, on a form prescribed by such department, setting forth the amount of such public service tax to which the city became entitled under the provisions of this article on account of bills paid by purchasers during the preceding fiscal month, and contemporaneously with the filing of such statement, shall pay the amount of such public service tax to the finance department to be deposited to the credit of the general fund of the city for utilization for such legal purposes as the city commission may from time to time determine. 
(Ord. No. 90-18, § 1, 1-15-90)  
Sec. 19-44. - Records to be kept by seller; inspection; transcripts. 
Each and every seller of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), fuel oil, water service, local telephone telegraph service, and cable television service, shall keep complete records showing all purchases in the city of such commodities or service. Such records shall show the price charged upon each purchase, the date thereof, and the date of payment thereof, and the records shall be kept open for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city during business hours on all business days. Duly authorized agents of the city shall have the right, power and authority to make such transcripts thereof during such times as they may desire. 
(Ord. No. 90-18, § 1, 1-15-90)  
Sec. 19-45. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  The United States of America, State of Florida, and political subdivisions and agencies thereof, are hereby exempted from payment of the taxes by this article. 
(2)  Purchases by any recognized church in this state for use exclusively for church purposes, an agency or instrumentality of the United States, the state, the county or the city. All exemptions pursuant to this paragraph (2) shall be specifically approved by the finance director on a tax exemption certificate which shall be initiated and completed by the purchaser and, upon approval by the finance director, shall be provided to the seller indicating authorization of the exemption. 
(3)  Purchases of local telephone services or other telecommunications services for use in the conduct of a telecommunications service for hire or otherwise for resale. All exemptions pursuant to this paragraph (3) shall be specifically approved by the finance director on a tax exemption certificate which shall be initiated and completed by the purchaser and upon approval by the finance director, shall be provided to the seller indicating authorization of the exemption. 
(4)  Any fuel adjustment charge, which charge shall be separately stated on each bill. The term "fuel adjustment charge" means all increases in the cost of utility services to the ultimate consumer resulting from an increase in the cost of fuel to the utility subsequent to October 1, 1973. 
(5)  Access charges. Any customer access line charges paid to a local telephone company, public telephone charges collected on site and charges for any foreign exchange service or any private line service except when such services are used or sold as a substitute for any telephone company switched service or dedicated facility by which a telephone company provides a communication path. 
(6)  No other exemptions, unless enacted by general law, shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 90-18, § 1, 1-15-90)  
Sec. 19-46. - Reports of deliveries for resale. 
Every manufacturer, distributor, wholesaler or seller who shall deliver electricity, metered gas, bottled gas, fuel oil, or water service to any seller or other person having a place of business in the city, or licenses to do business therein, to be sold or resold to ultimate purchasers, shall report to the director of finance semi-annually, as of June thirtieth and December thirty-first, the names and addresses of such sellers or other persons, and the quantities received by each of them during the preceding six (6) months, such reports to be filed not later than one (1) month after the close of each semi-annual period. 
(Ord. No. 90-18, § 1, 1-15-90)  
Sec. 19-47. - Computation of tax upon monthly basis. 
In all cases where the seller of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied petroleum gas or manufactured), fuel oil, water service, local telephone, telegraph service, and cable television service, collects the price thereof at monthly periods, the tax hereby levied may be computed on the aggregate amount of purchases during such period, provided that the amount of tax to be collected shall be the nearest whole cent to the amount computed. 
(Ord. No. 90-18, § 1, 1-15-90)  
Sec. 19-48. - Appropriation of revenues. 
All revenues received, collected and derived from the taxes levied by this article shall be deposited by the city treasurer and collector in a special account to be known as the utility tax fund and the city commission is hereby authorized and empowered to pledge any part or all of the revenues received, collected and derived from such utility tax for the payment of all or any part of any issue of revenue certificates or bonds that may be authorized and issued by the city and any part of the fund not so pledged may be expended for any municipal purpose. 
(Ord. No. 90-18, § 1, 1-15-90)  
Sec. 19-49. - Recognition of expense in regulation of rate. 
All reasonable, customary and routine expense incurred by a seller of public services other than telecommunications services, and all reasonable expenses in excess of the compensation to the seller of telecommunications services incurred by a seller of telecommunications service in making the collections and remittances and in fulfilling the duties prescribed by this article is hereby declared to be and to constitute an operating expense and may be accorded recognition as such in the establishment of rates and charges for rendering electricity, metered gas, bottled gas, fuel oil, telecommunications service or water service in the city. For the purpose of compensating the seller, the seller shall be allowed one (1) percent of the amount of the tax collected and due to the municipality in the form of a deduction from the amount collected for remittance. The deduction shall be allowed as compensation for the keeping of records and for the collection of, and the remitting of, the tax. 
(Ord. No. 90-18, § 1, 1-15-90)  
Sec. 19-50. - Failure to comply with chapter; remedies. 
Any purchaser failing or refusing and/or any seller failing or refusing to collect the taxes herein levied shall be subject to prosecution as provided by section 1-8 of the City Code, as amended, and/or subject to an appropriate civil action for collection of such taxes due, as well as interest, court costs and reasonable attorney's fees expended by the city and/or such other legal or equitable action at the election of the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-18, § 1, 1-15-90)  
Secs. 19-51—19-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - INTRODUCTION 
 
Sec. 19-61. - Definitions. 
As used in this Ordinance, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly otherwise requires: 
Annual Rate Resolution means the resolution described in Section 2.08 hereof, establishing the rate at which a Service Assessment for a specific Fiscal Year will be computed. The Final Assessment Resolution shall constitute the Annual Rate Resolution for the initial Fiscal Year in which a Service Assessment is imposed or reimposed. 
Assessed Property means all parcels of land included on the Assessment Roll that receive a special benefit from the delivery of the services, programs or facilities identified in the Initial Assessment Resolution or a subsequent Preliminary Rate Resolution. 
Assessment Roll means the special assessment roll relating to a Service Assessment approved by a Final Assessment Resolution pursuant to Section 2.06 hereof or an Annual Rate Resolution pursuant to Section 2.08 hereof. 
Building means any structure, whether temporary or permanent, built for support, shelter or enclosure of persons, chattel, or property of any kind, including mobile homes. This term shall include the use of land in which lot or spaces are offered for use, rent or lease for the placement of mobile homes, travel trailers, or the like for residential purposes. 
Certificate of Occupancy means the written certification issued by the City that a Building is ready for occupancy for its intended use. For purposes of this Ordinance, a set up or tie down permit or its equivalent issued for a mobile home shall be considered a Certificate of Occupancy. 
City Manager means the chief administrative officer of the City, designated by the City Commission to be responsible for coordinating Service Assessments, or such person's designee. 
County means Broward County, Florida. 
Final Assessment Resolution means the resolution described in Section 19-76 hereof which shall confirm, modify, or repeal the Initial Assessment Resolution and which shall be the final proceeding for the initial imposition of a Service Assessment. 
Service Assessment means a special assessment lawfully imposed by the City Commission against Assessed Property to fund all or any portion of the Service Assessed Cost for a service, facility, or program providing a special benefit to property as a consequence of possessing a logical relationship to the value, use, or characteristics of the Assessed Property. 
Service Assessed Cost means the amount determined by the City Commission to be assessed in any Fiscal Year to fund all or any portion of the cost of the provision of a defined service, facility, or program which provides a special benefit to Assessed Property, and shall include, but not be limited to, the following components: 
(a)  The cost of physical construction, reconstruction or completion of any required facility or improvement; 
(b)  The costs incurred in any required acquisition or purchase; 
(c)  The cost of all labor, materials, machinery, and equipment; 
(d)  The cost of fuel, parts, supplies, maintenance, repairs, and utilities; 
(e)  The cost of computer services, data processing, and communications; 
(f)  The cost of all lands and interest therein, leases, property rights, easements, and franchises of any nature whatsoever; 
(g)  The cost of any indemnity or surety bonds and premiums for insurance; 
(h)  The cost of salaries, volunteer pay, workers' compensation insurance, or other employment benefits; 
(i)  The cost of uniforms, training, travel, and per diem; 
(j)  The cost of construction plans and specifications, surveys and estimates of costs; 
(k)  The cost of engineering, financial, legal, and other professional services; 
(l)  The costs of compliance with any contracts or agreements entered into by the City relating to the provision of said services; 
(m)  All costs associated with the structure, implementation, collection, and enforcement of the Service Assessments, including any service charges of the Tax Collector or Property Appraiser and amounts necessary to off-set discounts received for early payment of Service Assessments pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act or for early payment of Service Assessments collected pursuant to Section 19-92 herein; 
(n)  all other costs and expenses necessary or incidental to the acquisition, provision, or construction of services, facilities, or programs, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incidental to any related financing authorized by the City Commission by subsequent resolution; 
(o)  a reasonable amount for contingency and anticipated delinquencies and uncollectible Service Assessments; and 
(p)  reimbursement to the City or any other Person for any moneys advanced for any costs incurred by the City or such Person in connection with any of the foregoing components of the Service Assessed Cost. In the event the City also imposes an impact fee upon new growth or development for related capital improvements, the Service Assessed Cost shall not include costs attributable to capital improvements necessitated by new growth or development that will be paid by such impact fees. 
Fiscal Year means that period commencing October 1st of each year and continuing through the next succeeding September 30th, or such other period as may be prescribed by law as the fiscal year for the City. 
Government Property means property owned by the United States of America or any agency thereof, a sovereign state or nation, the State of Florida or any agency thereof, a county, a special district or a municipal corporation. 
Initial Assessment Resolution means the resolution described in Section 2.02 hereof which shall be the initial proceeding for the identification of the Service Assessed Cost for which an assessment is to be made and for the imposition of a Service Assessment. 
Maximum Assessment Rate means the highest rate of a Service Assessment established by the City Commission in an Initial Assessment Resolution or Preliminary Rate Resolution and confirmed by the City Commission in the Final Assessment Resolution or Annual Rate Resolution. 
Ordinance means this Master Service Assessment Ordinance. 
Owner shall mean the Person reflected as the owner of Assessed Property on the Tax Roll. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, organization, corporation, association, or any other legal entity, whether singular or plural, masculine or feminine, as the context may require. 
Preliminary Rate Resolution means the resolution described in Section 2.08 hereof initiating the annual process for updating the Assessment Roll and directing the re-imposition of Service Assessments pursuant to an Annual Rate Resolution. 
Property Appraiser means the Broward County Property Appraiser. 
Tax Collector means the Department of Finance and Administrative Services as described in Article VI of the Broward County Charter. 
Tax Roll means the real property ad valorem tax assessment roll maintained by the Property Appraiser for the purpose of the levy and collection of ad valorem taxes. 
Uniform Assessment Collection Act means F.S. §§ 197.3632 and 197.3635, or any successor statutes authorizing the collection of non-ad valorem assessments on the same bill as ad valorem taxes, and any applicable regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 14-17, 7-2-14)  
Sec. 19-62. - Interpretation. 
Unless the context indicates otherwise, words importing the singular number include the plural number, and vice versa; the terms "hereof," "hereby," "herein," "hereto," "hereunder" and similar terms refer to this Ordinance; and the term "hereafter" means after, and the term "heretofore" means before, the effective date of this Ordinance. Words of any gender include the correlative words of the other genders, unless the sense indicates otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 14-17, 7-2-14)  
Sec. 19-63. - General findings. 
It is hereby ascertained, determined, and declared that: 
(a)  Pursuant to Article VIII, section 2(b), Florida Constitution, and F.S. §§ 166.021 and 166.041, the City Commission has all powers of local self-government to perform municipal functions and to render municipal services in a manner not inconsistent with law, and such power may be exercised by the enactment of City ordinances. 
(b)  The City Commission may exercise any governmental, corporate, or proprietary power for a municipal purpose except when expressly prohibited by law, and the City Commission may legislate on any subject matter on which the Florida Legislature may act, except those subjects described in (a), (b), (c), and (d) of F.S. § 166.021(3). The subject matter of paragraphs (a), (b), (c), and (d) of F.S. §§ 166.021(3), are not relevant to the imposition of assessments related to services, facilities or programs of the City. 
(c)  The purpose of this Ordinance is to: (1) provide procedures and standards for the imposition of citywide Service Assessments under the general home rule powers of a municipality to impose special assessments; (2) authorize a procedure for the funding of services, facilities, or programs providing special benefits to property within the City; and (3) legislatively determine the special benefit provided to Assessed Property from the provision of the City's services, facilities or programs. 
(d)  The annual Service Assessments, to be imposed using the procedures provided in this Ordinance, shall constitute non-ad valorem assessments within the meaning and intent of the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. 
(e)  The Service Assessments to be imposed using the procedures provided in this Ordinance are imposed by the City Commission, not the Broward County Board of County Commissioners, Property Appraiser or Tax Collector. The duties of the Property Appraiser and Tax Collector under the provisions of this Ordinance and the Uniform Assessment Collection Act are ministerial. 
(Ord. No. 14-17, 7-2-14)  
Secs. 19-64—19-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ANNUAL SERVICE ASSESSMENTS 
 
Sec. 19-71. - General authority. 
(a)  The City Commission is hereby authorized to impose an annual Service Assessment to fund all or any portion of the Service Assessed Cost upon benefitted property at a rate of assessment based on the special benefit accruing to such property from the City's provision of the subsequently identified service, facility, or program. All Service Assessments shall be imposed in conformity with the procedures set forth in this Article V. 
(b)  The amount of the Service Assessment imposed in a Fiscal Year against a parcel of Assessed Property shall be determined pursuant to an apportionment methodology based upon a classification of property designed to provide a fair and reasonable apportionment of the Service Assessed Cost among properties on a basis reasonably related to the special benefit provided by the services, facilities, or programs funded with assessment proceeds. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this Ordinance shall be construed to require the imposition of Service Assessments against Government Property. 
(Ord. No. 14-17, 7-2-14)  
Sec. 19-72. - Initial proceedings. 
The initial proceeding for the imposition of a Service Assessment shall be the adoption of an Initial Assessment Resolution by the City Commission: 
(1)  Containing a brief and general description of the services, facilities, or programs to be provided; 
(2)  Determining the Service Assessed Cost to be assessed; 
(3)  Describing the method of apportioning the Service Assessed Cost and the computation of the Service Assessment for specific properties; 
(4)  Establishing an estimated assessment rate for the applicable Fiscal Year; 
(5)  Establishing a Maximum Assessment Rate, if desired by the City Commission, and 
(6)  Directing the City Manager to (a) prepare the initial Assessment Roll, as required by Section 19-73 hereof, (b) publish the notice required by Section 19-74 hereof, and (c) mail the notice required by Section 19-75 hereof using information then available from the Tax Roll. 
(Ord. No. 14-17, 7-2-14)  
Sec. 19-73. - Initial assessment roll. 
(a)  The City Manager shall prepare or direct the preparation of the initial Assessment Roll, which shall contain the following: 
(1)  A summary description of all Assessed Property conforming to the description contained on the Tax Roll. 
(2)  The name of the Owner of the Assessed Property. 
(3)  The amount of the Service Assessment to be imposed against each such parcel of Assessed Property. 
(b)  The initial Assessment Roll shall be retained by the City Manager and shall be open to public inspection. The foregoing shall not be construed to require that the Assessment Roll be in printed form if the amount of the Service Assessment for each parcel of property can be determined by use of a computer terminal available to the public. 
(Ord. No. 14-17, 7-2-14)  
Sec. 19-74. - Notice by publication. 
(a)  Upon completion of the initial Assessment Roll, the City Manager shall publish, or direct the publication of, once in a newspaper of general circulation within the City a notice stating that at a meeting of the City Commission on a certain day and hour, not earlier than 20 calendar days from such publication, which meeting shall be a regular, adjourned, or special meeting, the City Commission will hear objections of all interested persons to the Final Assessment Resolution which shall establish the rate of assessment and approve the aforementioned initial Assessment Roll. 
(b)  The published notice shall conform to the requirements set forth in the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. Such notice shall include: 
(1)  A geographic depiction of the property subject to the Service Assessment; 
(2)  A brief and general description of the services, facilities, or programs to be provided; 
(3)  The rate of assessment including a Maximum Assessment Rate in the event one was adopted; 
(4)  The procedure for objecting provided in Section 2.06 hereof; 
(5)  The method by which the Service Assessment will be collected; and 
(6)  A statement that the Initial Assessment Roll is available for inspection at the office of the City Manager and all interested persons may ascertain the amount to be assessed against a parcel of Assessed Property at the office of the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 14-17, 7-2-14)  
Sec. 19-75. - Notice by mail. 
(a)  In addition to the published notice required by Section 19-74, the City Manager shall provide notice, or direct the provision of notice, of the proposed Service Assessment by first class mail to the Owner of each parcel of property subject to the Service Assessment. 
(b)  Such notice shall include: 
(1)  The purpose of the Service Assessment; 
(2)  The rate of assessment to be levied against each parcel of property, including a Maximum Assessment Rate in the event one was adopted; 
(3)  The unit of measurement applied to determine the Service Assessment; 
(4)  The number of such units contained in each parcel of property; 
(5)  The total revenue to be collected by the City from the Service Assessment; 
(6)  A statement that failure to pay the Service Assessment will cause a tax certificate to be issued against the property or foreclosure proceedings to be instituted, either of which may result in a loss of title to the property; 
(7)  A statement that all affected Owners have a right to appear at the hearing and to file written objections with the City Commission within 20 days of the notice; and 
(8)  The date, time, and place of the hearing. 
(c)  The mailed notice shall conform to the requirements set forth in the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. Notice shall be mailed at least 20 calendar days prior to the hearing to each Owner at such address as is shown on the Tax Roll. Notice shall be deemed mailed upon delivery thereof to the possession of the United States Postal Service. The City Manager may provide proof of such notice by affidavit. Failure of the Owner to receive such notice due to mistake or inadvertence shall not affect the validity of the Assessment Roll nor release or discharge any obligation for payment of a Service Assessment imposed by the City Commission pursuant to this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 14-17, 7-2-14)  
Sec. 19-76. - Adoption of final assessment resolution. 
(a)  At the public hearing as noticed pursuant to Sections 19-74 and 19-75 hereof, or to which an adjournment or continuance may be taken by the City Commission, the City Commission shall receive any oral or written objections of interested persons and may then, or at any subsequent meeting of the City Commission adopt the Final Assessment Resolution which shall: 
(1)  Confirm, modify, or repeal the Initial Assessment Resolution with such amendments, if any, as may be deemed appropriate by the City Commission; 
(2)  Establish the rate of assessment to be imposed in the upcoming Fiscal Year; 
(3)  Establish a Maximum Assessment Rate that may be imposed in the event such rate was adopted; 
(4)  Approve the initial Assessment Roll, with such amendments as it deems just and right; and 
(5)  Determine the method of collection. 
(b)  The adoption of the Final Assessment Resolution by the City Commission shall constitute a legislative determination that all parcels assessed derive a special benefit from the services, facilities, or programs to be provided or constructed and a legislative determination that the Service Assessments are fairly and reasonably apportioned among the properties that receive the special benefit. 
(c)  All written objections to the Final Assessment Resolution shall be filed with the City Manager at or before the time or adjourned time of such hearing. The Final Assessment Resolution shall constitute the Annual Rate Resolution for the initial Fiscal Year in which Service Assessments are imposed or re-imposed hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 14-17, 7-2-14)  
Sec. 19-77. - Effect of final assessment resolution. 
The Service Assessments for the initial Fiscal Year shall be established upon adoption of the Final Assessment Resolution. The adoption of the Final Assessment Resolution shall be the final adjudication of the issues presented (including, but not limited to, the determination of special benefit and fair apportionment to the Assessed Property; the method of apportionment and assessment; the initial rate of assessment; the Maximum Assessment Rate, if any; the initial Assessment Roll; and the levy and lien of the Service Assessments), unless proper steps shall be initiated in a court of competent jurisdiction to secure relief within 20 days from the date of the City Commission action on the Final Assessment Resolution. The initial Assessment Roll, as approved by the Final Assessment Resolution, shall be delivered to the Tax Collector, as required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, or if the alternative method described in Section 19-92 hereof is used to collect the Service Assessments, such other official as the City Commission by resolution shall designate. 
(Ord. No. 14-17, 7-2-14)  
Sec. 19-78. - Adoption of annual rate resolution. 
(a)  The City Commission shall adopt an Annual Rate Resolution during its budget adoption process for each Fiscal Year following the initial Fiscal Year for which a Service Assessment is imposed hereunder. 
(b)  The initial proceedings for the adoption of an Annual Rate Resolution shall be the adoption of a Preliminary Rate Resolution by the City Commission: 
(1)  Containing a brief and general description of the services, facilities, or programs to be provided; 
(2)  Determining the Service Assessed Cost to be assessed for the upcoming Fiscal Year; 
(3)  Establishing the estimated assessment rate for the upcoming Fiscal Year; 
(4)  Establishing or increasing a Maximum Assessment Rate, if desired by the City Commission; 
(5)  Authorizing the date, time, and place of a public hearing to receive and consider comments from the public and consider the adoption of the Annual Rate Resolution for the upcoming Fiscal Year; and 
(6)  Directing the City Manager to: 
a.  Update the Assessment Roll, 
b.  Provide notice by publication and first class mail to affected Owners in the event circumstances described in subsection (F) of this Section so require, and 
c.  Directing and authorizing any supplemental or additional notice deemed proper, necessary or convenient by the City. 
(c)  The Annual Rate Resolution shall (1) establish the rate of assessment to be imposed in the upcoming Fiscal Year and (2) approve the Assessment Roll for the upcoming Fiscal Year with such adjustments as the City Commission deems just and right. The Assessment Roll shall be prepared in accordance with the method of apportionment set forth in the Initial Assessment Resolution, or any subsequent Preliminary Rate Resolution, together with modifications, if any, that are provided and confirmed in the Final Assessment Resolution or any subsequent Annual Rate Resolution. 
(d)  Nothing herein shall preclude the City Commission from providing annual notification to all Owners of Assessed Property in the manner provided in Sections 19-74 and 19-75 hereof or any other method as provided by law. 
(e)  The City Commission may establish or increase a Maximum Assessment Rate in an Initial Assessment Resolution or Preliminary Rate Resolution and confirm such Maximum Assessment Rate in the event notice of such Maximum Rate Assessment has been included in the notices required by Section 19-74 and 19-75 hereof. 
(f)  In the event: 
(1)  The proposed Service Assessment for any Fiscal Year exceeds the rates of assessment adopted by the City Commission including a Maximum Assessment Rate, if any, that were listed in the notices previously provided to the Owners of Assessed Property pursuant to Sections 19-74 and 19-75 hereof; 
(2)  The purpose for which the Service Assessment is imposed or the use of the revenue from the Service Assessment is substantially changed from that represented by notice previously provided to the Owners of Assessed Property pursuant to Sections 19-74 and 19-75 hereof; 
(3)  Assessed Property is reclassified or the method of apportionment is revised or altered resulting in an increased Service Assessment from that represented by notice previously provided to the Owners of Assessed Property pursuant to Sections 19-74 and 19-75 hereof, or 
(4)  An Assessment Roll contains Assessed Property that was not included on the Assessment Roll approved for the prior Fiscal Year, notice shall be provided by publication and first class mail to the Owners of such Assessed Property as provided by law. Such notice shall substantially conform with the notice requirements set forth in Sections 19-74 and 19-75 hereof and inform the Owner of the date, time, and place for the adoption of the Annual Rate Resolution. The failure of the Owner to receive such notice due to mistake or inadvertence shall not affect the validity of the Assessment Roll nor release or discharge any obligation for payment of a Service Assessment imposed by the City Commission pursuant to this Ordinance. 
(g)  As to any Assessed Property not included on an Assessment Roll approved by the adoption of the Final Assessment Resolution or a prior year's Annual Rate Resolution, the adoption of the succeeding Annual Rate Resolution shall be the final adjudication of the issues presented as to such Assessed Property (including, but not limited to, the determination of special benefit and fair apportionment to the Assessed Property, the method of apportionment and assessment, the rate of assessment, the establishment or increase of a Maximum Assessment Rate, the Assessment Roll, and the levy and lien of the Service Assessments), unless proper steps shall be initiated in a court of competent jurisdiction to secure relief within 20 days from the date of the City Commission action on the Annual Rate Resolution. Nothing contained herein shall be construed or interpreted to affect the finality of any Service Assessment not challenged within the required 20 day period for those Service Assessments previously imposed against Assessed Property by the inclusion of the Assessed Property on an Assessment Roll approved in the Final Assessment Resolution or any subsequent Annual Rate Resolution. 
(h)  The Assessment Roll, as approved by the Annual Rate Resolution, shall be delivered to the Tax Collector as required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, or if the alternative method described in Section 19-92 hereof is used to collect the Service Assessments, such other official as the City Commission by resolution shall designate. If the Service Assessment against any property shall be sustained, reduced, or abated by the court, an adjustment shall be made on the Assessment Roll. 
(Ord. No. 14-17, 7-2-14)  
Sec. 19-79. - Lien of service assessments. 
Upon the adoption of the Assessment Roll, all Service Assessments shall constitute a lien against Assessed Property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district, or municipal taxes and special assessments. Except as otherwise provided by law, such lien shall be superior in dignity to all other prior liens, mortgages, titles, and claims, until paid. The lien for a Service Assessment shall be deemed perfected upon the City Commission's adoption of the Final Assessment Resolution or the Annual Rate Resolution, whichever is applicable. The lien for a Service Assessment collected under the Uniform Assessment Collection Act shall attach to the property included on the Assessment Roll as of the prior January 1, the lien date for ad valorem taxes imposed under the Tax Roll. 
The lien for a Service Assessment collected under the alternative method of collection provided in Section 19-92 shall be deemed perfected upon the City Commission's adoption of the Final Assessment Resolution or the Annual Rate Resolution, whichever is applicable, and shall attach to the property on such date of adoption. 
(Ord. No. 14-17, 7-2-14)  
Sec. 19-80. - Revisions to service assessments. 
If any Service Assessment made under the provisions of this Ordinance is either in whole or in part annulled, vacated, or set aside by the judgment of any court, or if the City Commission is satisfied that any such Service Assessment is so irregular or defective that the same cannot be enforced or collected, or if the City Commission has failed to include or omitted any property on the Assessment Roll, which property should have been so included, the City Commission may take all necessary steps to impose a new Service Assessment against any property benefited by the Service Assessed Costs, following as nearly as may be practicable, the provisions of this Ordinance and in case such second Service Assessment is annulled, vacated, or set aside, the City Commission may obtain and impose other Service Assessments until a valid Service Assessment is imposed. 
(Ord. No. 14-17, 7-2-14)  
Sec. 19-81. - Procedural irregularities. 
Any informality or irregularity in the proceedings in connection with the levy of any Service Assessment under the provisions of this Ordinance shall not affect the validity of the same after the approval thereof, and any Service Assessment as finally approved shall be competent and sufficient evidence that such Service Assessment was duly levied, that the Service Assessment was duly made and adopted, and that all other proceedings adequate to such Service Assessment were duly had, taken, and performed as required by this Ordinance; and no variance from the directions hereunder shall be held material unless it be clearly shown that the party objecting was materially injured thereby. 
(Ord. No. 14-17, 7-2-14)  
Sec. 19-82. - Correction of errors and omissions. 
(a)  No act of error or omission on the part of the Property Appraiser, Tax Collector, City Manager, City Commission, or their deputies or employees, shall operate to release or discharge any obligation for payment of a Service Assessment imposed by the City Commission under the provision of this Ordinance. 
(b)  When it shall appear that any Service Assessment should have been imposed under this Ordinance against a parcel of property specially benefited by the provision of a service, facility, or program, but that such property was omitted from the Assessment Roll; or such property was erroneously assessed; or was not listed on the Tax Roll as an individual parcel of property as of the effective date of the Assessment Roll approved by the Annual Rate Resolution for any upcoming Fiscal Year, the City Commission may, upon provision of a notice by mail provided to the Owner of the omitted or erroneously assessed parcel in the manner and form provided in Section 19-75, impose the applicable Service Assessment for the Fiscal Year in which such error or omission is discovered, in addition to the applicable Service Assessment due for the prior two Fiscal Years. Such Service Assessment shall constitute a lien against Assessed Property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district, or municipal taxes and special assessments, and superior in rank and dignity to all other prior liens, mortgages, titles, and claims in and to or against the real property involved, shall be collected as provided in Article VI hereof, and shall be deemed perfected on the date of adoption of the resolution imposing the omitted or delinquent assessments. 
(c)  Prior to the delivery of the Assessment Roll to the Tax Collector in accordance with the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, the City Manager shall have the authority at any time, upon his or her own initiative or in response to a timely filed petition from the Owner of any property subject to a Service Assessment, to reclassify property based upon presentation of competent and substantial evidence, and correct any error in applying the Service Assessment apportionment method to any particular parcel of property not otherwise requiring the provision of notice pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. Any such correction shall be considered valid ab initio and shall in no way affect the enforcement of the Service Assessment imposed under the provisions of this Ordinance. All requests from affected property owners for any such changes, modifications or corrections shall be referred to, and processed by, the City Manager and not the Property Appraiser or Tax Collector. 
(d)  After the Assessment Roll has been delivered to the Tax Collector in accordance with the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, any changes, modifications, or corrections thereto shall be made in accordance with the procedures applicable to correcting errors and insolvencies on the Tax Roll upon timely written request and direction of the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 14-17, 7-2-14)  
Sec. 19-83. - Interim assessments. 
(a)  An interim Service Assessment may be imposed against all property for which a Certificate of Occupancy is issued after the adoption of the Annual Rate Resolution. The amount of the interim Service Assessment shall be calculated upon a monthly rate, which shall be one-twelfth of the annual rate for such property computed in accordance with the Annual Rate Resolution for the Fiscal Year for which the interim Service Assessment is being imposed. Such monthly rate shall be imposed for each full calendar month remaining in the Fiscal Year. In addition to the monthly rate, the interim Service Assessment may also include an estimate of the subsequent Fiscal Year's Service Assessment. 
(b)  Issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy without the payment in full of the interim Service Assessment shall not relieve the Owner of such property of the obligation of full payment. Any interim Service Assessment not collected prior to the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy may be collected pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act as provided in Section 19-91 of this Ordinance, under the alternative collection method provided in Section 19-92 or by any other method authorized by law. 
(c)  Any interim Service Assessment shall be deemed due and payable on the date the Certificate of Occupancy was issued and shall constitute a lien against such property as of that date. Said lien shall be equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district or municipal taxes and special assessments, and superior in rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, titles and claims in and to or against the real property involved and shall be deemed perfected upon the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 14-17, 7-2-14)  
Sec. 19-84. - Hardship assistance. 
An Owner of Assessed Property who meets poverty level income and asset guidelines established by the City may be eligible to receive payment of a Service Assessment imposed by the City. The City Commission may adopt by separate resolution, guidelines and directives to the City Manager, or other designated City employee, for implementation and administration of the hardship assistance authorized by this Section. Applicants for this hardship assistance shall provide written documentation satisfactory to the City in order to qualify for such assistance. Any amounts provided for hardship assistance shall be paid by the City from funds other than those generated by Service Assessments. 
(Ord. No. 14-17, 7-2-14)  
Secs. 19-85—19-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - COLLECTION AND USE OF SERVICE ASSESSMENTS 
 
Sec. 19-91. - Method of collection. 
(a)  Unless otherwise directed by the City Commission, the Service Assessments shall be collected pursuant to the uniform method provided in the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, and the City shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. Any hearing or notice required by this Ordinance may be combined with any other hearing or notice required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act or other provision of law. 
(b)  The amount of a Service Assessment to be collected using the uniform method pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act for any specific parcel of benefitted property may include an amount equivalent to the payment delinquency, delinquency fees and recording costs for a prior year's assessment for a comparable service, facility, or program provided that: 
(1)  The collection method used in connection with the prior year's assessment did not employ the use of the uniform method of collection authorized by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, 
(2)  Notice is provided to the Owner as required under the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, and 
(3)  Any lien on the affected parcel for the prior year's assessment is supplanted and transferred to such Service Assessment upon certification of a non-ad valorem roll to the Tax Collector by the City. 
(Ord. No. 14-17, 7-2-14)  
Sec. 19-92. - Alternative method of collection. 
In lieu of using the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, the City Commission may elect to collect the Service Assessments by any other method which is authorized by law or under the alternative collection method provided by this Section: 
(a)  The City Commission shall provide Service Assessment bills by first class mail to the Owner of each affected parcel of property that is subject to the Service Assessment. The bill or accompanying explanatory material shall include: 
(1)  A brief explanation of the Service Assessment; 
(2)  A description of the unit of measurement used to determine the amount of the Service Assessment; 
(3)  The number of units contained within the parcel; 
(4)  The total amount of the Service Assessment imposed against the parcel for the appropriate period; 
(5)  The location at which payment will be accepted; 
(6)  The date on which the Service Assessment is due, and 
(7)  A statement that the Service Assessment constitutes a lien against Assessed Property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district or municipal taxes and other non-ad valorem assessments. 
(b)  A general notice of the lien resulting from imposition of the Service Assessments shall be recorded in the Official Records of the County. Nothing herein shall be construed to require that individual liens or releases be filed in the Official Records. 
(c)  The City Commission shall have the right to foreclose and collect all delinquent Service Assessments in the manner provided by law for the foreclosure of mortgages on real property or appoint or retain an agent to institute such foreclosure and collection proceedings. A Service Assessment shall become delinquent if it is not paid within 30 days from the date payment was due, as identified in accordance with paragraph (a)(6) of this Section. The City Commission or its agent shall notify any property owner who is delinquent in payment of his or her Service Assessment within 60 days from the date such assessment was due. Such notice shall state in effect that the City Commission or its agent will either (1) initiate a foreclosure action or suit in equity and cause the foreclosure of such property subject to a delinquent Service Assessment in a method now or hereafter provided by law for foreclosure of mortgages on real property, or (2) cause an amount equivalent to the delinquent Service Assessment, not previously subject to collection using the uniform method under the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, to be collected on the tax bill for a subsequent year. 
(d)  All costs, fees and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and title search expenses, related to any foreclosure action as described herein shall be included in any judgment or decree rendered therein. At the sale pursuant to decree in any such action, the City may be the purchaser to the same extent as any Person. The City Commission or its agent may join in one foreclosure action for the collection of Service Assessments against any or all property assessed in accordance with the provisions hereof. All delinquent Owners whose property is foreclosed shall be liable for an apportioned amount of reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the City Commission and its agents, including reasonable attorney fees, in collection of such delinquent Service Assessments and any other costs incurred by the City Commission as a result of such delinquent Service Assessments and the same shall be collectible as a part of or in addition to, the costs of the action. 
(e)  In lieu of foreclosure, any delinquent Service Assessment and the costs, fees and expenses attributable thereto, may be collected pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act; provided however, that (1) notice is provided to the Owner in the manner required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act and this Ordinance, and (2) any existing lien of record on the affected parcel for the delinquent Service Assessment is supplanted by the lien resulting from certification of the Assessment Roll, as applicable, to the Tax Collector. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the City Commission's use of an alternative method of collection, the City Manager shall have the same power and authority to correct errors and omissions as provided to the City Manager or other City officials in Section 19-82 hereof. 
(g)  Any City Commission action required in the collection of Service Assessments may be by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 14-17, 7-2-14)  
Sec. 19-93. - Government property. 
(a)  In the event Service Assessments are imposed against Government Property, the City Commission shall provide Service Assessment bills by first class mail to the Owner of each affected parcel of Government Property. The bill or accompanying explanatory material shall include: 
(1)  A brief explanation of the Service Assessment; 
(2)  A description of the unit of measurement used to determine the amount of the Service Assessment; 
(3)  The number of units contained within the parcel; 
(4)  The total amount of the parcel's Service Assessment for the appropriate period; 
(5)  The location at which payment will be accepted; and 
(6)  The date on which the Service Assessment is due. 
(b)  Service Assessments imposed against Government Property shall be due on the same date as all other Service Assessments and, if applicable, shall be subject to the same discounts for early payment. 
(c)  A Service Assessment shall become delinquent if it is not paid within 30 days from the date payment was due, as identified in paragraph (a)(6) of this Section. The City Commission shall notify the Owner of any Government Property that is delinquent in payment of its Service Assessment within 60 days from the date such assessment was due. Such notice shall state that the City Commission will initiate a mandamus or other appropriate judicial action to compel payment. 
(d)  All costs, fees and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and title search expenses, related to any mandamus or other action as described herein shall be included in any judgment or decree rendered therein. All delinquent Owners of Government Property against which a mandamus or other appropriate action is filed shall be liable for an apportioned amount of reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the City, including reasonable attorney fees, in collection of such delinquent Service Assessments and any other costs incurred by the City Commission as a result of such delinquent Service Assessments and the same shall be collectible as a part of or in addition to, the costs of the action. 
(e)  As an alternative to the foregoing, a Service Assessment imposed against Government Property may be collected as a surcharge on a utility bill provided to such Government Property in periodic installments with a remedy of a mandamus action in the event of non-payment. The City Commission may contract for such billing services with any utility, whether or not such utility is owned by the City. 
(Ord. No. 14-17, 7-2-14)  
Secs. 19-94—19-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 19-101. - Applicability. 
This Ordinance and the City Commission's authority to impose assessments pursuant hereto shall be applicable throughout the City. 
(Ord. No. 14-17, 7-2-14)  
Sec. 19-102. - Alternative method. 
(a)  This Ordinance shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized hereby and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing or which may hereafter come into existence. This Ordinance, being necessary for the welfare of the inhabitants of the City, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
(b)  Nothing herein shall preclude the City Commission from directing and authorizing, by resolution, the combination with each other of (1) any supplemental or additional notice deemed proper, necessary, or convenient by the City, (2) any notice required by this Ordinance, or (3) any notice required by law, including the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. 
(Ord. No. 14-17, 7-2-14)  
Sec. 19-103. - Scope of service assessment authorization. 
This Ordinance is intended to cover any type of assessment for services that provide a special benefit to property within the City. However, initially this Ordinance authorizes the use of a Service Assessment to fund the Service Assessed Cost for stormwater management services, facilities and programs. Any future authorization of a Service Assessment to fund any other services, facilities and programs within the City (except for fire-rescue) shall require an amendment to this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 14-17, 7-2-14)  
Chapter 20 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Junked, wrecked, abandoned property, § 10-46 et seq.; noise regulations, § 10-111 et seq.; riding vehicles across pedestrian overpasses prohibited, § 13-9. 
State Law reference— Uniform traffic control law, F.S. ch. 316. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 20-1. - Speed limit of fifteen miles per hour on city streets near city parks; providing for signage requirements and ticketing procedures. 
(a)  Speed limit established. A speed limit of fifteen (15) miles per hour is hereby established upon city streets, which for purposes of this section, shall mean any streets, roads, avenues or other public rights-of-way owned and maintained, or otherwise dedicated to the City of Miramar, for the area of such street which is three hundred (300) feet from the property line(s) of a city, county or state park within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Signage. Signage announcing such speed limits shall conform to State of Florida Uniform Traffic Controls Signals and Devices, as referenced by the manual and specifications published by the Florida Department of Transportation for uniform traffic control devices. All signage shall conform to standard street engineering and planning practices. 
(c)  Violations. Violations of this section shall be subject to ticketing by certified law enforcement officers upon uniform traffic citations, for traffic violations, promulgated under chapter 316, F.S., as amended, and other applicable laws, and may be enforced as provided by the general laws of the State of Florida and/or as civil violations of the municipal code. 
(Ord. No. 90-59, § 1, 9-4-90) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 90-59, § 1, adopted Sept. 4, 1990, has been included herein as § 20-1 at the discretion of the editor. Sections 2 through 4, dealing with severability, a repealer provision and the effective date have been omitted from codification.  
Secs. 20-2—20-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SAFETY COUNCIL 
 
Sec. 20-26. - Created. 
There is hereby created the safety council which shall be subject to and act under the supervision of the city manager. To the fullest extent possible, it shall be an independent citizens' advisory board discharging such duties and exercising such rights as provided by ordinance or inherent thereto. 
(Code 1964, § 24-5; Ord. No. 91-22, § 16, 3-4-91)  
Sec. 20-27. - Members. 
(a)  The city commission shall appoint, in the manner provided by law, eight (8) residents of the city as members of the safety council. 
(b)  The mayor shall appoint eight (8) residents of the city as members of the safety council. These eight (8) so appointed shall serve two-year terms and be eligible for reappointment for succeeding terms. The secretary shall maintain a current roster of members of the safety council and together with the vice-chairperson shall have such additional rights and responsibilities as delegated by the chairperson. 
(c)  The total active membership of the safety council shall consist of one (1) member from each organization in the city plus eight (8) residents to be members at large. Each recognized civic organization, club or organization located within the city, and each recognized homeowner's association or resident's association, club or organization located within the city, shall be entitled to appoint a member of the safety council. Each such association, organization or club shall advise the chairperson in writing of the appointment or change of a member and each member shall serve for a term to be fixed by the appointing organization. The number of at large members shall be filled by any residents of the city who shall submit their names to the safety council or have their names proposed by one (1) of the above designated members and approved by the majority of the membership. 
(d)  Active voting members of the safety council shall not hold any other elected public office. 
(Code 1964, § 24-6.1; Ord. No. 91-22, § 16, 3-4-91)  
Sec. 20-28. - Meetings; procedures; duties; and powers. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the safety council to hold regular public meetings at the city hall, not less than monthly, at such times and on such dates as the chairperson shall designate. Public notice of each regular meeting shall be given to the residents of the city. 
(b)  Meetings of the safety council shall be conducted under such reasonable procedures as may be adopted by the safety council; such procedures shall be designed to promote the free and open exchange of ideas within an orderly framework. Meetings shall be conducted by the chairperson or, in his or her absence, by the vice-chairperson. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the safety council to hear and consider any suggestions, comments, complaints or proposals, by or from any residents of the city; to discuss ways and means of promoting safety within the city; and to make recommendations to the city manager of such safety, health and welfare of the people of the city. The safety council shall, from time to time, render written reports to the city manager and all recommendations of the safety council shall be reduced to writing and submitted to the city manager who shall distribute copies of same to the city commission. 
(d)  No formal recommendations may be made and no formal action may be taken by the safety council without the affirmative vote of a majority of members present at a meeting, upon motion of a member duly made and seconded. 
(Code 1964, § 24-6; Ord. No. 91-22, § 16, 3-4-91)  
Secs. 20-29—20-44. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PARKING REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 20-45. - Adoption of State Uniform Traffic Control Law. 
The City of Miramar hereby adopts by reference all the provisions of Chapter 316, Florida Statutes, the State Uniform Traffic Control Law, as amended, regulating the movement of vehicular, pedestrian, and all other traffic upon streets and highways.  
Sec. 20-46. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except where the context otherwise requires: 
Bicycle. Any device propelled by human power, or any "moped" propelled by a pedal-activated helper motor with a manufacturer's certified maximum rating of one and one-half (1½) brake horsepower, upon which any person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels either of which is twenty (20) inches or more in diameter, and including any device generally recognized as a bicycle though equipped with two (2) front or two (2) rear wheels. 
Boat. Any contrivance designed to be propelled through the water. 
Bus. Any motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten (10) passengers and used for the transportation of persons and any motor vehicle, other than a taxi cab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation. 
Code enforcement officer. An authorized agent or employee of the City of Miramar whose duty is to assure code compliance. 
Commercial motor vehicle. Any self-propelled or towed vehicle used on the public highways in commerce to transport passengers or cargo, if such vehicle: 
(a)  Has a gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or more; 
(b)  Is designed to transport more than fifteen (15) passengers, including the driver; or 
(c)  Is used in the transportation of materials found to be hazardous for the purposes of the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act, as amended (49 U.S.C.ss.1801 et seq.) or 
(d)  Is used for commercial purposes and is so marked. 
Driveway. A hard surfaced area in the front yard of a building or structure which is connected to a street. 
Gross weight. The weight of a vehicle without load plus the weight of any load thereon. 
House trailer. A trailer or semitrailer which is designed, constructed, and equipped as a dwelling place, living abode, or sleeping place (either permanently or temporarily) and is equipped for use as a conveyance on streets and highways. 
Motor vehicle. Any vehicle which is a self-propelled vehicle not operated upon rails or guideway, but not including any bicycle or moped. 
Official traffic control devices. All signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this Traffic Code, placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
Official traffic control signal. Any device whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and permitted to proceed. 
Operator. Any person who is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle upon the highway or who is exercising control over or steering a vehicle being towed by a motor vehicle. 
Owner. A person who holds the legal title of a vehicle, or, in the event a vehicle is the subject of a agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of a vehicle is entitled to possession, then such conditional vendee, lessee, or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner, for purposes of this chapter. 
Park or parking. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers as may be permitted under Chapter 316, Florida Statutes and the provisions of this chapter. 
Pedestrian. Any person afoot. 
Person. Any natural person, firm, co-partnership, association or corporation. 
Police officer. Any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
Private road or driveway. Any privately-owned way or place used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner but not by other persons. 
Recreational vehicle. Any vehicle or portable structure designed primarily to provide temporary living quarters for recreation, camping or travel use; either a vehicular structure mounted on wheels, self-powered or designed to be pulled by another vehicle or a structure designed to be mounted upon and carried by another vehicle. 
Residential property. Any lot, tract, parcel or building used or intended for use primarily for dwelling purposes, but not including hotel or motel rooms. 
Roadway. That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of berm or shoulder. In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" as used herein shall refer to any such roadway separately, but not to all such roadways collectively. 
Safety zone. The area of space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and protected or so marked by adequate signs or authorized pavement markings as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
Semitrailer. Any vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer (as defined in Chapter 316.003, Florida Statutes), designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon, or is carried by another vehicle. 
Sidewalk. That paved portion of a right-of-way between the curb line, or the lateral line, of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by the pedestrians. 
Special-purpose vehicle. A vehicle especially designed primarily for unusual terrain and conditions and not usually licensed for or used on the public roadways. Examples include swamp buggies, stock cars, dragsters, half-tracks and the like. 
Stand or standing. The halting of a vehicle whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily, for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, receiving or discharging passengers. 
Stop or stopping. When prohibited, any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the directions of a law enforcement officer or traffic control sign or signal. 
Street or highway. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic. 
Swale. The area immediately adjacent to the paved road surface of a roadway extending to the right-of-way line or to the edge of sidewalk, if sidewalks are present. 
Trailer. Any vehicle with or without power, other than a pole trailer (as defined in Chapter 316.003, Florida Statutes), designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle. 
Truck. Any motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. 
Vehicle. Every device, in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except bicycles or mopeds or devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.  
Sec. 20-47. - Emergency or experimental regulations. 
The city manager or his designee is hereby authorized to take all actions necessary to make effective the provisions of this parking ordinance and to establish temporary or experimental regulations, consistent with this ordinance to cover emergencies or special conditions. The city manager, in establishing temporary or experimental regulations, shall make a finding that such proposed regulations promote the safety and general welfare of the residents. No such regulation shall be effective and in force unless adequate signs, signals or other notices are clearly erected indicating said regulation. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than six (6) months.  
Sec. 20-48. - Parking regulations, all zoning districts. 
(a)  Parking for disabled persons. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any parking space conspicuously outlined in blue paint, posted and maintained with a permanent, above-grade sign bearing the international symbol of accessibility or the caption "PARKING BY DISABLED PERMIT ONLY" unless such vehicle displays a parking permit issued pursuant to Chapter 320.0848, Florida Statutes and such vehicle is transporting a person eligible for such parking permit. Any unattended vehicle parked in violation of this section may be removed to a lawful parking space or facility, and the expense of such removal charged to the owner of the vehicle. Any person violating this section shall be subject to a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each such violation. 
(b)  Parking so as to face oncoming traffic prohibited. It is unlawful to park any vehicle on the street, right-of-way or swale area in such a manner as to face oncoming, opposing traffic, whether or not curbing is present. 
(c)  Parking, standing on sidewalks. It shall be a violation for any person to park a vehicle upon any part of a public sidewalk or bike path. 
(d)  Parking in public right-of-way. It shall be a violation for any person to park a vehicle on any street in such a way to impede the free flow of traffic or interfere with the passage of emergency vehicles. 
(e)  Parking near fire hydrants. It shall be a violation for any person to park any vehicle or trailer within fifteen (15) feet of any fire hydrant. 
(f)  Fire station, fire lane, or fire zone. When signs and/or striping authorized by the fire department are posted giving notice of a fire station, fire zone, or a fire lane it shall be a violation for any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle or trailer within such zone. It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle on private property which has been designated as a fire zone by the police of fire departments. 
(g)  Crosswalks and intersections. It shall be a violation for any person to stop, stand, or park any vehicle or trailer within any crosswalk or within twenty-five (25) feet of the intersection of street pavement. 
(h)  Center medians. It shall be a violation for any person to park any vehicle or trailer within the center median of any divided roadway. 
(i)  Parking within lines. It shall be a violation for any vehicle to be parked so that a portion of the vehicle extends over any of the lines delineating the parking space for that vehicle. 
(j)  Use for living or sleeping purposes. No boat, bus, trailer, recreational vehicle, nor any vehicle or any part of vehicle by whatever name known shall be occupied or used at any time within the limits of the City of Miramar for living or sleeping purposes. This prohibition shall not apply to construction trailers which have been issued temporary use permits or to any house trailer when located within a properly zoned community with proper utility connections. 
(k)  Blocking driveways. It shall be a violation for any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle so as to deny normal access to any public or private roadway. 
(l)  Parking near traffic control devices. It shall be a violation for any person to park any vehicle within thirty (30) feet of either side of any such traffic control device such as stop signs, yield signs or otherwise. 
(m)  Consent of owner required. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle including trailers upon any privately owned parking lot or other private property without the consent of the owner, lessee, tenant or other person entitled to the possession and use of the premises. 
(n)  No parking zones. It shall be a violation for any person who parks in an area designated by the city with appropriate signs or markings such as No Parking, No Stopping/Standing Zone or No Parking Fire Lane. 
(o)  Safety zones. It shall be a violation for any person who stops, parks or stands any vehicle in a section of pavement which is marked with cross-hatched pavement markings or otherwise indicating a safety zone. 
(p)  Sale of motor vehicle. It shall be unlawful for any person to place upon the property of another, any vehicle for sale within the city, unless such property shall be properly zoned and licensed for the sale of motor vehicles. Personal motor vehicles may be placed for sale by the owner only upon the property of the registered owner of the motor vehicle, and no more than one (1) motor vehicle at a time may be placed thereon for sale. It shall be unlawful to offer vehicles for sale on public property in the city. The city shall tow or have towed any vehicles in violation of this section, and any towing or storage fees shall be at the owner's expense. 
(q)  Authority to designate restricted parking areas. The police chief, upon concurrence of the city manager, may designate certain areas as restricted parking areas in order to protect the safety of the residents and so mark these designated areas with appropriate signs.  
Sec. 20-49. - Parking restrictions, residential zoned properties/zoning districts. 
(a)  Inoperable or derelict vehicles. The parking of inoperable or derelict vehicles is prohibited and such inoperable or derelict vehicles are subject to towing pursuant to section 20-51 of this Code. 
(b)  Commercial motor vehicles. It shall be a violation for any person to stop, stand, or park any commercial motor vehicle upon properties, streets, swales, alleys, or parkways of the city in residential zoned areas except under the following circumstances: 
(1)  In the performance of bona fide pick-ups to or deliveries from the residence not to exceed two (2) hours in duration. 
(2)  On property where construction or repairs is underway, for which a current and valid permit or license has been issued, as to those vehicles actively engaged in such activities. 
(3)  Standard pickup and panel trucks having a capacity of not more than one (1) ton. 
(4)  Any vehicle that is parked entirely inside a garage or is parked in a carport where no part of the vehicle extends outside the roofline of such carport. 
(c)  Recreation and special service vehicles. No more than one (1) trailer, one (1) recreational vehicle or one (1) boat shall be parked or stored on residential property unless such others are within a completely enclosed roofed and walled permanent structure. 
(d)  Trailers. It shall be a violation for any person to park any trailer upon residential property except for a boat trailer in good working condition. A boat trailer shall exhibit a current license plate and be parked on a driveway, in an enclosed garage or carport, or within the side or rear yard of the residence. 
(e)  Boats. Any boat in seaworthy condition, not to exceed an overall length of twenty-five (25) feet or beam width of seven (7) feet shall be permitted. All such boats shall be parked on a driveway, in an enclosed garage or carport, or within the side or rear yard of the residence. 
(f)  Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles are permitted to be stored on residential property. All such recreational vehicles shall be parked on a driveway, in an enclosed garage or carport, or within the fenced rear yard of the residence. 
(g)  Parking of buses. The parking of buses in residentially zoned areas of the city shall be prohibited. 
(h)  Parking location. No commercial or passenger vehicle shall be parked on any part of private property including the lawn area, except in a driveway, carport or garage. Passenger cars may be parked in swale areas abutting residential property with the consent of the abutting residential property owner. 
(i)  Unlicensed vehicles. No unlicensed boat trailers, recreational vehicles or vehicles shall be parked on any public or private property.  
Sec. 20-50. - Parking restrictions, nonresidential properties/zoning districts. 
(a)  Inoperable or derelict vehicles. Except as part of a city licensed business which deals with inoperable or derelict vehicles as an essential and related portion of their everyday trade, inoperable or derelict vehicles are prohibited and subject to towing pursuant to section 20-51 of this Code. 
(b)  Truck parking and storage. The parking and storage of trucks in areas zoned for agricultural, commercial or industrial uses that are not associated with the established business located on the property shall be prohibited.  
Sec. 20-51. - Removal of motor vehicles. 
(a)  Parked on private property. Whenever a property owner or his/her agent finds a motor vehicle parked upon such owner's property in violation of prominently displayed signs restricting such parking, the owner may, at such owner's discretion, provide for the removal of the vehicle to the location listed on the posted signs. The cost of such removal shall be borne by the motor vehicle owner. 
(b)  Parked in violation of this article. The city's police department and/or code enforcement division shall be empowered to authorize the removal of any vehicle in violation of this article. The cost of such removal shall be borne by the motor vehicle owner.  
Sec. 20-52. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Violations. Owners of vehicles in violation of this chapter and owners of the real property upon which said vehicle is located shall be jointly and severally liable for violations of this section. Owners of vehicles in violation of this chapter shall be ticketed either by the city law enforcement or code enforcement officers. The ticket issued to the owner(s) of the offending vehicle shall be personally served on such owner(s) or the ticket shall be affixed to the windshield of the offending vehicle. The ticket issued to the owner of the real property where a violation occurred shall be served in the manner prescribed by section 2-77 of the Code. The owner of the vehicle is responsible and liable for payment of any parking ticket violation unless the owner can furnish evidence that the vehicle was in the care, custody or control of another person at the time of the parking violation. In such instances the owner of the vehicle is required within ten (10) days after notification of the parking violation, to furnish to the appropriate law enforcement authorities an affidavit setting forth the name, address and drivers license number of the responsible person. The owner of the vehicle is not responsible for parking ticket violations if the vehicle involved was at the time stolen or in the care, custody or control of some person who did not have permission of the owner to use the vehicle. 
(b)  Fines. Any person found by a law enforcement or code enforcement officer to be in violation of this section shall be assessed, and pay a fine based on the following schedule in the manner provided for the ticket: 
Violations of section 20-48(a) Parking in areas designated for disabled persons ..... $250.00 
Violations of section 20-48(e) Parking near Fire Hydrant ..... 100.00 
Violations of section 20-48(f) Fire Lane or Fire Zone ..... 100.00 
All other violations ..... 30.00 
Failure to respond to a ticket, either by paying the stated fines or by appealing the ticket in accordance with section 20-53, within ten (10) business days from the date of issuance of the ticket, shall result in an additional late fee of twelve dollars ($12.00). 
(c)  Remedies cumulative. Persons failing to pay fines as provided for in the ticket and/or otherwise person who are in violation of this section may be prosecuted by the city of its authorized designee. This section is supplemental and will not preclude the city from enforcing its Code by any other means available at law or in equity, including the filing of a lien against the vehicle which is the subject of the violation for all fines, late fees, administrative fees and interest. 
(d)  School crossing guard trust fund. Five dollars ($5.00) of each fine imposed and collected by this article may be used for the sole purpose of funding the city's school crossing guard program ("program"). The city's program includes the school crossing guard training program which complies with the guidelines set forth by the Florida Department of Transportation, as amended from time to time. The city may establish a school crossing guard program trust fund wherein all funds collected from the surcharge shall be deposited and monies therein shall be used and distributed by law.  
Sec. 20-53. - Adjudication process. 
(a)  Designation of hearing officer. The city has designated the Clerk of Courts' Seventeenth Judicial Circuit, Broward County, Florida (hereinafter "clerk") as hearing officers for violations of this parking code. 
(b)  Contesting ticket. Any person who receives a ticket issued pursuant to the city's parking code may contest such ticket by giving written request for an administrative hearing to the clerk within ten (10) days of the date the ticket was issued. The clerk shall set the hearing within thirty (30) days of the date the ticket was issued giving the person issued the ticket at least seven (7) days notice excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays. Said notice shall be sent by mail to the address of the registered owner of the vehicle as per issued ticket or, in the event that the driver of the vehicle is not the owner, to the driver's address if he/she requests a hearing. 
(c)  Hearing procedure. 
(1)  The person issued the ticket may: (a) Be represented by counsel; (b) Call and examine witnesses; (c) Introduce exhibits; (d) Examine opposing witnesses on any relevant matter, even though the matter was not covered under direct examination; (e) Impeach any witness regardless of which party first called him to testify. 
(2)  All hearings shall be conducted insofar as practical in accordance with the Florida Rules of Civil Procedure and the Florida Evidence Code. However, the general nature of the hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner. 
(3)  All irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded; but all other evidence of a type commonly relied upon by reasonable prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs shall be admissible whether or not such evidence would be admissible in a trail in the courts of Florida. Any part of the evidence may be received by written form and all testimonies of parties and witnesses shall be made under oath. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining other evidence but it shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions. 
(4)  Any interested party or person may make application and upon good cause shown may be allowed by the hearing officer in his/her discretion to intervene and appear in a proceeding pending before the hearing officer. 
(d)  Contest by mail. Those persons who receive a parking ticket but who do not reside in Palm Beach, Broward, or Dade County, Florida, may contest the ticket in writing, thus avoiding the necessity of appearing for a hearing. Such person must submit his/her written request to contest the ticket by mail, along with all evidence within ten (10) days of the date the ticket was issued. For all tickets issued pursuant to any City of Miramar parking ordinance, a request to contest the ticket by mail and evidence must be sent to the clerk. The clerk shall present the evidence to the hearing officer within thirty (30) days of the date the ticket was issued. The evidence presented must include a sworn statement by the person cited. The statement must identify the ticket at issue by its number and date of issuance. It must set forth the name and current address of the person cited. The statement may contain argument in defense against the ticket. The hearing officer will not consider unsworn statements. The evidence submitted may include sworn statements of witnesses. Such statements must include the name and address of the witness as well as the basis if the witness's knowledge about the facts asserted in the statement. The evidence submitted may also include such documents as are relevant and material to the disposition of the ticket. All evidence submitted is subject to the evidentiary rules set forth above. 
(e)  Orders of the hearing officer. 
(1)  Pursuant to Section 316.1967, Florida Statutes, any person who elects to appear before the hearing officer or to contest a ticket by mail shall be deemed to have waived his right to pay the civil penalty amount set forth in the ticket. 
(2)  After a hearing or consideration of mailed-in admissible evidence, the hearing officer shall make a determination based on the greater weight of the evidence as to whether a parking violation has been committed and shall issue an order imposing a penalty not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for violations of disabled parking ordinances and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for violations of all other City of Miramar parking ordinances. The hearing officer may, in his/her discretion, grant additional time to pay the civil penalty amount. All orders shall be in writing signed and dated by the hearing officer and shall contain findings of fact supporting the order and conclusion of the law. 
(3)  If, at the conclusion of a hearing or consideration of mailed-in admissible evidence, the hearing officer orders a dismissal of the ticket and finds no violation, the hearing officer shall so state and issue his/her order of dismissal in writing signed and dated by the hearing officer and shall contain findings of fact supporting the order. 
(4)  Hearings shall be scheduled within thirty (30) days of request and decided within thirty (30) days thereafter. An order, decision, or opinion of the hearing officer may be appealed by the filing of a Petition for Writ of Certiorari in the Circuit Court of the Seventeenth Judicial Circuit and for Broward County, Florida, by any party receiving an adverse ruling. 
(Ord. No. 96-13, 2-07-96). 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 96-13 repealed Article III, Stopping, Standing, Parking, 1990 Code.  
ARTICLE IV. - MISCELLANEOUS FEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 4 and 5 of Ord. No. 91-15, adopted Jan. 28, 1991, amended Ch. 20 by adding §§ 20-52 and 20-53 thereto. For purposes of classification, the editor has included these provisions as a new Art. IV. 
 
Sec. 20-52. - Accident cleanup. 
The city hereby enacts a regulatory use fee to be charged by the city, jointly and severally, to persons involved in a vehicular accident which causes the city or its authorized agents to become involved in the cleanup of debris from vehicular accidents: 
For each accident cleanup ..... $115.00 
(Ord. No. 91-15, § 4, 1-28-91)  
Sec. 20-53. - Oil spill removal. 
The city hereby enacts a regulatory use fee to be charged by the city, jointly and severally, to persons involved in a vehicular accident which involves oil spill removal and cleanup by the city and/or its authorized agents. This fee is inclusive of the hazardous materials disposal fee paid by the city to government or environmental agencies or companies disposing of the material spilled: 
Oil spill removal with vehicular accident (for each oil spill) ..... $650.00 
(Ord. No. 91-15, § 5, 1-28-91)  
Secs. 20-56—20-64. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS ON CERTAIN ROADWAYS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-04, § 2, adopted February 18, 2009, amended the Code by adding a new Art. V, §§ 20-55—20-60. Inasmuch as there already exist provisions designated as §§ 20-55, the provisions of said Ord. No. 09-04 have been included herein as Art. V, §§ 20-65—20-70, at the discretion of the editor. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 20-65. - Restrictions on golf cart modifications. 
Speed-modified golf carts, including those with increased power, wheel base or tire modifications from a standard manufactured gas or electric golf cart, are not authorized for use in the City of Miramar. All golf carts operated within the City of Miramar shall meet the minimum equipment standards established by state and local law. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 2, 2-18-09)  
Sec. 20-66. - Required equipment on golf carts. 
All golf carts operated on areas and streets designated as permitted by this article must be equipped with efficient brakes, reliable steering apparatus, safe tires, a rearview mirror, and red reflectorized warning devices in both the front and rear of the golf cart. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 2, 2-18-09)  
Sec. 20-67. - Age restrictions. 
Pursuant to F.S. § 316.212(7), a golf cart may not be operated by any person under the age of fourteen (14). 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 2, 2-18-09)  
Sec. 20-68. - Authorization to operate golf carts within the city. 
Golf carts that meet the standards of this article, and are operated by persons aged fourteen (14) and above, may be operated during the hours between sunrise and sunset in the permitted areas within the following residential permitted neighborhoods designated by appropriate signage for golf cart usage: 
(a)  Permitted areas. 
(1)  On the travel lanes of city-maintained residential roadways with a posted speed limit of thirty (30) miles per hour or less. 
(2)  On the bicycle lanes and swale areas of city-maintained roadways with a posted speed limit of thirty-five (35) miles per hour or less. 
(3)  Areas, trails, or greenway systems designated for use by golf carts via posted signage. 
(b)  Permitted neighborhoods. 
(1)  Amber Lake. 
(2)  Avalon. 
(3)  Centergate. 
(4)  Country Club Ranches. 
(5)  Courtyards at Nautica. 
(6)  Enclave. 
(7)  Encore. 
(8)  Estates of Lake Miramar. 
(9)  Fairway. 
(10)  Foxcroft. 
(11)  Franklin Farms. 
(12)  Hampshire Homes. 
(13)  Haven Lakes Estates. 
(14)  Huntington. 
(15)  Knolls. 
(16)  Meadows of Miramar. 
(17)  Mirabella. 
(18)  Miramar Centre. 
(19)  Miramar Isles. 
(20)  Miramar Landings. 
(21)  Missionwood. 
(22)  Monarch Lakes. 
(23)  Murano. 
(24)  Nautica. 
(25)  Preserves. 
(26)  Regallo. 
(27)  River Run. 
(28)  Riverdale. 
(29)  Riveria Isles. 
(30)  Saint Andrews Place. 
(31)  Sherman Circle. 
(32)  Silver Falls. 
(33)  Silver Isles. 
(34)  Silver Lakes. 
(35)  Silver Shores. 
(36)  Sunset Falls. 
(37)  Sunset Lakes. 
(38)  Trilogy. 
(39)  Tropical Valley. 
(40)  Turtle Bay. 
(41)  Tuscany. 
(42)  Villages of Renaissance. 
(43)  Villagio. 
(44)  Villas at Nautica. 
(45)  Vizcaya/Somerset. 
(46)  Windsor at Miramar. 
(47)  Windsor Palms. 
(48)  Woodscape. 
(49)  Residential areas located south of Pembroke Road, north of Miramar Parkway, west of S.R. 7 and east of the Florida Turnpike, except S.W. 62nd Avenue and S.W. 64th Avenue. 
(50)  Residential areas located south of Miramar Parkway, north of Countyline Road, west of S.R. 7 and east of the Florida Turnpike, except S.W. 62nd Avenue. 
(51)  Residential areas located south of Pembroke Road, north of Riviera Boulevard, west of the Florida Turnpike and east of South University Drive. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 2, 2-18-09)  
Sec. 20-69. - Addition or deletion of permitted neighborhoods. 
Permitted neighborhoods may be deleted from the list set forth in section 20-68(b) by resolution of the city commission. However, if the city desires to add to the list of permitted neighborhoods set forth in section 20-68(b), the city commission must approve of such additions by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 2, 2-18-09)  
Sec. 20-70. - Compliance with traffic laws. 
All persons operating golf carts shall comply with all applicable local and state traffic laws. 
(Ord. No. 09-04, § 2, 2-18-09)  
Chapter 21 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; engineering department, § 2-139; local improvements special assessments procedure, § 2-266 et seq.; health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 10; sanitary nuisances, § 10-26 et seq.; injuring public property prohibited, § 13-4; solid waste, Ch. 18. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 21-1—21-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 21-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Residential service means any individual of multiple dwelling units designed for permanent household occupancy which would include individual cooking and bathing facilities. By way of example, residential service includes, but is not limited to, the following: a single-family home, efficiency, apartment unit, cooperative apartment unit, duplex unit, condominium, and multi-family residential building unit. 
(b)  Commercial service means a use of land or a building for non-residential purposes and shall encompass all uses not characterized as residential service as defined above. 
(c)  Eastern service area means that area within the city lying east of Douglas Road. 
(d)  Western service area means that area within the city lying west of Douglas Road. 
(e)  Equivalent residential connection (ERC) means the demand placed on the city's water and wastewater systems by a typical detached single-family residence. 
(Ord. No. 96-20, 4-17-96)  
Sec. 21-27. - Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 96-20, § 1 deleted this section in its entirety).  
Sec. 21-28. - Tampering with meters, unauthorized connections prohibited. 
(a)  The tampering with any water meter within the city by any means whatsoever, the unauthorized turning on of a meter after it has been turned off by city staff, the unauthorized connecting to the city's water distribution system, and the altering of any water meter and defacing of any water meter are hereby prohibited. 
(b)  Any person who violates any terms or provisions or parts of this section, shall be subject to tampering fees, as set and amended by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1964, § 25-3; Ord. No. 08-17, § 2, 4-2-08)  
Sec. 21-29. - Connection required; connection of other water supply systems with city water supply prohibited; drilling of wells in utility easements prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall cause or permit any physical connection to be made or exist between the city's public water supply or the distribution system thereof, or any other water supply system or source of whatever nature, including but not limited to any public or privately owned well existing within or without the city. The provisions of this section shall apply to all water distribution systems either inside or outside of any building or buildings either residential or commercial. 
(b)  A connection shall be construed as any physical joining by any means of private water supply to or connection with the city's public water supply or to distribution system thereof. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drill a well in any utility easement within the city. 
(d)  Any person owning, leasing or occupying real property containing buildings used or intended for human occupancy, employment or service to the public, or location in which persons congregate shall connect to and utilize the city's public water supply or the distribution system thereof within thirty (30) days after such system is made available. 
(Code 1964, § 25-4)  
Sec. 21-30. - Installation and use of fire line connections. 
The city shall install fire line connections up to the property line upon application being made at the office of the water department. The property owner is responsible for installation and maintenance of the fire line on his or her property and subject to inspection by the city. In case of a new installation, it will be necessary for the applicant to sign a contract for service and to prepay the estimated cost of the installation from the main to the curbline (plus the extension of the proper sized main, if necessary), including labor, materials, valves, check valves, street repairs, sidewalk repairs, and such other costs as may be incurred in rendering service. Such contract shall contain the following conditions: 
(1)  Use for fire purposes only. A fire line connection, beyond the detector check, is to be used for fire purposes only and is to have no connection whatsoever with any taps that may be used for other than fire purposes. 
(2)  Protection of connection. Because of the danger of pollution, a fire line connection shall have no connection with any other source of supply with the exception in case a tank or fire pump is installed as secondary supply. There shall be a check valve installed in each city connection to prevent the water from these secondary supplies running back into the city mains. 
(3)  Tests. The owner shall not draw any water whatsoever through a fire line connection for any purpose except the extinguishment of fires, or for periodic tests of the fire system, which tests shall be made in the presence of a representative of the city. 
(4)  Equipment inspection. Any authorized representative of the city shall have free access to the building at any reasonable time for the purpose of inspecting any of the equipment. 
(5)  Detector check. At the time of installation of the fire line a detector check shall be installed by the owner at the owner's expense and at the location designated by the city. Such detector check shall be satisfactory to the insurance companies and to the city; such detector check shall be fitted with a by-pass, on which shall be set a meter, the purpose of which shall be to indicate whether or not water is being used through this connection and for the further purpose of showing any leakage, if same exists. 
(6)  Violations. Violation by the owner of any of the regulations in this section shall terminate conditions as set forth in this section, and because of such violation the city shall disconnect such pipe or pipes, or stop the flow of water through same. 
(7)  Repairs. The right is reserved by the city to shut off the supply at any time in case of accident, or to make alterations, extensions, connections or repairs and if possible the city agrees to give due and ample notice of such shutoff. 
(8)  Pressure not guaranteed. The city shall not make any guarantee as to a certain pressure in this pipe or in the main supplying the same, and shall not be, under any circumstances, held liable for loss or damage to the owner for a deficiency or failure in the supply of water, whether occasioned by shutting off of water in case of accident or alterations, extensions, connections or repairs, or for any cause whatsoever. 
(Code 1964, § 10-3)  
Sec. 21-31. - Rates for fire line connections. 
The charges and surcharges or rates for special private fire service protection based upon the size of the connection with the water department's distributing system thereof shall be set and amended by resolution of the city commission. 
Surcharge. Monthly surcharges for each fire service connection larger than the largest metered domestic line serving a building or business shall be set and amended by resolution of the city commission. 
If the monthly surcharge exceeds the basic monthly minimum water charge to commercial customers, then only the monthly surcharge shall be collected. 
(Code 1964, § 10-4; Ord. No. 04-19, § 2, 7-7-04)  
Secs. 21-32—21-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - WATER CONSERVATION REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-26, § 2, adopted March 21, 2001, repealed Div. 2, it its entirety, to read as herein set out, which pertained to water conservation. Section 3 of said ordinance enacted provisions designated as a new Div. 2 to read as herein set out. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 21-46. - Intent and purpose. 
It is the intent and purpose of this division to protect the water resources of the city from the harmful effects of over-utilization during periods of water shortage and allocate available water supplies by assisting the South Florida Water Management District in the implementation of its Water Shortage Plan. 
(Ord. No. 01-26, § 3, 3-21-01)  
Sec. 21-47. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article the following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural include the singular and words in the singular include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
(a)  "District" is the South Florida Water Management District. 
(b)  "City" is the City of Miramar, Florida. 
(c)  "Person" is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
(d)  "Water resource" means any and all water on or beneath the surface of the ground, including natural or artificial water courses, lakes, ponds, or diffused surface water, and water percolating, standing or flowing beneath the surface of the ground. 
(e)  "Water shortage condition" is when sufficient water is not available to meet present or anticipated needs of persons using the water resource, or when conditions are such as to require temporary reduction in total water usage within a particular area to protect the water resource from serious harm. A water shortage usually occurs due to drought. 
(f)  "Water shortage emergency" means that situation when the powers which can be exercised under Part II of chapter 40E-21, Florida Administrative Code, are not sufficient to protect the public health, safety, or welfare, or the health of animals, fish or aquatic life, or a public water supply, or commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational or other reasonable uses. 
(Ord. No. 01-26, § 3, 3-21-01)  
Sec. 21-48. - Application of division. 
The provisions of this division shall apply within the city to all persons using the water resource within the geographical areas subject to the water shortage or water shortage emergency, as determined by the district, whether from public or privately owned water utility systems, private wells or private connections with surface water bodies. This division shall not apply to persons using treated effluent or saltwater. 
(Ord. No. 01-26, § 3, 3-21-01)  
Sec. 21-49. - Amendments to water shortage plan. 
Chapter 40E-21, Florida Administrative Code, as it may be amended from time to time, is incorporated herein by reference as a part of this division of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 01-26, § 3, 3-21-01)  
Sec. 21-50. - Declaration of water shortage; water shortage emergency. 
The declaration of a water shortage condition or water shortage emergency within all or any part of the city by the governing board or the executive director of the district shall invoke the provisions of this division. Upon such declaration all water use restrictions or other measures adopted by the district applicable to the city, or any portion thereof, shall be subject to enforcement action pursuant to this division. Any violation of the provisions of Chapter 40E-21, Florida Administrative Code, or any violation of an order issued pursuant thereto, shall be a violation of this division if committed within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 01-26, § 3, 3-21-01)  
Sec. 21-51. - Enforcement. 
Every police officer or sheriff having jurisdiction in the area governed by this division, including city police officers, shall, in connection with all other duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this division. In addition, the city manager, by written authorization, may also delegate enforcement responsibility for this division to the code enforcement officers of the city in accordance with Florida and local law. The city, in addition to the sanctions contained herein, may take any other appropriate legal action, including but not limited to seeking emergency injunctive action, to enforce the provisions of this division. Enforcement pursuant to City Code is authorized. 
(Ord. No. 01-26, § 3, 3-21-01)  
Sec. 21-52. - Penalties. 
Violation of any provision of this division shall be subject to the following penalties: 
First violation: Fifty dollars ($50.00). 
Second and subsequent violations: A fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
Each day in violation of this division shall constitute a separate offense. Law enforcement officials should generally provide violators with no more than one (1) written warning, unless additional warnings are found to be warranted by the officer. 
(Ord. No. 01-26, § 3, 3-21-01)  
Sec. 21-53. - Water users to accept provisions of division. 
No water service shall be furnished to any person by a public or private utility unless such person agrees to accept all the provisions of this division. The acceptance of water service shall be in itself the acceptance of the provisions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 01-26, § 3, 3-21-01)  
Secs. 21-54—21-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Local improvements special assessments procedure, § 2-266 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 21-71. - Use of septic tanks, etc., restricted; connection to city sanitary sewer system prohibited; discontinued septic tanks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drain or cause to be drained, any sewerage into septic tanks or other like system within such area as is served by the city's sanitary sewer system or where such system is available therefor. 
(b)  No connection shall be made from any septic tank or other like systems with city's sanitary sewer system. 
(c)  All discontinued septic tanks or other like systems shall be cleaned and filled with earth within ninety (90) days from date of such discontinuance. 
(Code 1964, § 25-4.1)  
Sec. 21-72. - Cast-iron cleanouts required in sewers. 
There shall be installed in all sewer line hookups to the sewer system of the city cast-iron cleanout with plastic spigot end or an adaptor fitting especially made to fit the city's lateral connection in running the house sewer line into the city sewer system. 
(Code 1964, § 25-5)  
Secs. 21-73—21-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SEWER USE REGULATIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-3, adopted Nov. 18, 1998, amended Div. 2, in its entirety, to read as herein set out in §§ 21-91—21-106. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Div. 2 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 21-91. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and policy. This division sets forth uniform requirements for users of the domestic wastewater facility (WWF) of the City of Miramar. This division enables the city to comply with all applicable federal and state laws, including the Clean Water Act of 1977 (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.) as amended, the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR, Part 403), and the Florida Department of Environmental Protection's Pretreatment Requirements (Rule 62-625 F.A.C). 
The objectives of this division are: 
(1)  To prevent discharges to WWFs which will interfere with the operation of the facility, including interference with its use or disposal of domestic wastewater residuals; 
(2)  To prevent discharges to WWFs which will pass through or otherwise be incompatible with WWFs; 
(3)  To protect WWF personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and to protect the general public; 
(4)  To improve opportunities to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge; 
(5)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the WWF; 
(6)  To enable the city to comply with its wastewater discharge/reuse permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and any other federal, state, or local laws to which the WWF is subject. 
This division authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; establishes effluent limits; requires pretreatment; authorizes monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities; requires industrial user reporting; establishes administrative review procedures; and provides for setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
This division shall apply to the City of Miramar sewerage system and to persons outside the system who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's WWF. Except as otherwise provided herein, the director of the department of public works, City of Miramar shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this division. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the director may be delegated by the director to other city personnel. 
(b)  Definitions. The following terms and phrases when used in this division shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where a provision explicitly states otherwise. 
Act or the Act shall mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.). 
Approval authority shall mean the Florida Department of Environmental Protection. 
Authorized or duly authorized representative of the user shall mean either: 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit [or general permit] requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3), above, may designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city. 
Best Management Practices or BMPs shall mean schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in section 21-92(g). BMPs include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. [Note: BMPs also include alternative means (i.e., management plans) of complying with, or in place of certain established categorical pretreatment standards and effluent limits.] 
Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Celsius, expressed in terms of concentration (milligrams per liter, mg/l) and as specified in Rule 62-160, F.A.C. 
Biosolids shall mean treated wastewater sludge that can be beneficially recycled. 
Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sanitary sewer or other place of disposal; also called a house connection, which conveys wastewater from the premises of a user to the WWF. 
Bypass shall mean the intentional diversion of wastewater streams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. 
Categorical industrial user shall mean an industrial user subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards. 
Categorical Pretreatment Standards or Categorical Standards shall mean any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which applies to a specific category of industrial users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, as amended. 
Chemical oxygen demand or COD shall mean the measure of oxygen equivalent to that portion of the organic matter content of a sample that is susceptible to oxidation by a strong chemical oxidant, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l), as specified in Rule 62-160, F.A.C. 
City shall mean City of Miramar, Broward County, Florida, acting under authority of the board of city commissioners and by and through its duly authorized, appointed and/or elected officers or employees. 
Color shall mean the "true color" due to the substances in solution, expressed in wave lengths of light. 
Compatible pollutant shall mean biochemical oxygen demand, total suspended solids, pH, oil and grease, fecal coliform bacteria and any additional pollutants identified in the WWF's discharge/reuse permit for which the WWF is designed to treat and does remove to a substantial degree; also called "conventional pollutant." 
Composite sample shall mean a sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time. 
Constituents shall mean the particles and dissolved substances which exist in wastewater. 
Control authority shall mean the City of Miramar. 
Cooling water shall mean the water discharged from uses such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, of which the only pollutant added is heat; also called "non-contact cooling water." 
Daily average values shall mean the average of all sample values for any one (1) given day. 
Daily maximum shall mean the arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a pollutant collected during a calendar day. 
Dilution shall mean any addition to a wastewater discharge for the purpose of, but not limited to, making weaker, less potent, mixing, dispersing, or thinning, so as to alter the physical, chemical or biological properties, other than what is defined as pretreatment. 
Direct discharge shall mean the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to waters of the State of Florida. 
Director shall mean the Director of Public Works/Utilities Department, City of Miramar, or his duly authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
Discharge shall mean the introduction of pollutants into a WWF from any nondomestic source. 
Domestic wastewater shall mean water-carried wastes of human origin, as opposed to wastes from commercial or industrial activities. 
Effluent shall mean the wastewater or other liquid that flows out of a basin, treatment process, or treatment plant. 
Environmental Protection Agency shall mean the United States Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
Existing source shall be any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards which will be applicable to the source if the standard is therefore promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act. 
Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP) shall mean a component of the executive branch of the State of Florida authorized by Section 20.261, Florida Statutes. 
Flow proportional composite sample shall mean a sample consisting of several individual portions in which each portion of the sample is proportional to the flow and combined to form a representative sample. 
Four-day average values shall mean the average of daily values for four (4) consecutive monitoring days. 
Garbage shall mean the solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
General pretreatment regulations shall mean "The General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution," published in the Federal Register, 40 CFR 403, on June 26, 1978, and any revisions to same. 
Grab sample shall mean a sample which is collected from a wastestream over a period of time not exceeding fifteen (15) minutes, with no regard to the flow in the waste stream. 
Hazardous substance shall mean a substance having radiological, chemical, physical or biological properties that are or could be dangerous to plant, animal or human life. 
Holding tank waste shall mean any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks; also called "septic tank wastes". 
Incompatible pollutant shall mean all pollutants other than compatible pollutants as defined in this section. 
Indirect discharge shall mean the discharge or the introduction of non-domestic pollutants from any source regulated under Section 307(b) or (c) of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1317), into the WWF (including holding tank waste discharged into the system). 
Industrial user shall mean a source of indirect discharge. 
Industrial wastes shall mean the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade or business, as distinct from domestic wastewater. 
Industrial waste surcharge shall mean the additional charge made in excess of the sewer service charge assessed against industrial users of the city, or industrial users outside the city's service area who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's WWF, whose wastewater characteristics exceed established limits for designated compatible pollutants. 
Influent shall mean water, wastewater, or other liquid flowing into a reservoir, basin, treatment process, or treatment plant. 
Instantaneous limit shall mean the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit shall mean the maximum concentration (or loading) of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any grab or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
Interference shall mean a discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the public owned treatment works ("POTW"), its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act ("RCRA"); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
Local limit shall mean specific discharge limits developed and enforced by the city upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b). 
Medical waste shall mean isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood byproducts, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, fomites, etiologic agents, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes. 
Minor user shall mean a non-categorical user which has the potential to discharge a non-domestic process wastestream but whose discharge may not significantly impact the WWF, degrade receiving water quality and/or contaminate sludge. 
Monthly average shall mean the sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured during that month. 
Monthly average limit shall mean the highest allowable average of "daily discharges" over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured during that month. 
National pollutant discharge elimination system or NPDES permit shall mean a permit for discharge of pollutants from point or non-point sources into the navigable waters, the contiguous zone and the oceans pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342). 
New source shall mean: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which is commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards prescribed under Section 307(c) (33 U.S.C. 1317) of the Act which will be applicable to such source, if the standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: (a) The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or (b) The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or (c) The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, will be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of paragraph (1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: (a) Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous onsite construction program, (i) any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment, or (ii) significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or (b) Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
Non-contact cooling water shall mean water used for cooling that does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
Oil and grease shall mean a group of substances including fats, waxes, free fatty acids, soaps, and certain other non-fatty materials which are from animal or vegetable source and biodegradable. This excludes petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin. 
Oil water separator shall mean any tank, box, sump or other container in which any petroleum or grease product thereof, floating on or entrained or contained in water entering the tank, box, sump or other container, is physically separated and removed from the water prior to outfall, drainage, or recovery of the water; also called "grease trap." 
Pass through shall mean a discharge which exits the WWF into the waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of violation of any requirement of the city's discharge/reuse permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
Person shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, partnership, co-partnership, joint stock company, trust, estate, group, industrial concern, municipality, governmental entity, political subdivision, public officer or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns, or any combination thereof. This definition includes all federal, state or local government entities. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context. 
pH shall mean the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution, expressed in standard units. 
Pollutant shall mean any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, medical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water, and the characteristics of the wastewater [i.e., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand, toxicity, odor]. 
Pollution shall mean the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, or radiological integrity of water. 
Pretreatment shall mean the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing the pollutants into the WWF. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or by process changes or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants as prohibited by Rule 62-625.410(5), F.A.C. unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment requirements shall mean any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard, imposed on an industrial user. 
Pretreatment standards or standards shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. In case of conflicting standards, the more stringent thereof shall apply. 
Priority pollutant shall mean any toxic pollutant regulated under categorical pretreatment standards. 
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges shall mean the absolute prohibition against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in section 21-92(g) of this division. 
Public utility shall mean any state, county or municipality owning, managing, controlling or operating a domestic WWF, or proposing to construct a domestic WWF that provides or proposes to provide wastewater service. 
Public sewer shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by the authority of a public utility. 
Publicly owned treatment works or POTW shall mean a treatment works, as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1292), which is owned by the City. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances, which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
Receiving waters shall mean that body of water, or watercourse receiving the discharge waters from the sewage treatment plant or formed by the waters discharged from the sewage treatment plant. 
Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer that carries wastewater and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
Self-monitoring shall mean sampling, analysis and monitoring by an industrial user of his regulated discharge at the expense of the user. 
Septic tank shall mean a subsurface impervious tank designed to temporarily retain sewage or similar waterborne wastes together with: 
(1)  A sewer line constructed with solid pipe, with joints sealed, connecting the impervious tank with a plumbing stub out; and 
(2)  A subsurface system of piping to drain the clarified discharge from the tank and distribute it underground to be absorbed or filtered. 
Sewage shall mean human excrement and gray water (and by example, and not limitation, household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.). 
Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit intended to carry wastewater. 
Sewerage system shall mean sewage treatment works, pipelines or conduits, pumping stations and force mains and all other constructions, devices, and appliances appurtenant thereto, used for conducting sewage or industrial wastes to the point of ultimate disposal; also called "sewage system." 
Shall is mandatory. 
Significant industrial user or SIU. Except as provided in subsections (3) and (4) of this section, a significant industrial user is: 
(1)  An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(2)  An industrial user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day ("gpd") or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
b.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  The city may determine that an industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards is a non-significant categorical industrial user rather than a significant industrial user on a finding that the industrial user never discharges more than one hundred (100) gpd of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the following conditions are met: 
a.  The industrial user, prior to city's finding, has consistently complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment standards and requirements; 
b.  The industrial user annually submits the certification statement required in Section 6.14 B [see 40 CFR 403.12(q)], together with any additional information necessary to support the certification statement; and 
c.  The industrial user never discharges any untreated concentrated wastewater. 
(4)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) of this part has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
Significant noncompliance or SNC shall be applicable to all significant industrial users (or any other industrial user that violates subsections (3), (4) or (8) of this section) and shall mean: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six (66) percent or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six (6) month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits as defined in this section; 
(2)  Technical Review Criteria ("TRC") violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three (33) percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined in this section, multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined in this section (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that [the superintendent] determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the city's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge permit (or a general permit) or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within forty-five (45) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of Best Management Practices, which the city determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
Sludge shall mean the accumulated settleable solids separated from liquids, such as water or wastewater, during processing. 
Slug load shall mean any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 21-92 of this division or any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge. 
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code shall mean a classification pursuant to the latest edition of Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987. 
State shall mean the State of Florida. 
Stormwater shall mean any flows occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
Total suspended solids shall mean the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering through a standard glass fiber filter. 
Total toxic organics shall mean the sum of the concentrations of specific toxic organic compounds listed in 40 CFR Part 122, Appendix D, Table II, III, IV, and V, found in the user's effluent at a concentration greater than 0.01 mg/l. 
Total volatile organics or volatile organic compounds shall mean purgeable halocarbon and aromatic organics such as carbon tetrachloride, chloroform, methylene chloride, tetrachloroethene, trichloroethane, vinyl chloride, benzene, chlorobenzene, or toluene detectable in a user's effluent using U.S. EPA Methods 601 & 602. 
Toxic pollutant shall mean any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the EPA under the provision of the Clean Water Act 307(a), and any amendments to same, or other federal or state acts. 
Upset shall mean an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with pretreatment standards due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. 
User shall mean any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the city's WWF. 
Waste shall include sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous or radioactive, associated with human habitation, or of human or animal origin, or from any producing, manufacturing or processing operations of whatever nature, including the waste placed within containers of whatever nature prior to, and for the purpose of disposal. 
Wastewater shall mean the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, together with any storm, surface or ground waters which may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the WWF. 
Wastewater discharge permit shall be a permit for a user to discharge wastewater to the WWF as set forth in section 21-94 of this division. 
Wastewater facility or WWF shall mean the structures, equipment and processes owned and maintained by the city that are required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic wastewater or industrial wastewater and dispose of the effluent. For the purposes of this division, "WWF" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewater to the city's WWF from persons outside the city wastewater service area who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's WWF. 
Water reclamation facility shall mean that portion of a WWF which is designed to provide treatment (including recycling and reclamation) of domestic and industrial wastewater. 
Waters of the state shall mean all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
The use of the singular shall be construed to include the plural and plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context of its use. Where terms have not been defined in this section, they shall have their accepted meanings or such as context may imply. 
(c)  Abbreviations. 
(1)  BOD - Biochemical Oxygen Demand. 
(2)  CFR - Code of Federal Regulations. 
(3)  COD - Chemical Oxygen Demand. 
(4)  EPA - U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
(5)  FAC - Florida Administrative Code. 
(6)  FDEP - Florida Department of Environmental Protection. 
(7)  fr - Federal Register. 
(8)  FS - Florida Statutes. 
(9)  gpd - Gallons per day. 
(10)  l - Liter. 
(11)  mg - Milligrams. 
(12)  mg/l - Milligrams per liter. 
(13)  NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
(14)  O&G - Oil and Grease. 
(15)  O&M - Operations and Maintenance. 
(16)  ppb - Parts per billion. 
(17)  RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. 
(18)  SIC - Standard Industrial Classification. 
(19)  SWDA - Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U. S. C. 6901, et seq. 
(20)  TSS - Total Suspended Solids. 
(21)  TTO - Total Toxic Organics. 
(22)  U.S.C. - United States Code. 
(23)  VOC - Volatile Organic Compounds or Total Volatile Organics. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, 11-18-98; Ord. No. 12-15, § 2, 5-2-12)  
Sec. 21-92. - Use of public sewers. 
(a)  [ Generally. ] All persons shall connect to the public sewer system where the sewer system is reasonably accessible, in accordance with all applicable regulations. No person shall discharge wastewater into the stormwater system. 
(b)  Control of discharge. If any wastes or wastewaters are discharged or are proposed to be discharged into the city's WWF which do not meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements, or which may have a deleterious effect upon the WWF, its processes, equipment, personnel, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to public health, safety and welfare, or which constitutes a public nuisance, the director may: 
(1)  Reject the wastewaters or impose specific condition(s) upon the introduction of new sources of wastewater into the WWF; 
(2)  Require the user to demonstrate that in-plant improvements will modify the discharge to such a degree as to be acceptable; 
(3)  Require pretreatment of the user's discharge to ensure compliance with this division; 
(4)  Require payment of an industrial waste surcharge to cover the added cost of handling and treating excess loads imposed on the WWF by the discharge. Industrial waste surcharges may be imposed upon compatible pollutants only. Said surcharges shall be in accordance with the schedule of rates and fees set forth in section 21-102 of this division and Article VI, "Rates, Charges, Billing and Collection Procedures." Imposition of industrial waste surcharges for the recovery of treatment costs does not replace or supersede the requirements for pretreatment facilities, should they be found necessary by the director; 
(5)  Issue a notice of violation(s) in accordance with this division. 
(c)  Protection from damage. 
(1)  No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with or prevent access to any structure, appurtenance or equipment, or other part of the WWF. Any person found in violation of this requirement shall be subject to the sanctions set out in sections 21-98 through 21-100 below. 
(2)  No person shall discharge directly into a manhole or other opening of the city WWF without the prior written approval of the director. No unauthorized person shall leave open an unprotected wastewater system manhole. 
(d)  Private sewage disposal where public sewers are not reasonably accessible. The following regulations shall apply where public sewers are not reasonably accessible: 
(1)  No person shall permit the discharge of septic tank effluent or cesspool overflow to any open drain, ditch, stream, or well penetrating a water-bearing formation. 
(2)  The minimum lot area for which a private sewage disposal facility may be approved shall be in accordance with regulations of the applicable agency in Broward County with jurisdiction. 
(3)  Any person building a private sewage disposal facility must first obtain approval from the applicable agency in Broward County with jurisdiction. 
(e)  Structures required of certain dischargers into sanitary sewers. 
(1)  Storage tanks: In order to equalize flows over a twenty-four-hour period, each person discharging a waste into the city sanitary sewers having a volume in excess of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons in any one (1) day, may be required to construct and maintain at his or her own expense a suitable storage tank approved by the city. The tank shall have a capacity of at least eighty (80) percent of the normal volume of one (1) twenty-four-hour production period of waste. The outlet to the sewer shall be controlled by a waterworks-type rate controller, or other approved devices, the setting of which shall be directed by the city. 
(2)  Control manhole: Any person discharging industrial wastes into the city sanitary sewers shall construct and maintain a suitable control manhole, downstream from any treatment, storage, or other approved works, to facilitate observation, measurements and sampling of all wastes, including domestic sewage, discharged from the industry. The control manhole shall be constructed at a suitable and satisfactory location and built in a manner approved by the city. Where a storage tank is not required, the control manhole shall be equipped with a permanent-type volume measuring device as may be required by the city. The manhole shall be maintained by him or her so as to be in the judgment of the city safe, accessible and in proper operating condition at all times. 
(3)  Plans: Plans for the construction of the storage tank, control manhole, and controlling devices shall be approved by the city prior to the beginning of construction. 
(f)  Measurement of flow through sewers. 
(1)  The volume of flow used in computing charges for wastewater treatment shall be based upon metered water consumption as shown in the meter reading records maintained by the city water department. 
(2)  Any person discharging industrial wastes into the sanitary sewers of the city, all or part of which waste is discharged into the sanitary sewers, may install and maintain, at his or her expense, water meters of a type approved by the city for the purpose of determining the proper volume of flow being charged. The city has a right to read, test, or require independent testing of such private meters. 
(g)  Prohibited discharge standards. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will pass-through or interfere with the operation or performance of the WWF. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the WWF whether or not the user is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. A user may not contribute the following substances to the WWF: 
(1)  Any liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the WWF or to the operation of the WWF. This includes but is not limited to all wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty (140) degrees F (sixty (60) degrees C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
(2)  Solids or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in the WWF resulting in interference, such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining, or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes, or any solids greater than one-half (½) inch or 1.27 centimeters in any dimension. 
(3)  Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or greater then 9.5, or otherwise causing corrosive damage or hazard to structures, equipment, or endangering personnel of the WWF. 
(4)  Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with the WWF, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters or effluent reuse of the WWF, exceed the limitation set forth in a Categorical Pretreatment Standard or local limit, or cause the WWF's effluent to fail a toxicity test. 
(5)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance, a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(6)  Any substance which may cause the WWF's effluent or any other product of the WWF such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. 
In no case shall a substance discharged to the WWF cause the WWF to be in non-compliance with effluent criteria, effluent reuse criteria or sludge use and disposal criteria; or guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act; or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting effluent reuse or sludge use and disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state or local criteria applicable to the effluent reuse or sludge management method being used. 
(7)  Any sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes. 
(8)  Any wastewater having a temperature greater than one hundred fifty (150) degrees F (sixty-five and five-tenths (65.5) degrees C) or which inhibits biological activity in the WWF resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at introduction into the treatment plant to exceed one hundred four (104) degrees F (40 C). 
(9)  Any pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with either the WWF; or any wastewater treatment or sludge process, or which will constitute a hazard to humans or animals. In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain a concentration or quantities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration, quantities, or flow during normal operation. 
(10)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except as specifically approved by the director in compliance with applicable local, state, or federal regulations. 
(11)  Any wastewater which results in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the WWF in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems or creates a public nuisance. 
(12)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
(13)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at the discharge point designated by the control authority in accordance with section 21-93(e). 
(14)  Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions 
(15)  Any stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, ground water remediation discharge, and unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the director. 
(16)  Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the director in a wastewater discharge permit. 
(17)  Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the WWF. 
(18)  Any concentration of chlorides which may cause damage to the WWF, pass-through or interfere with the treatment process. 
When the director determines that a user is contributing to the WWF any of the above enumerated substances in such amounts as to pass-through or interfere with the operation of the WWF, the director shall: (1) advise the user(s) of the impact of the contribution on the WWF; and (2) develop effluent limitation(s) for the user(s) to correct the interference with the WWF. Wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the WWF. All floor drains located in process or materials storage areas must discharge to the industrial user's pretreatment facility before connecting with the WWF. 
If any person causes damages as a result of the discharge of improper wastes, as described in this division, the entire cost of the damages and/or judgments resulting therefrom shall be paid by that person. 
The city, without limitation by other sections of this article, may authorize any person to discharge industrial wastes of unusual strength or character into the sewers of the city, under approved conditions or pretreatment. The city may prohibit entry of particular industrial wastes into the sanitary sewers whenever such action is necessary to prevent damage to the system or to determine the effects of such wastes on the sewage system. 
(h)  Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards. The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards found in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471 are hereby incorporated. 
(1)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 62-625.410(4). 
(2)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 62-625.410(6). 
(3)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 62-625.700, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(4)  A user may obtain a net/gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance 62-625.820. 
(i)  State requirements. State requirements and limitations on discharges found in Rule 62-625, F.A.C. are hereby incorporated and shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this division. 
(j)  Local limits. The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing the material or substances listed below in amounts that exceed the daily average and daily max values indicated below * : 
Material or
Substance	Daily
Average
Value mg/L	Daily
Max Value
mg/L
Biological Oxygen Demand, BOD 5 * 	400 	600 
Total Suspended Solids, TSS* 	400 	3,000 
Oil and Grease 	100 	200 
pH 	5.0—9.5 	
Cyanide, CN 	0.33 	
Arsenic, As 	0.044 	
Cadmium, Cd 	0.50 	
Total Chromium, Cr 	1.81 	
Copper, Cu 	3.25 	
Lead, Pb 	3.28 	
Manganese, Mn 	0.78 	
Mercury, Hg 	0.33 	
Molybdenum, Mb 	0.05 	
Nickel, Ni 	1.13 	
Selenium, Se 	0.12 	
Silver, Ag 	0.81 	
Total Phosphorus 	15 	45 
Zinc, Zn 	4.93 	
 
* Pollutant parameters that can be surcharged under industrial waste surcharge program. 
The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the WWF. The director may impose mass limitations, instantaneous maximum limitations, maximum monthly average values, or maximum four-day average values, in addition to, or in place of, the limitations listed above. 
(k)  Control authority's right of revision. The control authority reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the WWF if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in section 21-91(a) of this division. 
(l)  Dilution. No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations unless expressly authorized by an applicable Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the state. The director may impose mass limitations on industrial users that are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, 11-18-98; Ord. No. 08-03, § 2, 11-28-07; Ord. No. 12-15, § 2, 5-2-12; Ord. No. 15-01, § 2, 11-5-14)  
Sec. 21-93. - Pretreatment. 
(a)  Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as is required to comply with this division and shall achieve compliance with all Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards, local limits, and prohibitions set forth in section 21-92 above within the time limitations as specified by the EPA, the FDEP, or the director whichever is more stringent. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the control authority shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the director for review, and shall be approved by the director before construction of the facility. The review of the plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the director under the provisions of this division. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and acceptable to the director prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
(b)  Additional pretreatment measures. 
(1)  Whenever deemed necessary, the director may require industrial users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate domestic wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and other conditions as may be necessary to protect the WWF and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this division. 
(2)  The director may require any person discharging into the WWF to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(3)  Greasetraps, interceptors, and/or oil/water separators ("interceptors") shall be required when, in the opinion of the director, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand. Interceptors shall be required in establishments such as, but not limited to, food service establishments, transportation/equipment cleaning establishments, service stations, repair shops, or other commercial or industrial facilities where wastes containing grease, oil, flammable material, sand or other harmful constituents can be discharged into the WWF. Interceptors shall not be required for residential users. 
An engineer acting on behalf of the user shall determine the type, capacity and location of the interceptor. The engineer shall submit a copy of the calculations for sizing and location to the director for final written approval. The interceptor shall be located so that it is easily accessible for cleaning, sampling, and inspection. The interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the owner at his expense, but in no instance shall the cleaning frequency be less than once per year. 
(4)  Industrial users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain at his expense an approved combustible gas detection meter. At no time shall two (2) readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge to the WWF, or at any point in the WWF, be more than five (5) percent nor any single reading over ten (10) percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. 
(c)  Affirmative defenses to violations of prohibited discharge standards. A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general and specific prohibited discharge standards in section 21-92(g) of this division (excluding items (1), (3), and (13) under section 21-92(g)) if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
(1)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or 
(2)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the department was regularly in compliance with its NPDES or wastewater facility permit, and in the cases of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(d)  Accidental discharge, upset, and bypass. 
(1)  Accidental discharge/slug plan and procedure: Each user shall provide and maintain at their expense, protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials, slug loads or other substances regulated by this division. The director may require any user to develop and implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan. At least once every two (2) years the director shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs such a plan. Detailed plans and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review and approval. The plan shall include, but is not limited to: 
a.  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges. 
b.  Description of all stored chemicals. 
c.  Procedures to prevent accidental spills, including: 
1.  Maintenance of storage areas. 
2.  Handling and transfer of materials. 
3.  Loading and unloading operations. 
4.  Control of plant site stormwater run-off. 
5.  Worker training. 
6.  Building containment structures for equipment. 
7.  Measures for controlling toxic pollutants (including solvents). 
8.  Procedures and equipment for emergency response. 
9.  Follow-up practices to limit the damage suffered by the environment of the city's equipment. 
(2)  Upset: 
a.  The occurrence of an unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
b.  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of paragraph c., below, are met. 
c.  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
1.  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
2.  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
3.  The user has properly notified the city of the upset in accordance with the procedures set forth in paragraph (4) below. 
4.  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
5.  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
6.  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power for the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(3)  Bypass: An industrial user may allow bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. 
If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit a notice to the city at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass. 
Bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards is prohibited, and the city shall take enforcement action against an industrial user for a bypass, unless: 
a.  The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or sever property damage. 
b.  There were no technically feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgement to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance. 
c.  The industrial user properly notifies the city of the bypass in accordance with the procedures set forth in paragraph (4) below. 
(4)  Notification of accidental discharge, upset or bypass: 
a.  Immediate notification via telephone: In the event of an accidental discharge, slug load, upset or bypass, (including a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 21-92(f) of this division) the user shall take the necessary measures to stop, limit, or control the discharge. The discharger shall immediately notify the director within twenty-four (24) hours about the incident by telephone. In the event the director is not available, the discharger shall notify the city communications by telephone. The notification shall include: 
1.  Address of the discharge. 
2.  Type of discharge. 
3.  Concentration of pollutants in the discharge. 
4.  Volume of discharge. 
5.  Corrective measures taken. 
b.  Written notification: Within five (5) days of the accidental discharge, upset or bypass, the discharger shall submit a written report to the director. The report shall include, but not limited to, type of discharge, concentrations, volume, cause of the event, duration of the event, corrective measures taken and measures to be employed to prevent future incidents. In the event further information is requested, the discharger shall provide the information within forty-eight (48) hours of the request. If the event occurs during a holiday period or weekend, the written notification shall be the first working day following the holiday period or weekend. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the WWF, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this division or other applicable law. 
c.  Notice to employees: A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of an accidental discharge. Employers shall insure that all employees who could cause or suffer such an accidental discharges to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedures. Failure to notify the city of potential problem discharges shall be deemed a separate violation of this division. 
(5)  Tenant responsibility: Where an owner of property leases premises to any other person as a tenant under any rental or lease agreement, if either the owner or the tenant is an industrial user, either or both may be held responsible for compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(e)  Hauled wastewater. 
(1)  Septic tank waste may be accepted into the WWF at a designated receiving facility within the treatment plant area, and at such times as are established by the director, provided the wastes do not violate section 21-92 of this division or any other requirements established or adopted by the city. Wastewater discharge permits for individual vehicles to use the facilities will be issued by the city. All septic tank waste haulers and industrial waste haulers shall be required to obtain a waste hauler permit from the Department of Natural Resources Protection, Broward County. 
(2)  The discharge of hauled industrial wastes as "industrial septage" requires prior approval and a wastewater discharge permit from the control authority. The director will require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The director shall have the authority to prohibit the disposal of the wastes, if such disposal would interfere with WWF operation. Waste haulers discharge is subject to all other sections of this division. 
(3)  Industrial waste haulers shall discharge loads only at locations designated by the director. No load shall be discharged without prior consent of the director. The director may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The director may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(4)  Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, wastewater discharge permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous waste. 
(5)  Wastes from septic tanks or industrial wastes from locations outside the city wastewater system or the connected systems who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city WWF, shall not be discharged into the city's wastewater system or any connected system without previous written approval of the director. The discharge shall only be made at a site approved by the director. 
(6)  Fees for discharging septage will be established as part of the industrial user fee system as authorized in section 21-102. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, 11-18-98; Ord. No. 08-03, § 2, 11-28-07)  
Sec. 21-94. - Wastewater discharge permit administration. 
(a)  Permit application/wastewater survey. 
(1)  It is unlawful to discharge industrial waste without a city wastewater discharge permit in any area under the jurisdiction of the city's wastewater system; or to any person outside the system who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's WWF; and/or to the WWF any wastewater except as authorized by the director in accordance with the provisions of this division. Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this division and shall subject the permittee to sanctions set out in sections 21-98 through 21-100. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. The director may require other industrial users, including liquid waste haulers and nondischarging industrial users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this division. 
(2)  All prospective industrial users must submit to the director information on the nature and characteristics of their wastewater by completing a wastewater discharge permit application/wastewater survey at least one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin. The director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require industrial users to update the survey. Information to be provided with the survey may include the industrial user's identifying information (e.g., name and address of industrial user), information of any applicable environmental permits held by the IU, and location(s) for monitoring wastes covered by the permit, description of the industrial activity, specifications of the constituents inherent to the processes and wastes, identification of the wastewater characteristics, plumbing diagrams, number of employees and hours of operation, and any other information deemed necessary by the director to evaluate the permit application. Failure to complete this survey shall be reasonable grounds for terminating service to the user and shall be considered a violation of this division. 
(3)  Within ninety (90) days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the director will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. Permits will be issued to all users determined to be significant industrial users as defined in this section. Permits may also be issued to minor users as deemed necessary by the director to ensure compliance with this division. The director may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. 
(4)  Any user which discharges industrial waste into the WWF prior to the effective date of this division are granted temporary authority to continue to discharge in compliance with the existing codes, regulations, and policies of the city. Those users who wishes to continue such discharges, shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within ninety (90) days after the effective date of this division. The user shall not cause or allow discharges to the WWF to continue after one hundred and eighty (180) days of the effective date of this division, except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the director. 
(5)  Any existing industrial user located outside of the city's jurisdiction shall submit a wastewater discharge permit application within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this division. New industrial users located outside the city's jurisdiction shall submit the applications to the director one hundred and eighty (180) days prior to any proposed discharge into the WWF. Alternatively, the director may enter into an agreement with the neighboring jurisdiction in which the industrial user is located to provide for the implementation, and enforcement of the pretreatment program requirements against said user. 
(b)  Application signatories and certification. 
(1)  All wastewater discharge permit applications and industrial user reports must contain the following certification statement and be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(2)  Annual certification for non-significant categorical industrial users. A facility determined to be a non-significant categorical industrial user by the director pursuant to section 21-91 (definition of SIU subsection (3)) and section 21-94(a)(3) must annually submit the following certification statement signed in accordance with the signatory requirements in 1.4 C [Note: See 40 CFR 403.120(l)]. This certification must accompany an alternative report required by the superintendent: 
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR, I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief that during the period from MM/DD/YYYY to MM/DD/YYYY [Month, Day, Year]: 
a.  The facility described as [Facility Name] met the definition of a non-significant categorical industrial user as described in 1.4 GG (3); [Note: See 40 CFR 403.3(v)(2)] 
b.  The facility complied with all applicable pretreatment standards and requirements during this reporting period; and 
c.  The facility never discharged more than one hundred (100) gallons of total categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting period. 
This compliance certification is based on the following information: [Fill in pertinent information]. 
(3)  If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new written authorization satisfying the requirements of this section must be submitted to the director prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. 
(4)  A facility determined to be a non-significant categorical industrial user by the director pursuant to section 21-91(b)(3) must annually submit the signed certification statement in section 21-95(c)(1). 
(c)  Permit issuance process. 
(1)  Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this division and all other applicable regulations. The cost of said permit shall be incurred by the industrial user in accordance with the fee schedule as set forth in section 21-102 of this division and Article VI "Rates, Charges, Billing and Collection Procedures." 
(2)  Permit duration shall not exceed two (2) years and upon expiration of same, a renewal permit may be issued which shall be effective for an additional two (2) years provided that the conditions of the existing permit have not changed and the appropriate renewal fees have been paid. The permit shall be displayed by the industrial user in a location at the permitted facility so as to be seen and read by the general public. 
(3)  Wastewater discharge permits shall contain at a minimum, the following conditions: 
a.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration; 
b.  A statement of nontransferability; 
c.  Pretreatment standards and effluent limits applicable to the user based on applicable standards in federal, state, and local law; 
d.  Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record keeping requirements; 
e.  Statement of applicable civil, criminal, and administrative penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(4)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain the following additional conditions: 
a.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for management of the wastewater to be discharged to the WWF; 
b.  Limits on the instantaneous, daily, monthly average and/or four-day maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
c.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate and time of discharge and/or requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
d.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection facilities, and flow metering and sampling equipment; 
e.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the WWF; 
f.  Development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or routine discharges; 
g.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the WWF; 
h.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; 
i.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with this division, and federal and state laws, rules, and regulations. 
(d)  Compliance schedules. If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the user shall submit to the director for approval and incorporation in the permit the shortest schedule by which the user is to provide additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standards: 
The following conditions shall apply to this schedule: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.). 
(2)  No increment referred to in paragraph (a) shall exceed nine (9) months. 
(3)  Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the director including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the project to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between the progress reports to the director. 
(e)  Permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit may not be reassigned, transferred or sold to a new owner or new user unless the permittee gives at least ninety (90) days advance written notice to the director and the director approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the director shall include a written certification by the new owner and/or user that: 
(1)  States that the new owner and/or user has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the terms and conditions of the existing permit. 
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit voidable on the date of facility transfer. 
(f)  Permit appeal. 
(1)  The director shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the city to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within fifteen (15) days of its issuance. Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
(2)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge provisions objected to, the reasons for the objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(3)  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
(4)  If the city fails to act within fifteen (15) days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit, shall be considered final administrative action for purposes of judicial review. 
(g)  Permit modification. Permits may be modified by the city for causes including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the WWF that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's WWF, city personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violations of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to Rule 62-625.700, F.A.C.; 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; 
(9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator. 
(10)  Upon request of the permittee, provided such request does not create a violation of any applicable requirements, standards, laws, or rules and regulations. 
Industrial user requests for permit modifications shall be made in writing and include facts or reasons which support the request. When modifying a permit, the city shall allow a reasonable time frame for the user to comply with the new or changed conditions if the user cannot meet them at the time of the modification and if permitted by law. If the new or changed conditions are the result of new or changed pretreatment regulations, those regulations will stipulate the compliance period. The filing of a request by the permittee for a wastewater discharge permit modification does not stay any wastewater discharge permit condition. 
(h)  Permit revocation. Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to notify the city of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge. 
(2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the city of changed condition pursuant to section 21-95(f). 
(3)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application. 
(4)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports. 
(5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment. 
(6)  Refusing to allow the city timely access to the facility premises and records. 
(7)  Failure to meet effluent limitations. 
(8)  Failure to pay penalties. 
(9)  Failure to pay sewer charges. 
(10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules. 
(11)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted facility. 
(12)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this division. 
(13)  Indication that the discharge presents a threat to the environment or threatens to interfere with the operation of the WWF. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon nonuse, cessation of operations, or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit. 
(i)  Permit renewal. All permittees must apply for a permit renewal a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the existing permit. The reapplication for a permit shall consist of a written request for reissuance of the permit. The request shall state if all terms and conditions of the existing permit and ordinance are complied with and must be signed by an authorized representative of the user. 
(j)  Special agreements. The city reserves the right to enter into special agreements with industrial users setting out special terms under which they may discharge to the WWF. In no case will a special agreement waive compliance with a categorical pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(k)  Regulation of discharge from other jurisdictions. In the event another jurisdiction or municipality contributes all or a portion of its wastewater to the city's WWF, the WWF may require the jurisdiction or municipality to enter into an multi-jurisdictional agreement with the city. 
(1)  Prior to entering into an agreement, the director shall request the following information from the contributing jurisdiction: 
a.  A description of the quality and volume of the wastewater at point(s) where it enters the WWF from the contributing jurisdiction. 
b.  An inventory of all industrial users discharging to the WWF within the contributing jurisdiction. 
c.  Other information as may be required by the director. 
(2)  A multi-jurisdictional agreement as required above, shall contain the following conditions: 
a.  A requirement for the contributing jurisdiction to adopt a sewer use ordinance which is at least as stringent as this division and local limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in section 21-92. The requirement shall specify that the ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to this division. 
b.  A requirement for the contributing jurisdiction to submit a revised industrial user inventory on at least an annual basis. 
c.  A requirement for the contributing jurisdiction to (i) conduct pretreatment implementation activities including industrial user permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement; or (ii) authorize the WWF to take or conduct the activities on its behalf. 
d.  A requirement for the contributing jurisdiction to provide the city with access to all information that the municipal user obtains as part of its pretreatment activities. 
e.  Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing jurisdiction wastewater at the point where it discharges to the WWF. 
f.  Requirements for monitoring the municipal discharge. 
g.  A provision ensuring the director access to the facilities of users located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the director. 
h.  A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the multi-jurisdictional agreement. 
(3)  Violation of the terms and conditions of the multi-jurisdictional agreement subjects the contributing jurisdiction to the sanctions set out in sections 21-98 through 21-100. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, 11-18-98; Ord. No. 12-15, § 2, 5-2-12)  
Sec. 21-95. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  Baseline monitoring reports. 
(1)  Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical industrial users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the superintendent a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (b), below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the superintendent a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (2) below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(2)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below. 
a.  All information required in section 21-94(a)(2) 
b.  Measurement of pollutants. 
c.  The user shall provide the information required in section 4.5A(7)(a) through (d). 
d.  The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this section. 
e.  Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment the user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e) to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e), this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the control authority; 
f.  Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with section 21-95 (d)(3); 
g.  The superintendent may allow the submission of a baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures; 
h.  The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW. 
(3)  Compliance certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative as defined in section 21-91(b) (duly authorized representative of the user) and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance ("O&M") and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(4)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in subsection 21-95(a)(2)c. 
(b)  Signature and report certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be certified in accordance with section 21-94(b)(1) of this article and signed by an authorized representative as defined in section 21-91(b) (duly authorized representative of the user). 
(c)  Periodic compliance reports. 
(1)  Any user required to self monitor by their wastewater discharge permit shall submit to the director at a frequency determined by the director but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), a report indicating the nature and concentration of the pollutants in the effluent which are limited in the wastewater discharge permit. In addition, this report shall include a report of measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period for the discharge. At the discretion of the director and in consideration of such factors as high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the director may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a Best Management Practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required by the director or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user. Falsification of self-monitoring reports shall be considered a significant violation of this division and could lead to termination of the user's wastewater discharge permit. 
(2)  If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirement of this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the WWF, using the procedures prescribed in section 21-96(d) of this division, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(d)  Self monitoring and analysis of user discharges. 
(1)  The monitoring reports required in paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) of this section shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and nature and concentration, or production and mass where required, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the wastewater discharge permit. The frequency of monitoring to demonstrate compliance shall be as prescribed in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(2)  All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the state pursuant to Rule 62-160, F.A.C. Analytical techniques for additional pollutants not contained in Rule 62-160, F.A.C., must be performed using validated analytical methods approved by the state or by EPA. 
(3)  Except as indicated in section 21-95(d)(4) below, the industrial user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the director may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or through a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(4)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, toxicity, and volatile organic chemicals must be obtained using grab sample collection techniques. 
(e)  Compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline report. Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with the applicable standards, or in case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the WWF, any user subject to pretreatment requirements shall submit to the director a report indicating the concentration of pollutants in the discharge along with the average and maximum daily flow for those processes. These reports shall comply with the requirements of subsection 62-625.600(3), F.A.C. 
(f)  Report of changed conditions. 
(1)  Each user is required to notify the director of planned significant changes to the industrial user's operations or system that might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least sixty (60) days before the change. 
(2)  The director may require the user to submit information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 21-94(a); 
(3)  The director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 21-94(c) or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 21-94(g); 
(4)  No user shall implement the planned change of condition(s) until and unless the director has responded to the user's notice; 
(5)  For purposes of this requirement flow increases of ten (10) percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants, shall be deemed significant. 
(g)  Reports from unpermitted users. All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the city as the director may require. 
(h)  Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling and analysis performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the user must notify the control authority within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat sample analysis to the control authority within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to re-sample if: 
(1)  The city performs monitoring at the industrial user's at least once a month, or 
(2)  The city performs sampling between the industrial user's initial sampling and when the industrial user receives the results of this sampling. 
(i)  Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
(1)  Any industrial user shall notify the director, the EPA Region IV Waste Management Division Director, and the FDEP hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the WWF of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261 and/or Rule 62-730, F.A.C. Notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). 
(2)  If the industrial user discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the WWF, the notification shall also contain the following information as to the extent information is known and readily available to the industrial user: 
a.  An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes. 
b.  An estimation of the mass and concentration of the constituents in the wastewater discharged during that calendar month. 
c.  An estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months. 
(3)  All notifications must take place no later than thirty (30) days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph need to be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed discharges must be submitted under section 21-95(f) above. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported under the self monitoring requirements of sections 21-95(c) and (d) above. 
(4)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of paragraph (1) of this subsection during a calendar month in which a user discharges no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e) requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(5)  In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the WWF, the EPA Region IV Waste Management Waste Division Director, and the FDEP hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of the regulations. 
(6)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(7)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this division, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(j)  Signatories and certification. All reports identified in this section must be signed and certified in accordance with section 21-94(b). 
(k)  Records. 
(1)  Any user subject to the reporting requirements established in this section shall retain and make available for inspection and copying by EPA, FDEP, and the city, all records of all information resulting from monitoring activities required by this division. Records for sampling activities shall include the following: 
a.  The date, exact place, method, time of sampling and names of the person or persons taking the sample, and any appropriate field sample preservation methods; 
b.  The date analyses were performed; 
c.  Who performed the analyses; 
d.  The analytical methods/techniques used and detection limits; and 
e.  The results of the analyses. 
(2)  All records of monitoring activities and results shall be retained by the user for a minimum of three (3) years. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the user, or when requested by the director, FDEP, or EPA. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, 11-18-98; Ord. No. 12-15, § 2, 5-2-12; Ord. No. 13-01, § 2, 10-3-12)  
Sec. 21-96. - Compliance monitoring. 
(a)  Monitoring facilities. 
(1)  The city may require the user to provide and maintain at his own expense monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or the regulated process discharge. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's property at a location approved by the city prior to installation. When a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, the city may allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. There shall be ample room in or near the sampling manhole or facility to allow flow measurements, accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within ninety (90) days following written notification by the director. 
(2)  The city may require the user to install and maintain at his own expense suitable flow metering and sampling equipment to facilitate the accurate observation, sampling, and flow measurement of process wastewater. The sampling and measuring equipment shall be properly operated, cleaned, and maintained in good working order at all times. The sampling and metering equipment shall be accessible at all times. The devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated periodically based on manufacturer's recommendation to ensure their accuracy. 
(3)  The failure of an industrial user to keep his monitoring facility in good working order shall be deemed a separate violation of this division and shall not be grounds for claiming that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(b)  Authority of city inspectors. 
(1)  The city shall have the right to inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this division, and any permit or order issued hereunder, is being met and all requirements are being complied with. 
(2)  Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the director or his representatives ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any of their duties. The city, FDEP, and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Tampering with, or knowingly rendering the devices inaccurate shall be a significant violation and shall be prosecuted to the full extent of this division. 
(3)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into his premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city, FDEP, or EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to the safe and easy access of the industrial facility shall be promptly and permanently removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the director. The costs of clearing access shall be born by the user. Unreasonable delays in allowing control authority personnel access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this division. 
(c)  Search warrants. 
(1)  A search and/or seizure warrant will be obtained by the city if: 
a.  The director has been refused access to a building, structure or property or any part thereof; 
b.  The director has demonstrated probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this division; 
c.  There is a need to inspect as part of a routine inspection designed to verify compliance with this division or any permit or order issued hereunder; or 
d.  There is a need to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(2)  The search and/or seizure warrant shall be issued by the municipal court judge upon application by the city attorney, describing therein the specific location subject to the warrant. The warrant shall specify what may be searched and/or seized on the property described. 
(3)  The warrant shall be served at reasonable hours by the director in the company of a uniformed police officer of the local municipality. In the event of an emergency affecting public health and safety, inspections shall be made without the issuance of a warrant. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, 11-18-98)  
Sec. 21-97. - Confidential information. 
(a)  User information and data obtained from reports, questionnaires, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits and monitoring programs, and from inspections and sampling activities shall be available to the public or other government agencies without restriction. Information will be considered confidential only if the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state and federal law. Any request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. 
(b)  When properly requested and demonstrated by the user in accordance with the procedures in Section 403.111, F.S., the portions of information which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to this division, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit, FDEP disposal/reuse system permit and/or pretreatment programs; however, such portions of information shall be available for use in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the user. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(c)  Information accepted by the city as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency by the city until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the user. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, 11-18-98)  
Sec. 21-98. - Administrative enforcement. 
(a)  Notice of violation. 
(1)  Whenever the city finds that any user has violated or is violating this division, or a wastewater discharge permit, or any prohibition, limitation of requirements contained herein, the director or his agent may serve upon said user a written notice of violation. The notice of violation shall set forth the specific violation, the corrective action to be taken by the user, and the period of time by which the user must correct the violation. 
(2)  Within ten (10) days of the receipt of this notice, the user shall submit to the director a written explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violation occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city to take action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(b)  Show cause hearing. 
(1)  The director may order any user which causes or contributes to violation(s) of this division, wastewater discharge permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the director and show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. 
(2)  The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user. 
(c)  Administrative order. 
(1)  When the director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate this division, wastewater discharge permits or orders issued thereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, he may issue an administrative order to the user directing that the user come into compliance within a specified period of time. 
(2)  Administrative orders may also direct the user to take appropriate remedial or preventive action to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
(3)  Administrative orders may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including the installation of pretreatment technology, additional self monitoring, and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. 
(4)  An administrative order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a federal categorical pretreatment standard or requirement, nor may it release the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. 
(5)  Issuance of an administrative order shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other action against the user as set forth in other sections of this division. 
(d)  Administrative penalties. 
(1)  Notwithstanding any other section of this division, any user who is found to have violated any provision of this division, its wastewater discharge permit and orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement may be penalized in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation per day. Each day on which non-compliance shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. Assessments may be added to the user's next scheduled sewer service charge and/or the director shall have other collection remedies as may be available for other service charges and fees. 
(2)  Unpaid charges, fees, and penalties shall, after thirty (30) calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of fifty (50) percent of the unpaid balance and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of eighteen (18) percent per month. A lien against the individual user's property will be sought for unpaid charges, fees, and penalties. 
(3)  Users desiring to dispute penalties must file a request in writing for the director to reconsider the penalty along with full payment of the penalty within ten (10) days of being notified of the penalty. Where the director believes a request has merit, he shall convene a hearing on the matter within fifteen (15) days of receiving the request from the user. In the event that the user's appeal is successful, the payment together with any interest accruing thereto shall be returned to the industrial user. The city may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions such as sampling, inspections, notices, and orders to the penalty. 
(e)  Termination of service. 
(1)  The director may immediately terminate a user's wastewater discharge and/or wastewater discharge permit, after informal notice to the user, whenever such termination is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. 
(2)  The director may also immediately terminate a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, which presents or may present an endangerment to the environment, or threatens interference with the operation of the WWF. 
(3)  Any user notified of a termination of its wastewater discharge and/or wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the user to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director shall take steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the WWF system, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The director may reinstate the wastewater discharge and/or the wastewater discharge permit when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director elimination of the non-complying discharge. 
(4)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the director, prior to the date of any show cause hearing under section 21-98(b). 
(5)  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, 11-18-98)  
Sec. 21-99. - Judicial enforcement. 
If any person who discharges wastewater, industrial wastes, or other wastes into the WWF contrary to the provisions of this division or any order or permit issued hereunder, or violates any provision of this division, the director, through the city attorney, may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the Circuit Court for Broward County. Such an action by the city may be commenced without the use of the procedures set forth in section 21-98. 
(1)  Injunctive relief. 
a.  Whenever a user has violated a pretreatment standard or requirement or continues to violate the provisions of this division, wastewater discharge permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the director, through legal counsel may petition the Circuit Court for Broward County for issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction or both (as may be appropriate) which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this division on activities of the user. 
b.  The city may also seek other action as appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief. A petition for injunctive relief need not be filed as a prerequisite to taking any other action against a user. The director shall have remedies to collect these fees as he has to collect other sewer service charges. 
(2)  Civil penalties. 
a.  Any user who has violated or continues to violate this division, any order or wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the control authority for a maximum civil penalty of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) but not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), plus actual damages incurred by the WWF per violation per day for as long as the violation continues. 
b.  In addition to the above described penalty and damages, the director may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with the enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. The director shall petition the court to impose, assess, and recover such sums. 
c.  In determining amount of liability, the court may take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other action against a user. 
(3)  Criminal prosecution. 
a.  Any user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this division, any orders or wastewater discharge permits issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of at least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than one (1) year or both. 
b.  Any user that willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the WWF which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a penalty of at least five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per violation per day or imprisonment for one (1) year or both up to a fine of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than three (3) years or both. This penalty shall be in addition to any other action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. 
c.  Any user who knowingly makes false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this division, wastewater discharge permit, or order or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this division shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of at least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) but not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than one (1) year or both. 
d.  In the event of a second conviction, the user shall be punishable by a fine of at least ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) but not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per violation per day or imprisonment of one (1) year but not for more than three (3) years or both. 
(4)  Remedies nonexclusive. The provisions in sections 21-98 and 21-99 are not exclusive remedies. The city reserves the right to take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a non-compliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the city reserves the right to take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the city is empowered to take more than one (1) enforcement action against any non-compliant user. These actions may be taken concurrently. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, 11-18-98)  
Sec. 21-100. - Supplemental enforcement. 
(a)  Performance bonds. The director may decline to reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user which has failed to comply with the provisions of this division, any orders, or a previous wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder, unless the user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the director to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. The city attorney must approve the form of any bond. 
(b)  Water supply severance. Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this division, orders, or wastewater discharge permits issued hereunder, water service to the user may be severed and service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, 11-18-98)  
Sec. 21-101. - Publication of industrial users in significant noncompliance. 
(a)  The city shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by the WWF, a list of the users which, at any time during the previous twelve (12) months (Ord. No. 99-3, 11-18-98), were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall be applicable to all significant industrial users (or any other industrial user that violates paragraphs (3), (4) or (8) of this section) and shall mean: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six (66) percent or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six (6) month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits as defined in section 21-91(b); 
(2)  Technical review criteria ("TRC") violations, defined as those in which thirty-three (33) percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six (6) month period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by section 21-91(b); multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by section 21-91(b); (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that [the superintendent] determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the superintendent's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within forty-five (45) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of Best Management Practices, which the superintendent determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, 11-18-98; Ord. No. 12-15, § 2, 5-2-12)  
Sec. 21-102. - Fees and industrial waste surcharges. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this division to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the city's WWF for the implementation of the pretreatment program established herein. The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in the City of Miramar Utilities Schedule of Charges and Fees. 
(b)  Fees. The city may adopt charges and fees which may include the following: 
(1)  Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment monitoring program; 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspections, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing self monitoring reports submitted by users; 
(3)  Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(4)  Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing the applications; 
(5)  Fees for wastewater discharge permits; 
(6)  Fees for filing appeals; 
(7)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. 
These fees relate solely to matters covered by this division and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the city. 
(c)  Industrial waste surcharge rates. The city may adopt industrial waste surcharge rates for the following conventional parameters: 
Material or Substance 	Upper Limit 
(1) BOD5 - above 400mg/L 	500 mg/L 
(2) Reserved. 	
(3) TSS - above 400 mg/L 	600 mg/L 
(4) Oil & Grease - above 100 mg/L 	200 mg/L 
(5) Reserved. 	
(6) T-Phos - above 15 mg/L 	45 mg/L 
 
Industrial waste surcharge rates will be based on WWF's treatment cost and will be charged on a mass emission basis. The rates will be periodically modified and set forth in the City of Miramar Utilities Rates Schedule. 
(d)  The city commission by resolution, upon the recommendation of the director, shall establish or amend a reasonable rate schedule for IU's. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, 11-18-98; Ord. No. 08-03, § 2, 11-28-07)  
Sec. 21-103. - Severability. 
If any provision, paragraph, word, section or article of this division is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraphs, words, sections, and articles shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, 11-18-98)  
Sec. 21-104. - Conflict. 
All other divisions and parts of other divisions inconsistent or conflicting with any part of this division are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency or conflict. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, 11-18-98)  
Sec. 21-105. - Inclusion in Code. 
It is the intention of the governing body of the City of Miramar that the provisions of this division shall become and be made a part of the City of Miramar Code; and that the sections of this division may be renumbered or relettered and the word "ordinance" may be changed to "section," "article," or any other appropriate word or phrase in order to accomplish such intentions. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, 11-18-98)  
Sec. 21-106. - Effective date. 
This division shall become effective as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, 11-18-98)  
Secs. 21-107—21-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - GAS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Local improvements special assessments procedure, § 2-266 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 21-126—21-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - GAS LINES 
 
Sec. 21-141. - Location in easements; waiver. 
(a)  All gas lines within the easements and rights-of-way of the city shall be located at no greater depth than two (2) feet from the center of any rear or side easement. 
(b)  All gas lines within the easements and rights-of-way of the city shall be at no greater depth than eighteen (18) inches nor less than fifteen (15) inches from grade. 
(c)  All gas lines within the easements and rights-of-way of the city shall not be located in any utility easement adjacent to any easement wherein is located a main sewer line. 
(d)  All gas lines within the easements and rights-of-way of the city installed in any roadway of the city shall be installed with a cover of twenty-four (24) inches. 
(e)  Upon special application to the building department of the city, the building department may grant permission to waive the requirement for the twenty-four-inch covering of gas lines installed under roadways and permit a cover of twenty (20) inches in the event the building department finds such modification to be advisable under existing conditions. 
(f)  All persons owning any gas lines within the easements and rights-of-way of the city shall furnish the building department of the city six (6) copies of all blueprints showing the location of any gas lines and six (6) copies of blueprints showing the as-built gas lines. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-01)  
Sec. 21-142. - Notification to fire marshal of completion, readiness for inspection of gas installations. 
Upon completion of any installation, modification or change of any existing gas system or apparatus, including LP, manufactured or natural, or upon completion of each public or commercial service or meter connection or change or upon completion of installation or reinstallation of each fixture or appliance or after completion of any repairs to any gas line within the city, the person performing such service shall call upon the fire marshal of the city for an inspection thereof. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-02)  
Sec. 21-143. - Duty of fire marshal; notice of violation. 
The fire marshal, upon making his or her inspection of a gas installation under section 21-142, shall determine whether the work so performed has been completed in an approved manner so as to render the system safe. In the event the fire marshal finds, upon inspection, that the work so performed constitutes a danger or hazard or does not comply with the laws or regulations of the city, he or she shall so notify the person calling for such inspection and shall inform such person what is required to correct the dangerous or hazardous condition. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-03)  
Sec. 21-144. - Inspection fees. 
For each inspection under this division, the city shall collect and receive inspection fees, which shall be set and amended by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-04; Ord. No. 08-17, § 3, 4-2-08)  
Sec. 21-145. - Failure to correct violations. 
Any person who, after having received notice of any dangerous or hazardous condition existing in any gas system or apparatus, including LP, manufactured or natural gas by the fire marshal, fails to correct such dangerous or hazardous condition, shall be guilty of a violation of this division and shall be punishable according to law. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-05)  
Sec. 21-146. - Owners of gas lines required to furnish emergency crews. 
All persons owning gas lines or gas service furnishing gas within the city through underground gas lines shall have and maintain an emergency crew on duty at all times for the purpose of remedying and repairing any malfunction or break in such underground gas line, and shall furnish their names, current addresses and current twenty-four-hour-a-day emergency telephone numbers to the city clerk so that the emergency crew can be reached at all times. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-06)  
Sec. 21-147. - Propane gas tanks or cylinders to be marked. 
All propane gas tanks or cylinders shall be plainly marked thereon to show the name, address and telephone number of the owner of such tank or cylinder and the gas company supplying same to the consumer. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-07)  
Sec. 21-148. - Rate fixing; adequacy of facilities as criterion. 
(a)  In fixing the just, reasonable, and compensatory rates, charges, fares, tolls, or rentals to be observed and charged for service within the city by any and all gas companies under its jurisdiction, the city commission is authorized to give consideration, among other things, to the efficiency, sufficiency, and adequacy of the facilities provided and the services rendered, the value of such service to the public, and the ability of the company to improve such service and facilities; provided that no gas company shall be denied a reasonable rate of return upon its rate base in any order entered pursuant to such proceedings. In its consideration thereof, the city commission shall have authority, and it shall be the city commission's duty, to hear service complaints, if any, that may be presented by subscribers and the public during any proceedings involving such rates, charges, fares, tolls, or rentals; provided, however, that no service complaints shall be taken up or considered by the city commission at any proceedings involving rates, charges, fares, tolls or rentals unless the utility shall have been given at least thirty (30) days' written notice thereof and any proceeding may be extended prior to final determination for such period. No order under this section shall be made effective until a reasonable time shall be given the utility involved to correct the cause of service complaints considering the factor of growth in the community and availability of necessary equipment. 
(b)  At the time that the gas company applies to the commission for approval of a rate increase, a fee, set and amended by resolution of the city commission, shall be paid to the city clerk to cover the cost of the city investigating the propriety of the rate increase requested. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-15; Ord. No. 08-17, § 4, 4-2-08)  
Secs. 21-149— - 21-160. Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - GAS STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 21-161. - Title and scope. 
(a)  This division shall be known as the gas code of the city and may be cited as such. 
(b)  The purpose of this division is to provide standards, provisions, and requirements in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and to provide for the safe installation, maintenance and repair of consumer gas piping, gas appliances, gas distribution, and the storage and handling of gases. 
(c)  The rules adopted in this division shall apply to all facilities and appliances located within the city which are used in the storage, transfer, distribution or utilization of gas. No deviation from these rules shall be permitted unless authorized in writing by the city commission. 
(d)  This division will not apply to natural gas and any reference to natural gas in this division is hereby deleted. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-1)  
Sec. 21-162. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Authority having jurisdiction shall mean the city manager of the city or his or her appointed representative. 
Certificate of approval shall mean a properly executed document or tag issued and/or attached by the inspector to the inspected material, piping, or appliance installation. 
Gas shall mean manufactured liquefied petroleum gas in the liquid or vapor state, liquefied petroleum gas with air admixture or any similar gaseous substances, or any mixtures of any of these gases. 
Gas company utility, public utility, or operator shall mean any person distributing gas, whether by pipeline, container, cylinder, vessel, or vehicle within the city or authorized and proposing to so engage. 
Inspector shall mean any person appointed by the city manager to assure compliance with this division. 
Rate hearing examiner shall mean the mayor or his or her appointed representative. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-2; Ord. No. 91-22, § 17, 3-4-91)  
Sec. 21-163. - Powers and duties of inspector. 
(a)  The inspector is authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this division, and the inspector, upon presentation of proper credentials, may enter any building or premises at reasonable times for the purpose of making inspections and preventing violations of this division. In addition he or she shall be granted access to all installations or construction projects at any and all reasonable times and shall be given access to any records or information related to or arising from compliance with this division or the adopted standards. 
(b)  The inspector may order disconnection of any gas piping, fixture or appliance for which a certificate of approval is required but has not been issued with respect to same or which, on inspection, shall be found defective or in such condition as to endanger life or property. In all cases where such disconnection is made, a notice shall be attached to the piping, fixture or appliance ordered disconnected by the inspector, together with the reason or reasons thereof. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove such notice or reconnect such gas piping, fixture or appliance without authorization by the inspector and such gas piping, fixture or appliance shall not be put in service or used until the inspector has attached his or her certificate of approval in lieu of his or her prior disconnection notice. 
(c)  The inspector shall ensure, through monitoring of all gas company facilities in progress of construction, that the facilities are being installed and tested in accordance with the gas company's written construction standards and this gas code. The inspector shall have the right to prevent the gas facilities from being covered prior to inspection. 
(d)  For any buried metallic piping which may be subject to corrosion and is not under cathodic protection meeting the requirements set forth in Part 192, Code of Federal Regulations, an inspection shall be made in a manner and from time to time as deemed necessary by the building department. 
(e)  Rough piping inspection of customer fuel lines shall be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been attached thereto. Such inspection shall include among other things a pressure test to determine if any gas leaks are present. 
(f)  Final piping inspection shall be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions thereof which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed and after all fixtures or gas appliances have been attached thereto. The inspection shall include among other things a pressure test to determine if any gas leaks are present. 
(g)  It shall be the duty of the inspector to confer from time to time with representatives of the local health department, local fire department, and gas companies, and otherwise obtain from proper sources all helpful information and advice, presenting same to the city officials from time to time for their consideration. 
(h)  The inspector shall determine that the corrosion protection coating on the pipeline completely covers the pipe and any connection made to it. The inspector shall determine that there are no holes in the coating using a device such as an electrical holiday tester suitable for this purpose. 
(i)  Whenever a gas service connection is made into the gas distribution line after the original inspection, it shall be determined by the inspector that the connection has been made in a satisfactory manner. The inspector shall further determine that there is no gas leakage and the corrosion protection covering has been installed so that there are no holes in the pipe covering. 
(j)  All underground gas distribution piping shall be inspected before it is covered. The inspector shall conduct such tests deemed necessary to show that all hazardous leaks have been eliminated. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-4)  
Sec. 21-164. - Certificates of approval. 
The inspector shall issue a certificate of approval, at completion of the work for which a permit has been issued, if after inspection it is found that such work complied with the provisions of this division. A duplicate of each certificate of approval issued shall be delivered to the gas company and used as its authority to render gas service. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-5)  
Sec. 21-165. - Bond and license. 
(a)  No person shall engage in or work at the installation, extension, or alteration of consumers' gas piping or gas burning appliances, until such person shall have secured a license as provided in this division, and shall have executed and delivered to the city a good and sufficient bond to be approved by the city manager in the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) with corporate surety, conditioned for the faithful performance of all such work entered upon or contracted for, in strict accordance and compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(b)  Upon approval of such bond and prior to engaging in any work referred to in (a) above, such person shall first secure a nontransferable license from the city upon payment of the license fee as otherwise provided by the city. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this division shall be construed as prohibiting an individual from installing or repairing his or her own appliances in his or her own private residence or installing, extending, replacing, altering, or repairing consumer's piping in his or her own private residence, or as requiring a license or bond from an individual doing such work; providing, however, all such work must be done in conformity with all other provisions of this division and including those relating to permits, inspections and fees. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-6; Ord. No. 91-22, § 17, 3-4-91)  
Sec. 21-166. - Permits. 
(a)  No person shall install gas-burning appliances, gas storage facilities, gas distribution or service, gas piping or convert existing piping, or install, extend, replace, alter or repair consumer's piping for others or gas-consuming appliances to utilize another type of gas without first obtaining a permit from the city to do such work; however, permits will not be required for setting or connecting other gas-burning appliances in the same residence, commercial establishment, or industrial plant, or for the repair of leaks in service piping. 
(b)  No person shall build a liquefied petroleum gas storage facility to furnish gas to one (1) or more consumers or make additions to such storage, use other than atmospheric air adjacent to the storage tank to vaporize the liquid in the storage tank, construct a plant to fill cylinders (bottles) with liquefied petroleum gas, or use an area to store cylinders either empty or full, without first securing a permit. 
(c)  Gas companies shall not be required to obtain permits to set meters. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-7)  
Sec. 21-167. - Restoration of streets, sidewalks, surfacing and the like. 
In cases of disturbance of any pavement, street, sidewalk, driveway, surfacing or the like or disturbance of any improvement by a licensee in the pursuit of furnishing gas to consumers of the city, the licensee shall, at his or her own expense, and in the manner prescribed by the appropriate ordinance or resolution of the city commission, replace and restore such pavement, driveway, surfacing or other improvement to as good condition as before the disturbance. The bond required to be posted by the licensee shall also cover this requirement. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-8)  
Sec. 21-168. - Limitation as to contracts with users of gas. 
Each licensee under this division, upon acceptance of the license granted under this division and the permits issued under section 21-166, shall covenant that no customer to be served by the licensee in the city has been or will be required to agree, by written contract or otherwise, to use the licensees' gas exclusively for a period of time exceeding one (1) year. It is the intent and purpose of this section to provide that all citizens of the city shall have free choice at all times, except for the aforesaid one-year period, as to the kind of gas he or she wants to purchase or from whom he or she wishes to purchase it for his or her residence, commercial building or other structure. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-9)  
Sec. 21-169. - Right to purchase by city. 
By issuing a license under this division, the city reserves the right to purchase any lines, mains, meters, liquefied petroleum gas storage and allied facilities that are installed by a licensee at a price mutually agreed upon. If the price cannot be agreed upon, the price shall be determined by an arbitration board consisting of three (3) persons, one (1) of whom shall be selected by the city commission, one (1) shall be appointed by the licensee and the two (2) persons so selected shall select a third member of such board. In the event such board cannot agree as to the price to be paid by the city, then the city has the right to file appropriate condemnation proceedings. In all events, the city reserves the unrestricted right to exercise its right of condemnation of any lines, mains, meters, liquefied petroleum gas storage and allied facilities that would be usable for gas distribution in the event that the city, itself, decides to go into the gas distribution business. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-10)  
Sec. 21-170. - Inspection fees. 
(a)  The fees for inspecting a single residence including both rough and final inspection shall be set and amended by resolution of the city commission. 
(b)  The inspection fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of any permit therefor. 
(c)  Any and all inspection fees shall be paid by the person to whom the permit is issued. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-11; Ord. No. 08-17, § 5, 4-2-08)  
Sec. 21-171. - Violations and penalties and revocation of license. 
Any person who shall fail to comply with or violate any of the provisions of this division shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-13. In addition thereto, any license which is held by such person may be revoked following such conviction. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-12)  
Sec. 21-172. - Nonliability of city. 
This division shall not be construed as imposing upon the city any liability or responsibility for damages to any person injured by any defect in any gas piping or gas-burning appliance covered herein, or by installation thereof; nor shall the city, or any official or employee thereof, be held as assuming any such liability or responsibility by reason of the inspection authorized hereunder or the certificates of approval issued by the inspector. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-13)  
Sec. 21-173. - Use of existing piping. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this division to the contrary, consumer's piping installed prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this division was derived may be converted to another type of gas if the inspector finds, upon inspection and proper tests, that such piping will render reasonable satisfactory gas service to the consumer and will not in any way endanger life or property; otherwise such piping shall be altered or replaced, in whole or in part, to conform with the requirements of this division. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-14)  
Sec. 21-174. - Gas tank storage area. 
A gas company must keep the area owned or controlled by it lying in the vicinity of a gas storage area free from foreign debris and matter not required for the operation and use of such tank. 
(Code 1964, § 12A-20)  
Sec. 21-175. - Distance requirements for the installation of LP gas tanks with twenty thousand-water gallon capacity and larger, adjacent to schools, parks and public buildings. 
(a)  Aboveground LP gas tanks shall be located as indicated by Table 3-1 in the proposed standards for the storage and handling of liquefied petroleum gas, a section of National Fire Prevention Association Code No. 58-1972. 
(b)  Aboveground LP gas tanks shall be positioned in such a manner that they are parallel with the nearest face of any public or private school or public building. In addition, aboveground LP gas tanks shall be installed parallel with the nearest adjacent property line of any municipal park. Under no condition shall the ends of the tanks point toward a public or private school or public building. Nor shall the end of any tank point toward a municipal park. In the event that it is necessary due to conditions to point the end of the tank toward any school, public building or park, the tanks must be located one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet from such park boundary, public building or school.  
Secs. 21-176—21-190. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - WATER AND SEWER IMPACT FEES 
 
Sec. 21-191. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the Water and Sewer Impact Fee section of the Code.  
Sec. 21-192. - Legislative findings. 
The city commission finds, determines and declares that: 
(a)  The City of Miramar must expand its water and sewer facilities if new development is to be accommodated without decreasing current standards of public health. 
(b)  The Florida Legislature through enactment of Florida Statues Chapter 163 has sought to encourage the City of Miramar to enact impact fees. 
(c)  The imposition of impact fees is one of the preferred methods of ensuring that development bears a proportionate share of the cost of water and sewer facilities necessary to accommodate such development. 
(d)  Connections of new development to the city's water and/or sewer system will create a need for the construction, equipping, or expansion of water and/or sewer facilities. 
(e)  The fees established in this article are derived from, based upon, and do not exceed the cost of, providing additional water and sewer facilities necessitated by the connection to the city's water and sewer system. 
(f)  The plan entitled "City of Miramar, Water and Wastewater Master Plan" dated December 1987 and adopted May 16, 1988 by Resolution No. 88-103 and any revisions thereto sets forth a reasonable methodology and analysis for the determination of the impact of new development on the need for and costs of additional water and sewer facilities in the City of Miramar.  
Sec. 21-193. - Intent and purpose. 
This article intends to implement the City of Miramar Comprehensive Plan and it is the purpose of this article to insure that all new development bears its proportionate share of the cost of providing water and wastewater capital facilities. The city commission declares that the goal of this article is the establishment of a uniform and consistent method of determining and allocating the cost of providing water and wastewater capital facilities.  
Sec. 21-194. - Water and sewer impact fee imposition. 
Except as provided herein, any application for a building permit for development activity within an area served by the city shall be subject to the imposition of a water and sewer impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this article. No building permit shall be issued by the city unless and until the owner/applicant has paid such impact fee. 
(Ord. No. 11-08, § 2, 7-6-11)  
Sec. 21-195. - Equivalent residential connection. 
As a basis of providing a uniform and consistent method of distributing costs to developers within the service area, the city hereby establishes equivalent residential connections, hereinafter referred to as ERCs, as the standard unit to measure water or wastewater demand. On or prior to issuance of a building permit, the number of ERCs attributable to any project shall be determined in accordance with this section. 
(a)  The use of three hundred twenty-five (325) gallons of water per day, the maximum daily amount of water expected to be consumed by a typical detached single-family residential unit, constitutes one ERC. 
(b)  The generation of three hundred (300) gallons of wastewater per day, the greatest average of the maximum daily amount generated by a typical detached single-family residential unit during each of any three consecutive months. 
(c)  Meter size shall be used only to determine ERCs for detached single-family residential units, as follows: 
Meter Size 	ERCs for 
Detached 
Single-Family 
Residential Uses 
5/8	1.0 
1 	3.5 
1.5 	3.5 
 
_____ 
(d)  For the uses identified in the following table and in subparagraphs (i) and (ii) below, the number of water and wastewater ERCs will be determined as follows: 
Type of Use 	Unit of Measure 	ERCs per Unit 
Apartments 	each 	0.500 
Duplexes, townhouses and mobile homes 	each 	0.700 
Gas station (fueling only) 	fuel pump 	0.500 
Vehicular repair 	per bay 	0.500 
Laundry 	per machine 	1.510 
Restaurant/cafeteria 	per seat 	0.113 
Restaurant (24 hour) 	per seat 	0.189 
Restaurant (fast food) 	per seat 	0.057 
Bar, cocktail lounge 	per seat 	0.057 
Place of worship 	per seat 	0.011 
Private school 	per student 	0.040 
Dentist/doctor office 	per doctor/dentist 	0.943 
 
_____ 
(i)  ERCs will be determined on a case-by-case basis by the city utility staff for manufacturing, laboratory and similar facilities that use water as an integral part of their process, based on water use data documenting water consumption for the most recent one-year operating period of at least four (4) similar establishments that are acceptable to the city in its reasonable judgment. Similar establishments will be limited to facilities of a similar size, utilizing the same process in a comparable geographical environment with approximately the same operating environment, including hours, number of employees, and other relevant features. Average daily flow will be converted to maximum daily flow by multiplying the average daily flow by the "system peaking factor" and multiplying the result by the "unaccounted-for system water factor." The maximum daily flow will be divided by three hundred twenty-five (325) to determine the number of water and wastewater ERCs. 
(ii)  ERCs will be determined on a case-by-case basis by the city utility staff for hotels and motels, based on water use data documenting water consumption for the most recent one-year operating period of at least four (4) similar establishments that are acceptable to the city in its reasonable judgment. Similar establishments will be limited to facilities of a similar size and number of rooms, engaged in the same type of business in a comparable geographical environment with approximately the same operating environment, including hours, number of employees, and other relevant features. Average daily flow will be converted to maximum daily flow by multiplying the average daily flow by the "system peaking factor" and multiplying the result by the "unaccounted-for system water factor." The maximum daily flow will be divided by three hundred twenty-five (325) to determine the number of water and wastewater ERCs. 
(iii)  [ Reserved. ] 
(iv)  For purposes of converting average daily flow to maximum daily flow: 
(A)  the term "system peaking factor" means the amount computed for the system by dividing (1) the maximum day demand by (2) the annual average day demand, in accordance with the most recent policy of the Florida Public Service Commission; and 
(B)  the term "unaccounted-for system water factor" means the amount computed by dividing (1) the volume of water leaving the water treatment plant by (2) the volume of water measured at the customers' meters, calculated in accordance with standards promulgated by the American Water Works Association. 
(e)  For all non-residential uses not specified in paragraph (d), the number of water and wastewater ERCs will be determined as follows: 
(i)  The number of water ERCs will be determined by multiplying the number of fixture units attributable to the project (determined from the table set forth in subparagraph (iii) below) by fourteen and one-tenth (14.1) gallons per day, and then dividing the result by three hundred twenty-five (325) gallons per day per ERC. For example: 
Total Water ERC Value = Number of Fixture Units; X 14.1 gpd; 325 gpd/ERC 
(ii)  If the city is providing both water and wastewater service to the project, the number of wastewater ERCs will be equal to the number of water ERCs. If the city is providing only wastewater service to the project, the number of wastewater ERCs will be determined by multiplying the number of fixture units attributable to the project (determined from the table set forth in subparagraph (iii) below) by thirteen (13) gallons per day, and then dividing the result by three hundred (300) gallons per day per ERC. For Example: 
Total Wastewater ERC Value = Number of Fixture Units X 13 gpd;300 gpd/ERC 
(iii)  Fixture units are a measure of the instantaneous rate of flow normally required by a particular type of plumbing fixture. The sum of the fixture units of all plumbing fixtures in a project is a measure of the total water used by that project. The number of fixture units attributable to any project shall be determined as follows: 
Type Fixture 	Fixture Units 
Bathtub (with or without overhead shower) 	2 
Bidet 	1 
Dental unit or cuspidor 	1 
Dental lavatory 	1 
Drinking fountain 	½ 
Dishwasher domestic 	2 
Floor drains 	3 
Lavatory (small pipe outlet) 	1 
Lavatory large pipe outlet) 	2 
Lavatory, barber, beauty parlor 	2 
Lavatory, surgeon's 	2 
Laundry tray (1 or 2 compartments) 	2 
Shower stall, domestic 	2 
Showers (group) per head sinks 	3 
Combination sink-and-tray 	3 
Combination sink-and-tray with food disposal unit 	3 
Kitchen sink, domestic 	2 
Kitchen sink, domestic with food waste grinder and/or dishwasher 	2 
Surgeon's sink 	3 
Flushing rim sink (with valve) 	8 
Service sinks, combination trap, standard 	3 
Service sink (P trap), ordinary 	2 
Pot, scullery, etc., sink 	4 
Wash sink (circular or multiple), per faucet set 	1 
Urinal, pedestal 	8 
Urinal, wall 	4 
Urinal stall, washout 	4 
Water closet, tank operated 	4 
Water closet, valve operated 	8 
Automatic dishwasher (domestic) 	2 
Automatic clothes washer 	4 
Commercial dishwasher 	6 
Commercial clothes washer 	6 
 
(iv)  If the actual number of fixture units cannot be determined at or prior to issuance of a building permit (for example, in connection with a shell building), the utility staff shall reasonably estimate the number of fixture units based upon the anticipated uses. If the issuance of any building permit would result in a number of fixture units greater than the estimate, the developer shall pay for or assign the additional ERCs prior to issuance of the building permit. Upon completion of all interior improvements, a final fixture count shall be made. If the final number is less than the estimate, the utility staff shall issue a credit to the building owner for the number of unused ERCs. 
(f)  [ Reserved. ] 
(g)  If the number of ERCs for any project has been determined under section 21-195(d) the director of engineering services may elect to audit the accuracy of the determination in the manner set forth in this paragraph (g). Any audit shall be based upon actual demand during any twelve-month period within three (3) years of issuance of the certificate of occupancy, as determined by the director of engineering services, adjusted for the percentage of actual occupancy and use during each relevant period. Average daily flow will be converted to maximum daily flow by multiplying the average daily flow by the "system peaking factor" and multiplying the result by the "unaccounted-for system water factor". The maximum daily flow will be divided by three hundred twenty-five (325) to determine the number of water and wastewater ERC's. Upon completion of the audit, the utility staff shall provide a copy to the developer by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the audit concludes that the actual demand exceeds the number of ERC's determined under paragraph (d), the developer shall pay for the additional ERC's within thirty (30) days of receiving the audit. 
If the audit concludes that the actual demand is less than the number of ERC's determined under paragraph (d), the city shall reimburse the developer for the difference. 
(h)  Prior to issuance of a building permit to change the use of a nonresidential structure after it has been connected to the system, the number of added or reduced ERCs attributable to the change in use shall be calculated in accordance with this section. If the calculation results in additional ERCs, the developer shall pay for the additional ERCs prior to issuance of a building permit. If the calculation results in a reduction in the number of ERCs, the difference will be available for application to a future change in use or expansion of the project. This paragraph (h) shall not apply to building permits for the construction of initial tenant interiors within a shell building, which shall be handled in accordance with subparagraph (iv) of paragraph (e). 
(i)  The number of ERCs for any commercial, industrial and institutional building shall be calculated separately and must be rounded to the nearest highest whole number. Each commercial, industrial and institutional building will be individually metered. The developer's engineer shall certify a proposed meter size and provide information on estimated peak flows and low flows, including head losses through the metering devise from the manufacturer's literature, sufficient for the utility staff to review the metering accuracy in accordance with standards promulgated by the American Water Works Association. If the utility staff determines that the proposed meter size will accurately measure the flow, the proposed meter size will be approved. If the utility staff determines that the proposed meter size will not accurately measure the flow, the utility staff shall provide the developer's engineer by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notification of the rejection of the proposed meter size, the reason for rejection and the appropriate meter size to be used. The determination of the utility staff shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, § 2, 12-3-97; Ord. No. 11-08, § 3, 7-6-11)  
Sec. 21-196. - Water and sewer impact fee formula. 
(a)  The city is constructing water production, treatment and transmission facilities in order to provide service within the water service area. The water service area consists of all parcels located within the city limits. 
(b)  The city is constructing wastewater treatment, effluent disposal, and transmission facilities in order to provide service within the wastewater service area. The wastewater service area consists of all parcels within the city limits. 
(c)  The water and wastewater impact fee rates, for developments that were not previously assessed for water and wastewater facilities, and for developments that were assessed for water and wastewater facilities but which have no outstanding balance of ERCs, are as follows: 
(i)  Water impact fee: $2,750.00 per ERC 
(ii)  Wastewater impact fee: $2,760.00 per ERC 
(d)  The water and wastewater impact fee rates for developments that were previously assessed for water and wastewater facilities that have an outstanding balance of ERCs, upon pulling a building permit for any further development on the property, are as follows: 
(i)  Water impact fee: $566.00 per ERC 
(ii)  Wastewater impact fee: $378.00 per ERC 
(Ord. No. 94-3, § 21-196(a), (b), 10-20-93; Ord. No. 94-29, § 21-196, 3-16-94; Ord. No. 96-20, 4-17-96; Ord. No. 10-01, § 2, 10-7-09) 
Editor's note— At the request of the city, the provisions of § 21-196 have been amended to reflect the changes noted in memos dated November 6, 1996 and October 10, 1997.  
Sec. 21-197. - Adjustment formula and escalation provisions. 
(a)  The city hereby declares that the charges set forth in section 21-196 (c) shall be automatically escalated by city staff in October of each year based upon increases in construction costs as evidenced by the construction cost index published in Engineering News Record magazine, entitled "Construction Cost Index," using 5,484 as published index for July, 1995, with 1913=100 as the base. The city shall automatically adjust the charges set forth herein at the beginning of each fiscal year with the first such adjustment to be in October 1, 2010. Automatic escalations shall be the percentage difference between the construction cost index number for October of the current year as compared with the index number for October of the previous year. 
(Ord. 96-20, 4-17-96; Ord. No. 99-4, § 1, 11-4-98; Ord. No. 10-01, § 3, 10-7-09)  
Sec. 21-198. - Collection of fees. 
The water and sewer impact fee shall be paid to the engineering services department prior to the issuance of a building permit for each unit. All monies shall be deposited in the city's water/sewer infrastructure fund and used solely for the purposes specified herein. 
(Ord. No. 11-08, § 4, 7-6-11)  
Sec. 21-199. - Water/sewer infrastructure fund. 
The city shall establish a water/sewer infrastructure fund to account for the collection and disbursement of water and sewer impact fees. 
(a)  Funds collected from water and sewer impact fees shall be used solely for the purpose of acquiring, equipping, and/or making capital improvement to water and sewer facilities under the jurisdiction of the City of Miramar, and shall not be used for maintenance or operations. In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are issued for advanced provisions or funding of capital facilities, impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities provided are of the type described in this section. 
(b)  The city shall establish line items in the water/sewer infrastructure fund to separately account for revenues and expenditures associated with water and sewer impact fees. 
(c)  From time to time the city manager shall present to the city commission a proposed capital outlay program for water and sewer facilities, assigning funds, including any accrued interest, from the water/sewer infrastructure fund to specific improvement projects, debt service payments and related expenses. Carryover monies including any accrued interest, shall be retained in the fund until further assignment by the city.  
Sec. 21-200. - Exemption. 
The following exemptions from the required fees shall be permitted: 
(a)  Alterations or expansion of existing building where no additional or larger water meter and/or sewer connections are requested and where the use is not changed. 
(b)  The replacement of a building or structure with a new building or structure of the same size and use where no additional or larger water meter/or sewer connections are required and where the use is not changed. 
(c)  The installation of a replacement mobile home on a lot or other such site where a water and/or sewer impact fee for such mobile home site has been previously paid. 
Any claim of exemption must be made no later than the time that the applicable impact fee is due. Any claim not so made shall be deemed waived.  
Sec. 21-201. - Credits. 
Off-site water and sewer capital improvements constructed by a developer may be offered as total or partial payment of the impact fees attributed to water and sewer facilities. The city recognizes instances in which a developer may be required to advance or cause to be constructed the share applicable to other undeveloped property in order that off-site facilities may be constructed to serve the developer's property in accordance with the city's water and wastewater master plan. The applicant must request a water and sewer impact fee credit. If the city manager or his designee accepts the offer, whether before or after the effective date of this article, the credit shall be determined and provided in the following manner: 
(a)  Applicants for credit for construction of water and sewer facilities improvements shall submit acceptable engineering drawings and specifications, and construction cost estimates to the public works/utilities director. The public works/utilities director shall determine preliminary credit for construction based upon either these cost estimates or upon alternative engineering criteria and construction cost estimates if he determines that such estimates submitted by the applicant are either unreliable or inaccurate. Upon completion of construction, the applicant's engineer shall submit a certification of the actual off-site facilities costs to the public works/utilities director. In no event shall the city grant a credit in an amount greater than the total construction cost of such off-site improvements. Based on the approved certified construction costs, the city shall then provide the applicant with a letter or certificate setting forth the dollar amount of the credit, the water and sewer facilities impact fee component(s) to which the credit will apply, the reason for the credit, and the legal description or other adequate description of the project or development to which the credit may be applied. The applicant must sign and date a duplicate copy of such letter or certificate indicating his agreement to the terms of the letter or certificate and return such signed document to the city manager before credit will be given. The failure of the applicant to sign, date and return such document within sixty (60) days shall nullify the credit. The credit shall apply to future water and sewer impact fees based on the fee structure in place at the time a building permit is issued for each unit that is subject to a credit. 
(b)  Except as provided in subparagraph (c), credit against impact fees otherwise due will not be provided until the construction is completed and accepted by the city in accordance with city standards. 
(c)  Credit may be provided before completion of specified water and sewer facilities improvements if adequate assurances are given by the applicant that the standards set out in subparagraph (a) will be met and if the applicant posts security as provided below for the costs of such construction. Security in the form of cash, a performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit shall be posted with and approved by the city manager in an amount determined by the public works/utilities director. If the water and sewer facilities construction project will not be constructed within one (1) year of the acceptance of the offer by the city, the amount of the security shall be increased by ten (10) percent compounded for each year of the life of the security. The security shall be reviewed and approved by the city manager prior to acceptance. The water and sewer facilities construction project shall be completed within five (5) years of the date of the credit offer or the offer shall be null and void. 
Any claim for credit must be made no later than the time that the applicable impact fee is due. Any claim not so made shall be deemed waived. Credits can be transferred from one (1) project or development to another upon approval in writing by the director of engineering services. Credits shall not be transferable from one (1) component of the water and sewer facilities impact fee to another component of the impact fee. 
Determinations made by the city manager or his designee pursuant to the credit provisions of this section may be appealed to the city commission by filing a written request with the city manager within ten (10) days of the city manager's determination. 
(Ord. No. 10-01, § 4, 10-7-09; Ord. No. 11-08, § 5, 7-6-11)  
Sec. 21-202. - Refunds. 
Any funds not expended or encumbered by the calendar quarter immediately following ten (10) years from the date the impact fee was paid, may, upon application of the then current owner, be refunded to such owner, provided that the owner submits an application for a refund to the city one hundred and eighty (180) days from the expiration of the ten (10) year period.  
Sec. 21-203. - Transfer of on-site improvements. 
(a)  Each owner/developer who has constructed a water distribution and/or wastewater collection system on the owner's property prior to connecting to the city's existing facilities shall convey such component part of the water distribution or wastewater collection system to the city by bill of sale in a form satisfactory to the city attorney, together with such evidence as may be required by the city that the water distribution system and wastewater collection system proposed to be transferred to the city are free of all liens and encumbrances. 
(b)  In addition to the bill of sale, prior to connecting to the city's facilities, the owner/developer shall, at no cost to the city, grant or convey to the city any easements and/or rights-of-way necessary for the construction, installation, repair, relocation, and/or maintenance of the proposed facilities and anticipated future needs, as determined by the city. The grant or conveyance of easements and rights-of-way shall be in a form satisfactory to the city attorney. The city reserves the right to require such easement or public rights-of-way to that point at which the meter is proposed to be installed or at the "point of delivery of service", being the point at which the facilities of the city join with owner/developer's installation. 
(c)  Any facilities in the category of consumer's lines located on the discharge side of the water meter or on the consumer's side of the point of delivery of service shall not be transferred to the city and shall remain the property of the owner, a subsequent owner-occupant, or their successors and assigns. Each consumer's line shall remain the maintenance responsibility of the owner or subsequent owner-occupant. 
(d)  The city shall not accept title to any component part of the water distribution or wastewater collection system as constructed by the owner until the city has approved the construction of the component part, accepted any required tests conducted to determine that such construction meets the criteria established by the city, the owner has met all other city-imposed obligations and requirements and the city has formally accepted such component parts for city ownership, operation and maintenance. For the purpose of acceptance of such component parts under this section, the city shall act through the city manager in those instances where the easement related to improvements that were dedicated by plat or other instrument that had been previously approved by the city commission, and shall act through the city commission in all other instances. 
(e)  The city reserves the right to refuse connection and to deny the commencement of service to any property owner seeking to be connected to portions of the water distribution and wastewater collection system installed by the owner until such time as the provisions of this article have been fully met by the owner, its successors, or its assigns. 
(Ord. No. 00-37, § 2, 7-5-00)  
Sec. 21-204. - Service agreement. 
Prior to connection to the city's water and/or sewer facilities, each owner shall be required to enter into a service agreement. The service agreement shall address, but not be limited to, the following matters: 
(a)  The installation of service facilities; 
(b)  The interconnection of "consumer's lines" with the facilities of the city; 
(c)  Standards of construction or specifications; 
(d)  Time commitments to "take and use water and wastewater correctly"; 
(e)  Rules, regulations and procedures of the city; 
(f)  Prohibitions against improper use of the city's facilities; 
(g)  Warranties and bonding requirements; 
(h)  Guaranteed revenues or plant capacity charges; 
(i)  Prohibition of connection to city's water system for irrigation purposes; 
(j)  Any other matters deemed necessary by the city. 
The service agreement shall be fully executed prior to recordation of a final subdivision plat or issuance of a building permit if no platting is required or if the plat has already been recorded. The city manager shall be authorized to execute all service agreements subject to the city attorney's review as to form and legal sufficiency. 
(Ord. No. 11-08, § 6, 7-6-11)  
Secs. 21-205—21-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - RATES, CHARGES, BILLING AND COLLECTION PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 21-221. - Water tapping and connection charges. 
(a)  Service installation. The fees for water tapping and meter installation performed by the city shall be set and amended by resolution of the city commission. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Meter installation. The meter installation charges in those cases where all of the necessary improvements have previously been installed and have been accepted by the city, except for the meter and meter box shall be set and amended by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1964, § 25-9; Ord. No. 92-43, § 2, 8-19-92; Ord. No. 00-09, § 2, 11-17-99; Ord. No. 00-37, § 2, 7-5-00; Ord. No. 04-19, § 3, 7-7-04)  
Sec. 21-222. - Customer guarantee deposit. 
Before any person, firm or corporation shall be entitled to city utility services, they must file a written application with the city and pay the appropriate security deposit as set and amended by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1964, § 25-10; Ord. No. 92-43, § 3, 8-19-92; Ord. No. 04-19, § 4, 7-7-04)  
Sec. 21-223. - Water and sewer rates. 
(a)  Water rate: The monthly rates shall be set and amended by resolution of the city commission. 
Service availability charge shall be charged to each commercial or residential unit, in those cases where one (1) meter serves several commercial or residential units. The finance director may grant a waiver of this requirement for those commercial units which have no active connections. 
(1)  Monthly minimum charge. No monthly bill, regardless of usage, shall be for less than the service availability charge based on the class of customer served and according to the size of the meter through which service is furnished. 
(2)  Automatic annual rate adjustment. The city will institute annually, effective with bills rendered on and after October 1, 2008, and each year thereafter an automatic increase to the monthly service availability charges and volumetric rates as contained in section 21-223(a), to be applied to such rates which are in effect immediately prior to the effective date of each annual increase. The annual index adjustment shall be one (1) percent, to the monthly service availability charges and volumetric rates. All other adjustments in excess of those identified above will be changed by a resolution as adopted by the city commission. 
(b)  Sewer rate: Eastern City Area: The sewer rate schedule set and amended by resolution of the city commission shall be applicable to all sewer customers of the sewer utility served by the City of Miramar for customers located east of Palm Avenue, which have provided wastewater treatment service through a large users agreement with the City of Hollywood. (Eastern City Area). 
Service availability charge shall be charged to each commercial or residential unit, in those cases where one (1) meter serves several commercial or residential units. The finance director may grant a waiver of this requirement for those commercial units which have no active connections. 
(1)  Monthly minimum charge. No monthly bill, regardless of usage, shall be for less than the service availability charge based on the class of customer served and according to the size of the meter through which service is furnished. 
(2)  Automatic annual rate adjustment. The city will institute annually, effective with bills rendered on and after October 1, 2008, and each year thereafter an automatic increase to the monthly service availability charges and volumetric rates as contained in section 21-223(b), to be applied to such rates which are in effect immediately prior to the effective date of each annual increase. The annual index adjustment shall be one (1) percent, to the monthly service availability charges and volumetric rates for the eastern service area. With respect to the wastewater treatment service from the City of Hollywood and others, on behalf of the eastern city area, any increase or decrease in the cost of such purchases to the city shall result in an automatic adjustment to such applicable rates as identified in section 21-223(b), and shall be a pass-through to the consumer equal to the dollar amount of such increase or decrease in such costs as billed by the City of Hollywood or others as determined by the city. All other adjustments in excess of those identified above will be changed by a resolution as adopted by the city commission. 
(c)  Sewer rate—Western City Area: The sewer rate schedule set and amended by resolution of the city commission shall be applicable to all sewer customers of the sewer utility served by the City of Miramar for customers located west of Palm Avenue, which are provided wastewater treatment service from the City of Miramar wastewater treatment facilities owned and operated by the City of Miramar on behalf of such area (the Western City Area). 
Service availability charge shall be charged to each commercial or residential unit, in those cases where one (1) meter serves several commercial or residential units. The finance director may grant a waiver of this requirement for those commercial units which have no active connections. 
(1)  Monthly minimum charge. No monthly bill, regardless of usage, shall be for less than the service availability charge based on the class of customer served and according to the size of the meter through which service is furnished. 
(2)  Automatic annual rate adjustment. The city will institute annually, effective with bills rendered on and after October 1, 2008, and each year thereafter, an automatic increase to the monthly service availability charges and volumetric rates as contained in section 21-223(c) to be applied to such rates which are in effect immediately prior to the effective date of each annual increase. The annual index adjustment shall be one (1) percent, to the monthly service availability charges and volumetric rates as contained in section 21-223(c). All other adjustments in excess of those identified above will be changed by a resolution as adopted by the city commission. 
(Code 1964, § 25-11; Ord. No. 91-45, § 1, 9-19-91; Ord. No. 92-04, § 1, 10-2-91; Ord. No. 92-12, § 1, 11-20-91; Ord. No. 92-43, § 4, 8-19-92; Ord. No. 93-1, § 1, 10-14-92; Ord. No. 93-27, § 21-223(d) & (e) 9-1-93; Ord. No. 97-46, § 1, 9-24-97; Ord. No. 99-23, § 2, 9-15-99; Ord. No. 04-19, § 5, 7-7-04)  
Sec. 21-224. - Monthly services charges applicable irrespective of service usage. 
Monthly water and sewer services charges shall apply to all service addresses connected to the city's water and sewer utility system regardless of water or sewer usage. These service charges shall apply to both active and disconnected accounts. 
(Code 1964, § 25-12; Ord. No. 92-43, § 5, 8-19-92)  
Sec. 21-225. - Rates where more than one business in one building. 
The rates provided for water and sewer services to commercial customers shall be charged to and levied against the commercial building owner in the event one (1) master meter is used for more than (1) business establishment. 
(Code 1964, § 25-13; Ord. No. 92-43, § 6, 8-19-92)  
Sec. 21-226. - Interim service agreements 
(1)  Disclosure requirements. That all property owners located within the service districts described below, shall disclose, in writing, the water and sewer rates affecting the property to all prospective purchasers prior to entering into a binding contract to sell the property. The written disclosure required under this section shall contain language to the effect that the disclosed water and sewer rates may be temporarily higher than the water and sewer rates for other residents of the City of Miramar. 
Water Service Area: From Palm Avenue to U.S. 27. 
Wastewater Service Area: From Flamingo Road to U.S. 27. 
(2)  Penalty for noncompliance. Sellers of property who fail to comply with the disclosure requirements of this section shall be assessed a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per occurrence. 
(Ord. 93-26, 7-21-93) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 92-43, § 7, adopted August 19, 1992, repealed former § 21-226, which pertained to sewerage system capital improvements.  
Sec. 21-227. - Service outside city. 
The rates for the same service recited in this article outside the limit of the city shall be one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the schedule within the city. 
(Code 1964, §25-15)  
Sec. 21-228. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 91-45, § 2, adopted September 19, 1991 repealed former § 21-228, which pertained to notice of proposed water, sewer and sanitation rate increase and derived from § 25-16 of the city's 1964 Code.  
Sec. 21-229. - Billing procedure; delinquent accounts; turnon and turnoff fees. 
(a)  Payment for city utility services shall be due nineteen (19) days from the billing date. There is a five (5) day grace period between the bill due date and the past due date. Payments for utility services will be considered past due if payments are not received on or before twenty-four (24) days from the billing date and will be subject to a late charge, which shall be set and amended by resolution of the city commission. If payment for utility services is not received on or before the 29th day, utility service will be discontinued, and the customer's account will become delinquent. 
(b)  When a city employee is sent to the property address to discontinue water service based on nonpayment of amounts billed as outlined in section 21-229(a), an administrative fee for turnoff and a fee for turnon will be added to the utility customer's account if, in fact, the utility customer's service is discontinued. Turnon and turnoff fees shall be set and amended by resolution of the city commission. 
(c)  For those accounts that have been turned off due to nonpayment, the finance department shall require payment of all past due amounts billed prior to restoring water service for the account. Additionally, if the account has been turned off due to nonpayment more than twice during any six-month period, the finance department may require an additional deposit and require all future utility payments in cash. 
(Code 1964, § 25-17; Ord. No. 92-43, § 8, 8-19-92; Ord. No. 04-19, § 6, 7-7-04; Ord. No. 08-17, § 6, 4-2-08; Ord. No. 13-06, § 2, 4-3-13)  
Sec. 21-230. - Creation of lien for nonpayment of water and sewer service charges; requests for information concerning outstanding city liens; charges for preparing and recording liens and lien satisfactions. 
(a)  In general. All water and sewer service charges becoming due and payable shall constitute and are hereby imposed as special assessment liens against the real property being serviced, and until fully paid, inclusive of fees and costs charged by law, shall remain liens superior in rank and dignity to all other liens, encumbrances, titles and claims in, to or against the real property involved. Such service charges shall become delinquent if not fully paid by the delinquent date. All delinquent service charges shall bear an interest charge of twelve (12) percent per annum from the due date, or such other rate as may be specified by F.S. § 687.01, as amended, and shall also bear lien fees specified herein to cover the city's legal, administrative, clerical, processing and recording costs for the lien. Unpaid and delinquent service charges together with all fees and interest imposed thereon shall remain and constitute special assessment liens against the real property involved. The special assessment liens may be collected and/or foreclosed by any of the methods provided in Florida Statutes. The remedy provided in this section shall be cumulative and shall not be construed to waive the right of the city to require payment of any outstanding balance on the utility account before renewing water and sewer services to the premises. 
(b)  Requests for information concerning outstanding or pending city liens. Whenever the city receives a request for an accounting of the amounts of any pending or outstanding city liens, a minimum service fee shall be charged to the person or entity making the request. The amount of such service fee shall be set and amended by resolution of the city commission. 
(c)  Charges for preparing and recording liens and lien satisfactions. Charges imposed in connection with liens and lien satisfactions shall be set and amended by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1964, § 25-18; Ord. No. 91-41, § 1, 8-21-91; Ord. No. 92-43, § 9, 8-19-92; Ord. No. 04-19, § 7, 7-7-04; Ord. No. 08-17, § 7, 4-2-08)  
Sec. 21-231. - Payment of delinquent charges when premises sold or transferred. 
When an owner vacates or sells property leaving a delinquent bill against such property vacated or sold, the water department may, at its option, refuse further service to the premises and may also refuse any other service the same owner may be using or intends to use in the future until the date the original delinquent account is paid, regardless of whether the other accounts of the owner are in good standing or not. 
(Code 1964, § 25-19)  
Sec. 21-232. - Impact fee for users of water storage tank. 
(a)  There is hereby assessed an impact fee for all users of the two-million-gallon water storage tank and trunk water mains located at University Park. Such fee shall be payable upon issuance of building permits for a unit or units which connects to this water system, including all property lying east of Palm Avenue and west of University Drive, north of the turnpike and south of Pembroke Road, excluding properties already permitted on the date of the ordinance from which this section derives and excluding Tropical Valley and University Park. 
(b)  All such persons applying for a building permit shall pay to the city the sum of one hundred fifty-five dollars and eighty-four cents ($155.84) for each equivalent residential connection. No permit will be issued unless the assessed impact fee has been paid. 
(Code 1964, § 25-20)  
Sec. 21-233. - Miscellaneous fees. 
Fees for the following services shall be set and amended by resolution of the city commission: 
(1)  Establishment of new account. 
(2)  Account termination. 
(3)  Voluntary suspension of service. 
(4)  Meter check. 
(5)  Reserved. 
(6)  Dishonored checks given to the city for water or sewer service and/or any other service, transaction, purchase or payment shall be subject to a fee in accordance with F.S. § 832.07, et seq., as may be amended from time to time. 
(Code 1964, § 25-20.1; Ord. No. 92-43, § 10, 8-19-92; Ord. No. 04-19, § 8, 7-7-04; Ord. No. 08-17, § 8, 4-2-08)  
Sec. 21-234. - Water and wastewater analytical service charges for developers and public entities. 
Developers and other private entities may use the services of the city's analytical labortory located at the west water treatment plant to perform water and wastewater analysis for the purpose of satisfying and city, state, federal or other regulatory requirements for connecting to or utilizing the city's water and wastewater utility services. 
Public entities may use the services of the city's analytical labortory located at the West Water Treatment Plant to perform water and wastewater analysis for any purposes. 
The city commission, by resolution upon the recommendation of the city manager, shall establish or amend a reasonable rate for analytical testing which shall not exceed all of the city's cost of providing such services. 
(Ord. No. 98-24, § 2, 3-18-98)  
Secs. 21-235—21-250. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 21-251. - Definitions. 
[For the purposes of this article, certain terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.] 
City shall mean the City of Miramar, Florida. 
Developed property or parcels shall mean all property altered from a natural state by grading, paving, compaction, construction of structures, impervious surfaces, or drainage works so that stormwater runoff from the property is changed in quantity, quality, or point of discharge from that which would occur in the natural condition. 
Director shall mean the city manager or his/her designee. 
Effective impervious area shall mean the combination of total impervious area and an appropriately established percentage of the pervious area of a parcel, which is representative of the parcel's run-off contribution potential. 
Equivalent residential units (ERU's) shall mean the base unit of measurement for determining all parcels' proportionate share of runoff contribution. The numerical value of one (1) ERU shall be defined and adopted by resolution. 
Impervious area shall mean those areas which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil as it is entered in natural conditions prior to development. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, compacted gravel and soil surfaces, and other surfaces. 
Non-residential property or parcels shall mean property that is classified as such by the property appraiser under the Florida Department of Revenue Land Use Codes, as may be amended from time to time and shall be deemed to include, but not be limited to commercial and industrial use, dormitories, hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums, recreational vehicle spaces, hotels and motels. Any property that contains both residential and non-residential facilities shall be treated as the type of property that will result in the larger number of equivalent residential units (ERU's). 
Pervious area shall mean land surfaces which allow the penetration of water into the ground surface. 
Residential property or parcels shall mean any land which has the majority use as being residential in nature, including single-family, apartment, condominium, mobile home or trailer communities, and classified as such by the property appraiser under the Florida Department of Revenue Land Use Codes. 
Stormwater shall mean stormwater runoff and surface runoff and drainage. 
Stormwater management system shall mean the system which is owned and operated by the city by which the city manages and controls stormwater and surface water. The system includes management services such as designing, permitting, planning, and reviewing stormwater related infrastructure; and the operation, maintenance, repair, replacement and improvement of said infrastructure of waterways contained within the city's capital improvement plan, comprehensive plan, or other municipal framework. 
Undeveloped property or parcels shall mean land in an unaltered natural state or land which has been modified to such minimal degree as to have a hydrologic condition comparable to land in an unaltered natural state. Undeveloped land shall have no pavement, asphalt, or compacted gravel surfaces or structures which create an impervious surface that would prevent infiltration or cause stormwater to collect, concentrate or flow in a manner materially different than that which would occur if the land were in an unaltered natural state. 
Vacant land shall mean property that is classified as such by the property appraiser under the Florida Department of Revenue Land Use Codes, which includes inactive land without structures such as individual lots scattered throughout the city and undeveloped land (no structures) within urban areas. 
(Ord. No. 98-21, § 3, 3-4-98)  
Sec. 21-252. - Creation of stormwater management utility fee. 
(a)  A stormwater management utility fee ("fee") is hereby created and may be levied on all property within the City of Miramar for services and facilities provided under the stormwater management program. The property owner or their tenant is responsible for payment of the fee. For the purposes of this chapter, all property within the city shall be classified as: 
(1)  Residential property (single-family, multifamily, etc.); or 
(2)  Non-residential property; or 
(3)  Undeveloped property, or 
(4)  Vacant property. 
(b)  The fee for each parcel in the city shall be determined as based upon the parcel's classification and the number of ERU's assigned to it. The city commission, by resolution, shall from time to time, upon the recommendation of the director, establish or amend the average square footage of effective impervious area of the ERU. 
(c)  The city commission, by resolution, upon the recommendation of the director, shall establish or amend a reasonable rate for each ERU. 
(Ord. No. 98-21, § 4, 3-4-98)  
Sec. 21-253. - Stormwater management utility fund. 
There shall be established a stormwater management program utility fund ("fund") for the deposit of all fees and charges collected pursuant to the stormwater management program. These monies shall be for the exclusive use of the city's stormwater management program activities, including but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Stormwater management services, such as studies, design, permit review, plan preparation and development review. 
(2)  Operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of the stormwater collection, storage, treatment and conveyance infrastructure. 
(3)  Project costs related to constructing major or minor structural improvements to the stormwater-related infrastructure. 
(4)  Administrative costs associated with the management of the stormwater management program. 
(5)  Debt service financing of stormwater-related capital improvements. 
(6)  Funding of studies associated with the planning of stormwater-related infrastructure. 
(7)  Costs required for the city to comply with national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) stormwater and surface water requirements. 
(Ord. No. 98-21, § 5, 3-4-98)  
Sec. 21-254. - Stormwater management program. 
(a)  [ Generally. ] It shall be the duty and responsibility of the director to administer the stormwater management program. The director shall keep an accurate record of all properties benefitting from the services and facilities of said program and make changes in accordance with the utility rate structure as established and amended by resolution of the city commission. 
(b)  Construction sites and construction activities . 
(1)  Construction sites and operations shall be required to maintain, during and after all construction, development, excavation, and/or alteration operations, structural and non-structural, best management practices with the intent to reduce pollutants and sediment in stormwater run-off. 
a.  Construction and operations site plans and permits may be required and reviewed by the city prior to the initiation of construction operations. Site plans shall include descriptions of structures, procedures and/or control measures designed to reduce and control sediment and pollutant loading either directly or indirectly to stormwater run-off. 
b.  Construction or construction operations over any existing or planned stormwater management system or any such operations causing interference with any stormwater management system shall not be permitted. 
c.  A schedule of inspections for monitoring may be developed to be carried out during and after the construction and operation phases as conditions to the permit to determine and verify compliance with this section. 
(c)  Industrial sites and industrial activities. 
(1)  Industrial sites and industrial activities determined by the city to contribute pollutant loadings to stormwater and/or the stormwater management system may be inspected and monitored by the city in order to verify compliance with this section. 
a.  It shall be unlawful to deposit, spill, dump, or introduce any significant material or pollutants that may contribute contamination to any surface area, stormwater management system, and/or stormwater run-off. It shall be unlawful to deposit, spill, dump or introduce: 
1.  Substances that settle to form sludge deposits. 
2.  Floatable or suspended substances such as debris, oil, scum, and other materials. 
3.  Any significant substance, petroleum product, infectious matter, toxic or hazardous substance or hazardous material onto surface areas or to stormwater management systems. 
4.  Industrial wastewater, domestic, cooling or any other wastewater into any system designed to carry stormwater without prior city and/or Broward County approval. 
b.  Any site and/or activity identified as contributing any significant material and/or pollutants may be required: 
1.  To develop and initiate structural systems and/or non-structural management practices designed to reduce and control the contribution of pollutants to the stormwater management system. 
2.  To be inspected and monitored by the city in order to verify compliance with this section. 
(d)  Landfill run-off control. Operations of any landfill or dump site shall be conducted to provide for collection, control and treatment of surface run-off and verification that no significant pollutant contribution to receiving waters shall occur upon discharge of said run-off. 
(e)  Illicit discharges. Any dumping, spilling, or discharging of any non-stormwater material to any surface area or stormwater management system shall be prohibited unless allowed by prior written approval of the city. Prohibited illicit discharges shall require spill response, spill control, and spill clean-up as designated and prescribed by the city. 
(f)  Alterations or obstructions to stormwater management. Alterations or obstructions to any stormwater management system, including pump stations, sewer lines, structural controls, catch basins, culverts, wetlands or swales shall be prohibited without prior written approval of the city. 
(g)  Septic tank inspections. Any residential property utilizing a septic tank system for the disposal of sanitary wastes will be required, prior to the sale of said property, to pass a septic tank inspection by a licensed septic tank service firm to verify the integrity of the system. 
(h)  Herbicide, pesticide, fertilizer applications. Companies involved in the application of herbicides, pesticides, fertilizers or any regulated material shall be required to obtain operating licenses, train their employees in the application of said materials with the intent to minimize or prevent over application and spills; and develop plans for spill response and spill control of said materials. 
(i)  Storage tanks. The discharge of hazardous and/or significant materials from storage tank facilities to ground or surface waters, to surface areas, to ground waters during remediation activities, to stormwater run-off, and/or stormwater management systems shall be prohibited. 
(j)  Backwash disposal. The disposal of filter backwash water to stormwater management systems shall be prohibited. Disposal of backwash shall provide for separation before final disposal to: 
(1)  Sanitary sewers after prior written approval by the city. 
(2)  Detention pits or pervious surface areas where sufficient pervious area exists, remote from water supply wells, disposal systems, pits and septic tanks. 
(k)  Litter, littering material. The accumulation, placing, sweeping, scattering, throwing or dumping of litter, or littering material such as dead plants, yard clippings, stagnant water, rubbish, debris, trash, including any wrecked, derelict or partially dismantled motor vehicle, trailer, boats, machinery, appliances, furniture or similar article, or any unsanitary, hazardous or significant material upon any surface area, stormwater management system or water body within the city is hereby prohibited. 
(l)  Water management works, erosion control. The city is hereby authorized and empowered to exercise jurisdiction; to control; and to require, construct, reconstruct or improve stormwater management works which provide for the collection, storage, treatment, and conveyance of stormwater including systems such as structural controls, erosion prevention facilities and flood control and management systems within the jurisdiction of the city in compliance with the stormwater management regulations as outlined in this chapter. 
(m)  Stormwater interagency agreements and stormwater programs. The city is authorized to develop interagency agreements and mutually compatible programs with the South Florida Water Management District, Florida Department of Transportation, Broward County, South Broward Drainage District and other local governmental agencies, and all private agencies, with the intent to control the contribution of pollutants within the inter-system stormwater management system linkages, in order to develop mutually compatible stormwater management programs and systems; and to develop and enforce stormwater management, inspections, and monitoring programs. 
(n)  Determination of compliance or non-compliance. The city shall be granted the authority to determine the compliance or non-compliance with this section, of a stormwater management system or non-stormwater discharge to a stormwater management system, water body or surface area; based on investigation, surveillance, monitoring, sampling, testing and/or sound engineering and operational evaluations. 
(o)  Assessment of penalty for non-compliance. 
(1)  Upon determination of a violation of this section, the city may assess against the violator a minimum penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per offense. 
(2)  Additional charges against the violator may be assessed in an amount determined by the city depending on the extent of environmental damage, required mitigation, the cost of remediation and enforcement. 
(3)  Upon determination of a violation of this section, the violator shall bear all costs incurred for clean-up, enforcement action and remediation. 
(4)  Each day during any portion of which a violation occurs constitutes a separate violation and may incur additional penalties. 
(5)  It shall be the responsibility of the director to determine if a violation of this subchapter exists, as based on the findings required in this subchapter. 
(p)  Stormwater inspections and monitoring procedures. The city may enter, perform inspections, surveillance and monitoring procedures, within reasonable hours, of all structures and premises, and shall have free access to copying or reviewing pertinent records of a facility, system or premises in order to ascertain the state of compliance with the laws, rules, and regulations of the city regarding compliance as outlined in this subchapter. 
(1)  The compliance personnel of the enforcing agency shall be provided with official identification and shall exhibit such identification when making inspection. 
(2)  The owner, operator, lessees, occupant or person in charge of the structure or premises shall give the inspecting officer free access for the purpose of making such inspections without hampering, obstructing, or interfering with such inspection. 
(q)  Effluent standards and water quality criteria. The city adopts section 27-196, section 27-197 and section 27-198 of the Code of Broward County as minimum surface water criteria and effluent standards for discharges to surface water. 
(Ord. No. 98-21, § 6, 3-4-98)  
Sec. 21-255. - Appeal process. 
(a)  Any person who believes that the fee does not bear a rationale relationship to the impact of his/her property and its effect upon the city's stormwater management system, who disagrees with the methodology used to determine the fee, or who has any other objections, reservations, or other claims as to the validity, amount, or manner of implementation of the fee, or who is otherwise aggrieved by the fee, shall, within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice of the fee due from that person, file a claim for relief from the stormwater management utility fee. 
(b)  The claim shall specifically state the nature of the relief sought, the grounds for the relief (with specificity), and shall include, where appropriate to support the claim for relief, expert evidence to support the claim, and any other relevant information which the applicant for relief believes supports the claim. The director may also request additional information which shall be provided within a reasonable time of request by the director. 
(c)  The city may provide specific application forms for the purposes of applying for relief, but in the absence of said application forms, the applicant shall provide the information set forth above and any and all relevant information which it believes supports its claim or relief. 
(d)  The city commission shall, within ninety (90) days of the application for relief, hold a hearing to determine whether the claim for relief is warranted and may, after said hearing: 
(1)  Grant the full relief requested; 
(2)  Grant partial relief, or 
(3)  Deny the relief requested. 
(Ord. No. 98-21, § 7, 3-4-98)  
Secs. 21-256—21-265. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL 
 
Sec. 21-266. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as "cross connection control." 
(Ord. No. 98-23, § 3, 3-18-98)  
Sec. 21-267. - Definitions. 
[For the purposes of this article, certain terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.] 
Air gap separation shall mean the unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of such vessel. 
Approved shall mean accepted by the utilities or building department as meeting an applicable specification stated or cited in this article, and is suitable for the proposed use. 
Auxiliary water supply shall mean any water supply on or available to the premises other than the purveyors approved public water supply. Auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyors potable water supply or any natural source such as well, river, stream, canal, used water, reuse water, industrial fluids, etc. These waters may be polluted, contaminated or objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the water purveyor does not have sanitary control. 
Backflow shall mean the undesirable reversal of flow of water or other substances through a cross-connection and into the piping of a public water system or consumers water system. 
Backflow prevention assembly approved shall mean an assembly used for containment and/or isolation purposes that has been investigated and approved by the public works/utilities department and has been shown to meet the design and performance standards of the American Society of Sanitary Engineers (ASSE), the American Water Works Association (AWWA), and the Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern California (FCCC). 
Backflow prevention device shall mean any assembly, device or other means designed to prevent flow reversal through pipes or valves. 
Backpressure shall mean a pressure higher than the supply pressure caused by a pump, elevated tank, boiler, cooling tower, or any other means that may cause backflow. 
Back-siphonage shall mean backflow caused by negative or reduced pressure in the piped water system. 
Building official shall mean the person designated as the principal enforcing officer of the South Florida Building Code within the City of Miramar. 
Certified backflow tester/technician shall mean a person, who is certified to make competent tests, or to repair, overhaul and make reports on backflow prevention assemblies. Such person shall be knowledgeable of applicable laws, rules, and regulations, shall be a licensed plumber or have at least two (2) years of experience under a plumber and be employed by a Florida State licensed plumber or plumbing contractor, or have equivalent qualifications acceptable to the City of Miramar Public Works Utilities Department, and must hold a certificate of completion from an approved training program in the testing and repair of backflow prevention assemblies as listed: 
AWWA American Water Works Association 
FWPCOA Florida Water and Pollution Control Operators Association 
ASSE American Society of Sanitary Engineers 
NETTI National Environmental Technology Training Institute 
FCCCHR Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research 
TREEO Training Research and Education for Environmental Occupations 
ICCC Institute for Cross Connection Control 
All certified backflow prevention assembly testers must become re-certified every two (2) years through an approved backflow prevention certification program. 
Consumer is a person or facility receiving service from an approved water system. 
Consumer's dual water system shall mean the combination of the consumer's potable and reclaimed water systems that services the consumer's property. 
Consumers potable water system shall mean that portion of the privately owned potable water system lying between the point of delivery and point of use and/or isolation protection. This system will include all pipes, conduits, tanks, receptacles, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances used to produce, convey, store or use potable water. 
Consumer's reclaimed water system shall mean that portion of the privately owned reclaimed water system lying between the point of delivery and point of use and/or isolation protection. This system will include all pipes, conduits, tanks, receptacles, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances used to produce, convey, store or use reclaimed water. 
Contamination shall mean an impairment of the quality of the water, which creates a potential or actual hazard to the public health through the introduction of hazardous or toxic substances, or through the spread of disease by sewage, industrial fluids or water. 
Cross-connection shall mean any temporary or permanent connection between an approved public dual water system or consumer's dual water system and any other source through which it is possible to introduce into any part of the public dual water system any substance other than approved water. By-pass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices, and any other temporary or permanent devices through which, or because of which, backflow could occur are considered cross-connections. 
Cross connection control shall mean a connection between a public water system and a non-approved water source with an approved backflow prevention assembly properly installed that will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
Customer shall mean the person, firm, corporation or other legal entity whose name or names appear on billing for a water service connection from the City of Miramar. 
Degree of hazard shall mean the term derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the approved water system. 
(1)  Hazard, health shall mean an actual or potential threat of contamination of a physical, hazardous or toxic nature to the public or consumer's approved water system to such a degree or intensity that there would be a danger to health. 
(2)  Hazard, non-health shall mean an actual or potential threat to the quality of the public or consumer's approved water system. A non-health hazard is one that, if introduced into the public water supply system could be a nuisance to water consumers but would not adversely effect human health. 
(3)  Hazard, plumbing shall mean a plumbing-type cross connection in a consumer's approved water system that has not been properly protected by a vacuum breaker, air gap separation, or backflow prevention device. 
(4)  Hazard, pollution shall mean an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the dual water system or to the potability of the public or the consumers potable water system which could constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause minor damage to the system or its appurtenances, but would not be dangerous to human health. 
(5)  Hazard, system shall mean an actual or potential threat of severe damage to the physical properties of the public dual water system or the consumer's dual water system or of a pollutant or contaminant which would have a protracted effect on the quality of the approved water in the system. 
Double check-detector assembly shall mean a specially designed assembly composed of a line-size approved double check valve assembly with a specific bypass water meter and a meter-sized approved double check valve assembly. The meter shall register (in U.S. gallons) accurately for only very low rates of flow and shall show a registration for all rates of flow. This assembly shall only be used to protect against a non-health hazard (i.e., pollutant). 
Double check valve assembly shall mean a device composed of two single, independently acting check valves, including tightly closing shut-off valves located at each end of the device, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each check valve. This assembly shall only be used to protect against a non-health hazard (i.e. pollutant). 
Dual check valve device shall mean a compact unit manufactured with two independent spring-action check valves to prevent backflow. This device shall be used only on residential property to protect against a pollution hazard. 
Dual water system shall mean one set of pipes for potable water and another set for reclaimed water. 
Industrial fluids system shall mean any system containing a fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically, or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, system, or non-health hazard if introduced into an approved water supply. 
Isolation shall mean the act of confining a localized hazard within a consumer's water system by installing approved backflow prevention assemblies. 
Owner shall mean the person, firm, corporation or other legal entity that holds title to a property or premises. 
Point of delivery shall generally be at the property line of the customer adjacent to the public street where mains are typically located or at a point at the customer's property where the meter is located. The customer shall be responsible for all water piping and control devices located on the customer's side of the point of delivery, except in those cases as determined by the director of public works/utilities. 
Potable water shall mean any water which, according to recognized standards is safe for human consumption. 
Pollution shall mean the impairment of the quality of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to public health, but which does adversely and unreasonably affect the aesthetic qualities of such waters for domestic use. 
Pressure vacuum breaker shall mean an assembly consisting of an independently operating internally loaded check valve, an independently operating loaded air-inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve, with test cock and shut-off valves at each end of the assembly. This assembly is designed to protect against a health hazard (i.e. contaminant) under a back siphonage condition only. 
Public potable water system shall mean any publicly or privately owned water system operated as a public utility under a current Florida State Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services Permit to supply water for public consumption or use. This system will include all sources, facilities and appurtenances between the source and the point of delivery such as valves, pumps, pipes, conduits, tanks, receptacles, fixtures, equipment, and appurtenances used to produce, convey, treat or store potable water for public consumption or use. 
Purveyor, water shall mean the City of Miramar Utilities Department. 
Reclaimed water shall mean water that has been previously used and has been reclaimed through advanced treatment processes at the City of Miramar's Wastewater Reclamation Facility to produce high quality non-potable water. Reclaimed water is not suitable for human consumption. 
Reduced pressure principal assembly shall mean any assembly of two independently operating approved check valves with an hydraulically operating, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve between the two check valves, tightly closing shut-off valves on either side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of the check and relief valves. This assembly is designed to protect against a health hazard (i.e., contaminant). 
Retrofit shall mean any work or modification to an existing facility or device. 
Service connections shall mean the terminal end of a service connection from any part of the public dual water system. Service connection shall also include connections from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency connections from the utility system. 
Water, non-potable shall mean water which is not safe for human consumption or which is of questionable potability. 
Water, potable shall mean any water which, according to recognized standards, is safe for human consumption. 
Water used shall mean any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public potable water system to a consumers water system after it has passed through the point of delivery and is no longer under the sanitary control of the water purveyor. 
(Ord. No. 98-23, § 4, 3-18-98; Ord. No. 00-20, § 2, 1-19-00)  
Sec. 21-268. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all users connected and/or permits for the connection to the City of Miramar's public potable water supply regardless of whether the user is located within the city limits or outside of the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 98-23, § 5, 3-18-98)  
Sec. 21-269. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is: 
(1)  To protect the public water supply of Miramar from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within the customer system such contamination or pollutants that could backflow into the utility system; and 
(2)  To promote the elimination of the potential for existing cross connections, which could create backflow and back-siphonage, between the customer system and plumbing fixtures, and industrial piping system; and 
(3)  To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross connection control that will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of the Miramar Water System. 
(Ord. No. 98-23, § 6, 3-18-98; Ord. No. 00-20, § 2, 1-19-00)  
Sec. 21-270. - Responsibility. 
(a)  State agencies. The Florida State Department of Environmental Protection has the responsibility for promulgating and enforcing laws, rules, regulations, and policies to be followed in carrying out an effective cross connection control program. 
The Florida State Department of Health (DOH) has the primary responsibility of insuring that the water purveyor operates the public potable water system free of actual or potential sanitary hazards, including unprotected cross connections. 
(b)  Water purveyor. Except as otherwise provided herein, the water purveyor's (the City of Miramar Public Works/ Utilities Department) responsibility is to ensure a safe water supply begins at the source and includes all of the public water distribution system, including the service connection, and ends at the point of delivery to the consumers water system(s). In addition, the water purveyor shall exercise reasonable vigilance to ensure that the consumer has taken the proper steps to protect the public dual water system. To ensure that the proper precautions are taken, the city's public works/utilities department is required to determine the degree of hazard or potential hazard to the public dual water system; to determine the degree of protection required; and to ensure proper containment protection through an ongoing cross connection control program. If necessary, the utility department will perform evaluations and inspections of the customer's potable or dual water system within the premises and inform the customer by letter of any corrective action deemed necessary and the time allowed for the correction to be made. In areas being served by reclaimed water, the public works/utilities department will perform cross connection control surveys to eliminate cross connections at residential sites, provide the consumer of residential sites with educational material about reclaimed water, and perform evaluations of substances being used to determine if a backflow prevention assembly may be required to be installed. 
When the city's public works/utilities department determines that a backflow prevention assembly is required for the protection of the public system, the public works/utilities department shall give notice in writing to the customer to install, at the customer's expense, an approved backflow prevention assembly at each service connection, to test immediately upon installation and thereafter at a frequency as determined by the public works/utilities department, to properly repair and maintain such assembly or assemblies and to keep adequate records of each test and subsequent maintenance and repair, including materials and/or replacement parts. The failure, refusal, or inability on the part of the customer to install said device or devices shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water services to the premises until such device or devices have been properly installed. 
The public works/utilities department will be responsible for ensuring implementation of annual testing and renewal requirements for the backflow prevention devices in accordance with this article. 
(c)  Building inspection. The building inspection department of the City of Miramar has the responsibility to not only review building plans and inspect plumbing as it is installed, but, it shall also have the responsibility of preventing cross connections from being designed and built into the plumbing system within its jurisdiction. 
The plumbing official's responsibility begins at the point of delivery and continues throughout the entire length of the consumers water system. The plan inspector should inquire about the intended use of water at any point where it is suspected that a cross connection might be made or where one is actually called for by the plans. When such is discovered, it shall be mandatory that a suitable, approved backflow prevention assembly be required by the plans and be properly installed. 
The plumbing official shall be responsible for ensuring that the initial installation and related testing of the backflow prevention assembly has been done properly and in accordance with this article. 
(d)  Customer. The customer has the primary responsibility of preventing pollutants and contaminants from entering the consumer's potable water system(s) or the public dual water systems. The customer's responsibility starts at the point of delivery from the public dual water system and including all of the customer's water system(s). The customer, at his/her own expense, shall install, operate, test and maintain approved backflow prevention assemblies as directed by the public works/utilities department. The customer shall maintain accurate records of tests and repairs made to backflow prevention assemblies and shall maintain such records for a minimum period of three (3) years. The records shall be on forms approved by the public works/utilities department and shall include a list of materials or replacement parts used. Following any repair, overhaul, re-piping or relocation of an assembly, the customer shall have it tested to ensure that it is in good operating condition and will prevent backflow. Tests, maintenance and repairs of backflow prevention assemblies shall be made by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester. 
The customer shall ensure that the necessary plumbing permits are obtained for new backflow system installations, retrofits and alterations to existing backflow installations. Retrofit installations of dual check devices for single-family residential units only, will not require a plumbing permit. 
This article does not change, supersede or attempt to modify any building codes related to fire prevention or any provisions of Florida Statute 633, Fire Prevention and Control. The owner and customer will be responsible for complying with all applicable fire protection codes, statues and ordinances. 
(e)  Certified backflow prevention assembly tester. The tester will be responsible for making competent inspections and for repairing or overhauling backflow prevention assemblies and making reports of such repair to the consumer and responsible authorities on forms approved by the public works/utilities department. The tester shall include the list of materials or replacement parts used. The tester shall be equipped with and be competent to use all the necessary tools, gauges, manometers and other equipment necessary to properly test, repair, and maintain backflow prevention assemblies. It will be the tester's responsibility to insure that original manufactured parts are used in the repair of, or replacement of, parts in a backflow prevention assembly. It will be the tester's further responsibility not to change the design, material or operational characteristics of an assembly during repair or maintenance without prior approval of the public works/utilities department. A certified tester shall perform the work and be responsible for the competency and accuracy of all tests and reports. A certified tester shall provide a copy of all test and repair reports to the customer and to the public works/utilities department cross connection control program manager within ten (10) business days of any completed test or repair work. A certified tester shall maintain such records for a minimum period of three (3) years. 
All certified backflow prevention assembly testers must obtain and employ backflow prevention assembly test equipment which has been evaluated and/or approved by the public works/utilities department. All test equipment shall be registered with the public works/utilities department cross connection control program manager. All test equipment shall be checked for accuracy annually (at a minimum), calibrated, if necessary, and certified to the public works/utilities department as to such calibration, employing an accuracy/calibration method acceptable to the public works/utilities department. 
(Ord. No. 98-23, § 7, 3-18-98; Ord. No. 00-20, § 2, 1-19-00)  
Sec. 21-271. - Policy. 
(a)  Existing residential dwelling units which have not had backflow devices installed will not be required to install a backflow assembly or device unless the public works/utilities director determines that a potential risk to the potable or reclaimed water system exists. 
(b)  No water service connection to commercial/industrial, or new residential units shall be installed or maintained by the City of Miramar Utilities Department unless the water supply is protected as required by state law (Florida Statute, Section 403.855) and regulations (Florida Administrative Code, Chapter 62-550) and this article. Service of water to such premises shall be discontinued by the water purveyor if a backflow prevention assembly required by this article is not installed, tested, and maintained, or if it is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been removed, bypassed, or if an unprotected cross connection exists on the premises. Service shall not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. Degree of protection required and maximum time allowed for compliance will be based upon the potential degree of hazard to the public supply system. The maximum time limits are as follows: 
(1)  Cross connections with private wells or other auxiliary water supplies, or, if in the judgement of the public works/utilities director, an imminent health hazard exists, containment commensurate to the degree of hazard shall be effected immediately. 
(2)  All facilities which pose a health hazard to the potable water system must have a containment assembly in the form of a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly within thirty (30) calendar days. 
(3)  All industrial and commercial facilities not identified as a health hazard shall be considered non-health hazard facilities. All non-health hazard facilities must install an appropriate backflow assembly as determined by the public works/utilities director or his designee. 
(c)  The customer's system should be open for inspection at all reasonable times and during the event of an emergency, to authorized representatives of the public works/utilities department, the building department and the Broward County Public Health Unit to determine whether cross connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of this article exist. When such a condition becomes known, the public works/utilities director shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing for a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected the condition in conformance with state and city laws relating to plumbing and water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto. On request, the consumer shall furnish to the authorized representatives any pertinent information regarding the water system on such property where cross connections and backflow are deemed possible. 
(d)  No person shall fill special use tanks or tanker containing pesticides, fertilizers, other toxic chemicals or their residues from the public water system, except at a location equipped with an air gap separator or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly properly installed on the public water supply. 
(e)  In areas being served by reclaimed water, the following conditions must be met: 
(1)  There will be no cross connections to the potable water supply. 
(2)  The distribution piping will be color-coded purple to differentiate the reclaimed water from potable water. 
(3)  There will be signs erected in Spanish and English saying, "Do Not Drink." 
(4)  The reclaimed water supply shall be protected. The public works/utilities department will conduct evaluations for cross connections and the potential for backflow to the reclaimed water distribution system. Included in the evaluation will be an inspection for the type of substances present at the site that could potentially backflow into the reclaimed water supply and the risks associated with the backflow. This information will help to determine what type of prevention will be required on the private service line. 
(Ord. No. 98-23, § 8, 3-18-98; Ord. No. 00-20, § 2, 1-19-00)  
Sec. 21-272. - Backflow prevention device. 
(a)  An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed, at the customers expense, on each service line to a customers water system, no less than twelve (12) inches and not more than three (3) feet from the point of delivery unless approved otherwise by the plumbing official or director of public works/utilities. In all cases, the backflow shall be the first branch line leading off the service line, wherever the following conditions exist: 
(1)  In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a backflow prevention device in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard. 
(2)  In the case of premises upon which any industrial fluids or any other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a backflow prevention device in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard. This shall include the handling of process waters, reuse water, and waters originating from the utility system which have been subject to deterioration in quality. 
(3)  In the case of premises having internal cross connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled, intricate plumbing and piping arrangements, or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross connections exist, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly in the service line. 
(b)  The type of protective device required shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists, as follows: 
(1)  In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device. 
(2)  In the case of any premises where there is water or some substance that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved double check valve assembly. 
(3)  In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to health which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device. Examples of premises where these conditions may exist include wastewater treatment plants, wastewater pumping stations, wastewater reuse pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries, and metal plating plants. 
(4)  In the case of any premises where there are cross connections that are not controlled, either actual or potential, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device at the service connection. 
(5)  In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant cross connection survey, the public water system shall be protected against backflow or back-siphonage from the premises by the installation of a backflow prevention device in the service line. In this case, maximum protection will be required, that is, an approved air-gap separator or reduced pressure principle backflow assembly. 
(6)  In the case of any premises where there is reclaimed water service for irrigation, there shall be no physical connection between the reclaimed water system and the customer's potable water system which is served by a public potable water system. Where such connections are found, disconnection will be made, and the public potable water system shall be protected against the possibility of future reconnection by a reduced pressure principle backflow assembly. 
(c)  A waiver of the requirements in paragraph (a) above is hereby granted in each case where the owner maintains documentation showing that compliance with paragraph (a) will adversely affect the operation of a pre-existent fire protection system. Also, a waiver of the requirements in paragraph (a) is hereby granted in each case where the owner maintains documentation showing all of the following: 
(1)  The potable water system on the premises supplies water only for ordinary domestic type uses (i.e. toilet flushing, hand washing or bathing, cooking or dish washing, or lawn or garden watering) and does not supply water to any irrigation piping system, fire protection system cooling water system, space heating hot water or steam boiler, single-wall heat exchanger, double-wall heat exchanger without leak detection capability, or water loading station. 
(2)  The premises are subject to the provisions of the South Florida Building Code, and the potable water system on the premises conforms with the South Florida Building Code, Section 4620. 
(3)  The premises does not have multiple interconnected water service connections and does not have any auxiliary water system, reclaimed water system, wastewater pump unless the premises is a non-industrial premises with just a submersible wastewater pump, or multi-story building with four or more stories above ground. 
(4)  No chemical except those chemicals that conform with the standards in Rule 62-555.320(3) F.A.C. is added to the potable water system on the premises. 
(d)  The following types of facilities or services have been identified by the public works/utilities department as having a potential for backflow of non-potable water into the public water supply system. Therefore, an approved backflow prevention assembly will be required on all such services according to the degree of hazard present. Other types of facilities or services not listed below may also be required to install approved backflow prevention assemblies if determined necessary by the public works/utilities director. As a minimum requirement, all commercial services and multi-family units will be required to install a double check valve assembly, unless otherwise listed below. 
(1)  Automotive services stations, dealerships, etc. 
a.  No health hazard: DCVA 
b.  Health hazard: RP 
(2)  Automotive plants: RP 
(3)  Auxiliary water systems: 
a.  Approved public/private water supply: DCVA 
b.  Unapproved public private water supply: AG 
c.  Used water and industrial fluids: RP 
(4)  Bakeries: 
a.  No health hazard: DCVA 
b.  Health hazard: RP 
(5)  Beauty shops/barber shops: 
a.  No health hazard: DCVA 
b.  Health hazard: RP 
(6)  Beverage bottling plants: RP 
(7)  Breweries: RP 
(8)  Buildings - Hotels, apartment houses, public and private buildings, or other structures having unprotected cross connections: 
a.  (Under five (5) stories) No health hazard: DCVA 
b.  (Under five (5) stories) Health hazard: RP 
c.  (Over five (5) stories) All: RP 
(9)  Canneries, packing houses, and rendering plants: RP 
(10)  Chemical plants - Manufacturing, processing, compounding or treatment: RP 
(11)  Chemically contaminated water systems: RP 
(12)  Commercial car-wash facilities: RP 
(13)  Commercial greenhouses: RP 
(14)  Commercial sales establishments (department stores, malls, etc.) 
a.  No health hazard: DCVA 
b.  Health hazard: RP 
(15)  Concrete/asphalt plants: RP 
(16)  Dairies and cold storage plants: RP 
(17)  Dye works: RP 
(18)  Film laboratories RP 
(19)  Fire systems: 
a.  Systems three-fourths (¾) inch to two (2) inch 
1.  No health hazard: DCDA 
2.  Health hazard: (booster pumps, foam, antifreeze solution, etc): RP 
b.  Systems two and one-half (2½) inch to ten (10) inch or larger 
1.  No health hazard DCDA 
2.  Health hazard: (booster pumps, foam, antifreeze solution, etc): RPDA 
(20)  Hospitals, medical buildings, sanitariums, morgues, mortuaries, autopsy facilities, nursing and convalescent homes, medical clinics, and veterinary hospitals: RP 
(21)  Industrial facilities: 
a.  No health hazard: DCVA 
b.  Heath hazard: RP 
(22)  Laundries: 
a.  No health hazard: DCVA 
b.  Health hazard: (i.e., Dry Cleaners): RP 
(23)  Lawn irrigation systems (splits taps): 
a.  No health hazard: DCVA - (Single Tap) PVB 
b.  Health hazard: (booster pumps, chemical systems): RP 
(24)  Metal manufacturing, cleaning, processing, and fabricating plants: RP 
(25)  Mobile home parks: 
a.  No health hazard: DCVA 
b.  Health hazard: RP 
(26)  Oil and gas production, storage or transmission properties: RP 
(27)  Paper and paper products plants: RP 
(28)  Pest control (exterminating and fumigating): RP 
(29)  Plating plants: RP 
(30)  Power plants: RP 
(31)  Radioactive materials or substances, plants or facilities handling: RP 
(32)  Restaurants: 
a.  No health hazard: DCVA 
b.  Health hazard: RP 
(33)  Restricted, classified, or other closed facilities: RP 
(34)  Rubber plants (natural or synthetic): RP 
(35)  Sand and gravel plants: RP 
(36)  Schools and colleges: RP 
(37)  Sewage and storm drain facilities: RP 
(38)  Single-family residential unit: DCVA 
(39)  Swimming pools: RP 
(40)  Waterfront facilities and industries: RP 
All assembles and installations shall be subject to inspection and approval by the appropriate city officials. 
Legend 
RP - Reduced pressure principle assembly 
DCVA - Double check valve assembly 
DCDA - Double check detector assembly 
AG - Air gap 
PVB - Pressure vacuum breaker 
RPDA - Reduced pressure detector assembly 
(Ord. No. 98-23, § 9, 3-18-98; Ord. No. 00-20, § 2, 1-19-00)  
Sec. 21-273. - Inspections, testing and recertifications. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the customer at any premises where backflow prevention devices are installed to have certified inspections and recertification tests made at least once per year. Single-family dwelling units with dual check devices are not required to comply with this section. In those instances where the plumbing official or the director of public works/utilities deems the hazard to be great enough, he/she may require certified inspections at more frequent intervals. Inspections and recertification tests shall be at the expense of the customer and shall be performed by a certified backflow tester/technician approved by the director of public works/utilities or his/her designee. 
Backflow prevention devices shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at the expense of the customer whenever they are found to be defective and the records of such tests shall be made available to the utilities department. The customer shall inform the utilities department of any proposed or modified cross connections and also any existing cross connections of which the customer is aware of but has not been found by the utilities department. The customer shall not install a bypass around any backflow prevention device unless there is a backflow prevention device of the same type on the bypass. Customers who cannot shut down operation for testing or repair of a backflow prevention device must supply additional devices necessary to allow testing or repair to take place. 
(b)  A plumbing permit must be obtained from the building department for all new installations, retrofits and alterations in accordance with this article. The customer shall be responsible for having a certified backflow tester/technician conduct an annual recertification and inspection of his/her backflow prevention device. Should the customer fail to do so, the public works/utilities department personnel shall perform the required recertification and inspections and the customer shall reimburse the department for the cost it incurs. Copies of all tests and repairs shall be sent to the public works/utilities department on a form provided by the public works/utilities department. 
(c)  The city shall have the authority and the responsibility to conduct an aggressive backflow program. Tests results of these inspections shall be maintained by the city for a period of seven (7) years. 
(d)  All presently installed backflow prevention devices which do not meet the requirements of this section but were approved devices for the purposes described herein at the time of installation and which have been properly maintained shall, except for the inspection maintenance requirements, be excluded from the requirements of these rules, so long as these backflow prevention devices will protect the public potable water supply system in accordance with the Florida Administrative Code, Chapter 62-550 and 62-555. Whenever the existing device is moved from the present location or requires more than minimum maintenance, or when the director of public works/utilities finds that the maintenance constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by a backflow prevention device meeting the requirements of this article. Further, the backflow prevention device must be reinstalled if or when any of the following conditions apply or occur: 
(1)  The backflow preventer is installed in such a manner that it cannot be tested, if applicable, or maintained. 
(2)  The backflow preventer is an RP, PVB, or AG and is installed in such a manner that the PVB's air inlet port, the RP's relief valve port, or the supply pipe outlet at the AG could be submerged by a ten-year flood. 
(3)  The backflow preventer is an RP and is installed in such a manner that the RPs relief valve port could be submerged as a result of discharge through the RPs relief valve. 
(4)  The backflow preventer is a PVB and is installed with its check valve less than twelve (12) inches above any downstream piping or water outlets. 
(e)  In areas served by reclaimed water, the city shall have the authority to inspect private premises for cross connections between the consumer's potable water system and reclaimed water system. Inspection frequency will be based on the consumer's demand for reclaimed services. High demands will require annual inspections of the premises. Low demands will require inspections once every three (3) years. 
(Ord. No. 98-23, § 10, 3-18-98; Ord. No. 00-20, § 2, 1-19-00)  
Sec. 21-274. - Installation. 
(a)  The city shall install all dual check valve devices on existing single-family dwelling units which require backflow protection as required by this article, section 21-272(2). 
(b)  The fee for installation and initial testing of dual check valve devices on existing single-family dwelling units shall be set by resolution of the city commission. 
(c)  All installations of dual check valve devices on new, single-family dwelling units shall comply with the permit and fee requirements of the building department as established by this article. 
(d)  If the backflow preventer is on the customer's side of the property line, there shall be no takeoffs connected to the water service pipe between the property line and the backflow presenter. 
(e)  If the backflow is on the customer's side of the property line and there exists an air gap, the water service pipe between the property line and the air gap must be visible. No bypass piping shall be installed around any backflow preventer unless the bypass piping is equipped with a backflow preventer of the same type as that which is being bypassed. 
(f)  Each air gap, reduced pressure, or pressure vacuum breaker shall be installed in such a manner that it is not subject to flooding by a ten-year storm, or wherever practical, a one hundred-year storm. 
(g)  Each reduced pressure, pressure vacuum breaker, double check, or residential dual check shall be installed with adequate space to facilitate testing, if applicable, and maintenance. 
(h)  Each reduced pressure, double check, or residential dual check shall be installed in a horizontal position unless it is a make, model, and size that is specifically designed and approved for such positions. Each pressure vacuum breaker shall be installed in a vertical position unless it is a make, model, and size that is specifically designed and approved for the intended position. 
(i)  Each reduced pressure device shall be installed with an air gap between the reduced pressure devices relief valve port and the ground or floor. 
(j)  Reduced pressure devices (RP's) shall not be installed in pits that are entirely below ground level. If an RP is installed in a semi-buried pit or in an enclosure, the pit or enclosure shall have an above ground drain opening that discharges to a well drained area and that is sized to accommodate the maximum discharge rate through the RP's relief valve. Furthermore, there shall be an air gap between the RP's relief valve port and the maximum flood level expected in the pit or enclosure as a result of discharge through the RP's relief valve. 
(k)  If an RP is installed inside a building, the building shall conform to the South Florida Building Code. 
(l)  Each pressure vacuum breaker (PVB) shall be installed with its check valve at least twelve (12) inches above all down stream piping and water outlets. Each PVB shall be installed in a location where drainage is adequate to accommodate spillage through the PVB'S air inlet valve. 
(m)  If a residential dual check (RDC) is installed below ground level, adequate drainage shall be provided to maintain a normally dry location. If a RDC is installed in a location susceptible to flooding, the RDC's test cocks shall be plugged. 
(n)  Before installing a backflow preventer at a service connection in accordance with this article, the consumer shall, if deemed appropriate by the director of public works/utilities, conduct a thorough hydraulic analysis of any pre-existent fire protection system that is downstream from the backflow preventer, and notify the public works/utilities department if the operation of such fire protection system will be adversely affected by the backflow preventer. Further, the customer shall install a device for the control of thermal expansion in the consumer's potable water system if said system includes a water heater and will be made a closed-loop system by the backflow preventer. 
(o)  The customers backflow preventer, if applicable, shall be tested immediately after being installed or repaired by a certified backflow tester/technician and provide a written report to the public works/utilities department of the test results within 3 days of the test. 
(Ord. No. 98-23, § 11, 3-18-98)  
Sec. 21-275. - Fees and permits. 
(a)  Permits for new installation, retrofitting, and certification of backflow devices/assemblies as required by this article must be obtained from the building department by a master plumber in accordance with Chapter 4620 of the South Florida Building Code. The applicant shall pay the building permit fee in effect at the time of issuance of the permit. However, the public works/utilities department shall install and certify all backflow devices on city facilities without the requirements for permits or fees from the building department as allowed by state law (Florida Statutes, Section 489.103). 
(b)  Permits for re-certification must be obtained from the public works/utilities department by a master plumber in accordance with Chapter 4620 of the South Florida Building Code. The applicant shall pay the utility permit fee then in effect at the time of issuance of the permit. However, the public works/utilities department shall install and recertify all backflow devices on city facilities without the requirements for permits or fees from the building department as allowed by state law (Florida Statutes, Section 489.103). 
(c)  The certification and recertification of all backflow devices on all private property shall be performed only by a certified backflow tester/technician. 
(d)  Backflow test and installation fee charges shall be set by resolution of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 98-23, § 12, 3-18-98)  
Sec. 21-276. - Notification to utility customers. 
The public works/utilities director shall notify the owner or authorized agent of the building or premises in which there is found a violation of this subchapter of such violation. The director shall set a reasonable time for the owner to have the violation removed or corrected. On failure of the owner to have the defect corrected by the end of a specified time interval, the director or public works/utilities may, if in his/her judgement an imminent health hazard exists, cause the water service to the building or premises to be terminated and/or recommend such additional fines or penalties to be invoked as are provided in section 21-277 hereafter. 
(Ord. No. 98-23, § 13, 3-18-98)  
Sec. 21-277. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who knowingly fails or refuses to obey or comply with, or willfully violates any of the provisions of this article, or any lawful rule or regulation promulgated hereunder, or any lawful order of the director of utilities issued pursuant to the provisions of this article, shall, upon conviction of such offense, be subject to a fine as set forth below. Each day during which the knowing or willful failure or refusal to comply with this article continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be liable to the city for all estimated or actual costs and damages incurred by the city as a result of such violation plus a fine up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day. 
(Ord. No. 98-23, § 14, 3-18-98)  
Secs. 21-278—21-290. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - REUSE OF RECLAIMED WATER 
 
Sec. 21-291. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "reuse of reclaimed water." 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 3, 12-1-99)  
Sec. 21-292. - Definitions. 
The following terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Available reclaimed water service means the availability of reclaimed water from the wastewater reclamation facility and the existence of an active reclaimed water transmission and distribution main in the vicinity of real property located in the city's reclaimed water service area. 
Backflow prevention device means any assembly, device or other means designed to prevent flow reversal through pipes or valves. 
City means the City of Miramar, Florida. 
Consumer means the user of reclaimed water who is subject to the regulations of this article. 
Cross-connection means any temporary or permanent connection between a public water system or consumers potable water system and any other source through which it is possible to introduce into any part of the public water system any substance other than the potable water that the public water system is supplying. By-pass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices, and any other temporary or permanent devices through which, or because of which, backflow could occur are considered cross-connections. 
Developer means the entity developing real estate within the service area who is subject to the regulations of this article. 
Discontinuation of service means the cessation of reclaimed water service. 
Individual irrigation system means any permanent irrigation system, not served through a master irrigation system, commonly composed of underground pipes and necessary appurtenances thereto, used for the watering of lawns, landscaping and green space on a single-family residential property. 
Irrigation system shall mean an underground system with permanently placed sprinkler devices or below ground hose bibs contained in a locked valve box. Above ground hose bibs (faucets) with hoses and sprinklers shall not constitute an irrigation system. 
Local distribution main means a reclaimed water line, generally six-inch in diameter, within a local road in a sub-division which is an integral part of the sub-division distribution grid system. These mains feed individual irrigation systems through a service connection. 
Local road means a road that generally provides direct access to residential property via connection to a driveway. 
Local transmission main means a reclaimed water line, generally eight-inch in diameter within a collector road, that is fed by the regional transmission system and that generally feeds a local distribution main(s) or a master irrigation system(s). 
Master irrigation system means an irrigation system operated by a developer, by an association of the sub-division, or by a landlord of a commercial or light industrial complex, which provides irrigation water service to more than one property or which provides service to common ground area. 
Master irrigation system tie-in point means the most upstream location in a master irrigation system prior to the reclaimed water service connection. 
Reclaimed water means water which has been previously used and has been reclaimed through advanced treatment processes at the City of Miramar's Wastewater Reclamation Facility to produce a high quality nonpotable water. 
Reclaimed water service area means all land within the City of Miramar limits that is west of Palm Avenue. 
Reclaimed water service connection means that conduit for reclaimed water from the local distribution main to the real property, or to the master irrigation system tie-in point, including a corporation stop or tapping valve and sleeve at the main and a master meter. A curb stop and box or shut-off valve shall be located at the property line. 
Reclaimed water system means the regional and local transmission mains, local distribution mains, service connections, meters and other necessary appurtenances thereto, which are owned by the city and are located on public property such as public right-of-way and easements. 
Regional transmission main means a reclaimed water pipeline, generally greater than eight-inch in diameter, that forms the primary structure of the reclaimed water system and that generally feeds a local transmission main(s). 
Reuse shall mean the deliberate application of reclaimed water, in compliance with the State of Florida Department of Environmental Protection rules, for a beneficial purpose. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 4, 12-1-99)  
Sec. 21-293. - Consumers to accept provisions of article. 
All consumers shall accept the provisions contained in this article and all rules and regulations not inconsistent herewith promulgated by the city manager for the regulation of reuse of reclaimed water. The acceptance of reclaimed water service from the city shall be deemed to constitute acceptance of the above. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 5, 12-1-99)  
Sec. 21-294. - Reclaimed water program overview. 
(a)  It is the intent of the City of Miramar to make reclaimed water available for irrigation use in certain areas of the city where the city determines that the construction of a reclaimed distribution system is feasible and economical. 
(b)  It is the intent of the City of Miramar to implement a phased reclaimed water program designed to provide irrigation water service to all common grounds and roadway medians in all new developments within the reclaimed water service area as set forth herein. 
(c)  The reclaimed water system shall be constructed in phases to provide service to designated areas as determined by the city, pursuant to the terms and conditions set forth herein. It is further the intent of the city to establish a reclaimed water system which complies with the rules and regulations set forth by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, Chapter 62-610, Florida Administrative Code. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 6, 12-1-99)  
Sec. 21-295. - Construction of reclaimed water pipeline. 
(a)  The reuse of reclaimed water shall be required on common grounds and roadway medians. 
(b)  The reclaimed water system shall be constructed in accordance with the standards adopted by the city's public works/utilities department. 
(c)  Developments within the reclaimed water service area shall include reclaimed water local transmission mains. These mains shall be constructed and paid for by the developers. 
(d)  The regional transmission will be constructed by the city through a phased program as funds become available. 
(e)  Installation of irrigation piping, service connections and appurtenances required for the operation of a master irrigation system shall be the full responsibility of the developer. 
(f)  In the event that reclaimed water service is not immediately available and the developer or consumer utilizes an interim source of irrigation water, for a particular property, an approved pumping system shall be designed and/or located to minimize modifications when activating the reclaimed water system. Irrigation system shall be a dual system which can receive source water from either the approved interim water source or the reclaimed water service connection at any point on the main irrigation loop. 
(g)  In all premises where reclaimed water service is provided, the public or private potable water supply systems shall be protected by an approved backflow prevention device. All devices and material installed for backflow prevention must be approved by the city and must be installed in accordance with Article VIII, Cross Connection Control, Chapter 21, City Code. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 7, 12-1-99)  
Sec. 21-296. - Application for service. 
(a)  Prior to connection to the reclaimed water service a consumer shall file a written application with the engineering division, department of public works/utilities. 
(b)  Before an application for reclaimed water service is approved, the customer must have a suitable irrigation system. No system with a cross-connection to the potable water system will be considered for connection to the reclaimed water system. Temporary irrigation systems will not be considered for connection. The systems shall not include above ground faucets or other devices or connections that could permit reclaimed water to be used for any purpose other than irrigation, unless such uses and systems have been approved in writing by the public works/utilities director. 
(c)  Where there exists available reclaimed water service, an existing individual irrigation system shall be connected to the reclaimed water system within twelve (12) months of availability. Any existing master irrigation system(s) shall be connected to the available reclaimed water service within ninety (90) days of availability. 
(d)  Any irrigation system to be constructed, to which there exists available reclaimed water service, shall be connected to the available reclaimed water service upon construction. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct any irrigation system that does not connect to an available reclaimed water service connection. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 8, 12-1-99)  
Sec. 21-297. - Disconnect and discontinue services. 
(a)  After reclaimed water service has been disconnected by the city for violation by the consumer of an ordinance or regulation relating thereto, such service shall not be reconnected until the violation has been permanently corrected. 
(b)  In the event a potable water meter serving a property has been disconnected or removed by the city for nonpayment, the reclaimed water meter, if any, shall also be disconnected or removed and the reclaimed water supply shall be discontinued. 
(c)  Application to discontinue reclaimed water service shall be made in writing by the consumer to the utility billing office. 
(d)  Within five (5) business days of the request by a consumer to have service discontinued, the meter, if applicable, will be read by the city. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 9, 12-1-99)  
Sec. 21-298. - Flowmeter requirements. 
(a)  All reclaimed water users shall be required to utilize an appropriate sized master flow-meter approved by the city. The master flow-meter location shall be determined by the city so that the total usage of reclaimed water can be determined. All flow-meters for the reclaimed water system will be installed and owned by the city. The city may require the developer to install a flow-meter and reimburse the cost of flow-meter installation. 
(b)  Meter readers, employees or other agents of the utilities department of the city shall have access at all times to the meters, valves and/or other connections, and shall be able to enter upon the premises of the consumer for all reasonable purposes associated with services and to disconnect service for the nonpayment of bills when due or to remove the meter for any default on the part of the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 10, 12-1-99)  
Sec. 21-299. - Promulgation and enforcement of reclaimed water service procedures. 
(a)  The public works/utilities director will establish regulations and procedures with respect to the following: 
(1)  Enforcement of ordinances and regulations pertaining to reuse of reclaimed water including procedures for installation, connection, and inspection of an irrigation system or any other application system. 
(2)  Installation, including specifications for acceptable materials and devices, to prevent backflow or cross-connections between the reclaimed water system and any other utility systems. Backflow devices shall be required and installed in accordance with the requirements of Article VIII, Cross Connection Control, Chapter 21, City Code, on properties which are connected to the reclaimed water system. 
(3)  Use of hose connections to an irrigation system or any other application system. 
(4)  The actual use of reclaimed water as recorded by master flow-meters. 
(5)  Any matter relating to the operation of the reclaimed water system. 
(6)  Availability of flow rate and pressure. 
(7)  Expansion of the reclaimed water system. 
(b)  The cross-connection of the reclaimed water system with any other sources of water and sewer services, and the use of reclaimed water for potable purposes and other uses than irrigation is prohibited. No developer or consumer shall construct, operate or maintain any device which is not in compliance with all regulations and procedures established pursuant to the city ordinance. A developer or consumer who does so shall be liable to the city for all costs incurred by the city in finding, securing or removing the noncompliance device. 
(c)  All irrigation systems installed on private property shall be constructed and maintained so as to eliminate waste of reclaimed water and in accordance with applicable rules and regulations of the city, Broward County, and the State of Florida. 
(d)  Any irrigation system constructed or operated in violation of the city ordinances, regulations or procedures shall be subject to immediate discontinuance by the city. Discontinuance of service shall not relieve any consumer of civil liability or from prosecution for criminal or municipal ordinance violation charges. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 11, 12-1-99)  
Sec. 21-300. - Prohibition of unauthorized work on reclaimed water system. 
No person shall do work on the reclaimed water system who is not expressly authorized to do so by the director of public works/utilities. This prohibition specifically includes opening and closing valves and otherwise causing reclaimed water to flow from the system. Any person who violates this section shall, in addition to other fines and penalties which may be imposed by law, be liable to the city for any costs incurred by the city to correct the work. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 12, 12-1-99)  
Sec. 21-301. - Inspections. 
(a)  To ensure that the provisions of the city's ordinances, regulations and procedures are being observed, the city may inspect, secure or remove, as necessary, any or all devices, including but not limited to, backflow preventers, valves, fittings, pipes, sprinklers, and other appurtenances which connect to or control the reuse of reclaimed water. 
(b)  The refusal by a consumer to permit an authorized city agent or employee to enter a premises for the purpose of inspecting an irrigation system may result in the immediate discontinuance of reclaimed water service at the discretion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 13, 12-1-99)  
SUBPART B - LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS  
Chapter 22 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING STRUCTURE REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Parks and recreational impact fee, § 2-226; police and fire impact fees, § 2-227; alarm systems, Ch. 3; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 4; amusement devices, Ch. 5; animals, Ch. 6; running at large of dogs and cats prohibited, § 6-27; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; open burning restrictions, § 9-2; fire prevention code, § 9-51 et seq.; smoke detectors, § 9-66 et seq.; health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 10; sanitary nuisances, § 10-26 et seq.; junked, wrecked, abandoned property, § 10-46 et seq.; rodent control, § 10-66 et seq.; inspection, eradication of rodent infestation required before issuance of permit for demolition of a building or structure, § 10-74; weeds and debris, § 10-91 et seq.; noise regulations, § 10-111 et seq.; property maintenance, 10-118 et seq.; business taxes, permits and business regulations, Ch. 11; business tax, § 11-26 et seq.; garage sales, § 11-81 et seq.; peddlers and solicitors, § 11-101 et seq.; planning and development, Ch. 22.5; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23; subdivisions, Ch. 24; vegetation, Ch. 25; tree, § 25-26 et seq.; zoning, Ch. 26; solid waste, Ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Construction standards, F.S. ch. 553. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Numbering of buildings. 
(a)  Definition. For the purpose of this section, the word "owner" shall include a lessee or agent in charge of a building. 
(b)  Numbering requirements: Buildings in the city shall be numbered as follows: 
(1)  Single-family, duplex buildings. The owner of any single-family home or duplex facing, abutting, opening upon or having its main entrance onto any public or private street, avenue, terrace, lane, road, court or other right-of-way located within the city shall have affixed thereto numbers not less than three (3) inches in height, indicating the street address of such home or duplex. In the alternative, the numbers may be placed on the mailbox or lamppost, provided that the mailbox or lamppost is located on the same lot as the main structure. 
(2)  Apartment, commercial, industrial, multistory buildings. All apartment buildings, commercial buildings, industrial buildings and multistory buildings within the city shall be numbered with the street address, with such numbers being not less than six (6) inches in height. 
(3)  Multifamily units, suites, rooms, offices. All multifamily units, suites, rooms and offices shall be numbered on the doors thereof with all units on the first floor commencing with number 101 and all units on subsequent floors commencing with the number of the floor, as 201, 301, etc. All numbers shall be not less than two (2) inches in height. A directional sign indicating the numbering sequence shall be prominently displayed in all elevator lobbies. 
(c)  Compliance with numbering requirements. All numbering required pursuant to subsection (b) of this section shall be completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a building. All buildings presently existing which are not numbered as provided herein shall be so numbered within six (6) months from the effective date of this section. 
(d)  Maintenance of numbers. The owner shall maintain numbers on his or her building provided they are in good condition and in a conspicuous place where same can be seen and read from the street. 
(Code 1964, § 6-33) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23.  
Sec. 22-2. - Moving building to within territorial boundaries of city. 
(a)  No person shall move a building, as defined by the zoning ordinance, from a location inside or outside the territorial boundaries of the city to a location within the territorial boundaries of the city except and unless the provisions of the South Florida Building Code, Broward County Edition, as amended from time to time, are fully complied with and except and unless the provisions of this Code are fully complied with. 
(b)  Before an application for the moving of a building under the provisions of this section shall be considered by the city building department in accordance with the requirements of the South Florida Building Code, Broward County Edition, the following shall be fully complied with: 
(1)  An application shall be made by the person desiring to move such house or houses to the city zoning administrator, which application will be processed by the city zoning administrator in accordance with the provisions of section 6 of the zoning ordinance governing a special exception. 
(2)  The application shall contain the following: 
a.  The names of the persons employed to do the work and whether by day or by contract. 
b.  The estimated value of the building not including the value of the proposed building site. 
c.  The legal description of the site to which the building is proposed to be relocated. 
(3)  The application shall be accompanied by the following: 
a.  A complete set of plans and specifications prepared in such a manner that the building in its new location shall conform with all provisions of the South Florida Building Code, Broward County Edition, and this Code. The plans shall show in sufficient detail the existing structure such that the advisory planning and zoning board and the city commission may make a determination as to the class of construction, cost, quality and general appearance of the building and may compare same with buildings already constructed within the area to which such building is to be moved. 
b.  A payment and performance bond issued by a state licensed surety company, either cash or surety, meeting the approval of the city attorney and payable to the city guaranteeing compliance with the applicable building code and this Code, providing for restoration of any city property damaged in the moving operation and further guaranteeing that the cost of such building or fair market value thereof shall equal the cost restriction contained in the deed or deeds affecting the subdivision in which the building is placed. The amount of such bond shall be equal to the cost restrictions contained in the deed or deeds affecting the subdivision in which such building is placed and in the absence of such figure shall be a figure equal to the fair market value of the building when placed in its proposed location and all improvements have been made. 
(4)  In considering an application for permission to move a building the advisory planning and zoning board and the city commission shall, with the assistance of the planning director and building official, determine the following: 
a.  Whether the building sought to be moved fully complies with the deed restrictions, building restrictions and zoning restrictions applicable to the particular area to which the applicant desires to move such building. 
b.  Whether or not such building conforms according to the plans and specifications to the same class of construction, quality, cost and general appearance of buildings already constructed within the area to which such building is to be moved. 
c.  That all applicable deed restrictions, zoning regulations and ordinances of the city are to be complied with. 
(c)  The advisory planning and zoning board shall recommend approval or disapproval and the city commission shall approve or disapprove of the moving of a building to a site in the city based upon its determination as set forth herein. The city commission shall consider any objections which may be interposed to such application and its conformance with applicable provisions of existing building and zoning regulations. 
(d)  Any person who shall violate any terms of the provisions of this section upon conviction of such violation before the judge of the municipal court, shall be subject to the penalties prescribed by section 1-13, within the discretion of the municipal judge. Each day of violation of any term or provisions of this section shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1964, § 6-38)  
Secs. 22-3—22-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Smoke detectors, § 9-66 et seq. 
 
Sec. 22-26. - Florida Building Code adopted. 
The Florida Building Code, 2014 Fifth Edition, as amended, be, and the same is hereby adopted as a regulation governing the construction of buildings in the city. 
(Code 1964, § 6-2; Ord. No. 17-08, § 4, 11-14-16)  
Sec. 22-26.1. - Accessibility by handicapped persons. 
The accessibility by handicapped persons requirement set forth in part V, chapter 553, Florida Statutes, as amended, and the Florida Building Code 2014 Accessibility, Fifth Edition, as amended, are hereby adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 91-29, § 1, 5-1-91; Ord. No. 17-08, § 5, 11-14-16)  
Sec. 22-26.2. - Energy Efficiency Code for Building Construction adopted. 
The Florida Building Code Energy Conservation, Fifth Edition, (2014), developed by the State of Florida Department of Economic Opportunity, as amended, is hereby adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 91-29, § 2, 5-1-91; Ord. No. 17-08, § 6, 11-14-16)  
Sec. 22-26.3. - National Electrical Code adopted. 
The 2011 Edition of the National Electrical Code, as amended, is hereby adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 91-29, § 3, 5-1-91; Ord. No. 17-08, § 7, 11-14-16)  
Sec. 22-26.4. - Conflicts. 
In the event any sections of the foregoing laws conflict with the Florida Building Code (2014 Fifth Edition), then, to the extent of such conflict, the building code shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 91-29, § 4, 5-1-91; Ord. No. 17-08, § 8, 11-14-16)  
Sec. 22-27. - Permit and related fees. 
City permit and related fees shall be established and adjusted by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1964, § 6-4; Ord. No. 91-10, § 2, 12-10-90; Ord. No. 92-48, § 2, 9-16-92; Ord. No. 02-05, §§ 2, 3, 12-12-01)  
Sec. 22-28. - Plan review and engineering permit fees. 
City plan review and engineering permit fees shall be established and adjusted by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1964, § 6-4.1; Ord. No. 91-17, § 1, 2-19-91; Ord. No. 02-05, §§ 4, 5, 12-12-01)  
Sec. 22-29. - Homeowner or condominium association affidavit requirement. 
(a)  Declaration of intent. The intent of this section is to require property owners whose property is governed by a Homeowners' Association or Condominium Association to provide affidavits indicating their awareness that they may be subject to additional association regulations despite the issuance of a building permit for renovations by the city. 
(b)  Definitions. [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Homeowners' Association shall mean an association created pursuant to F.S. Ch. 720, to govern and represent the residents of a community. 
Condominium Association shall mean an Association created pursuant to Chapter 718, Florida Statutes, to govern and represent the residents of a community. 
(c)  Affidavit requirement. 
(1)  Affidavit of awareness. As part of the application process for a building permit in accordance with this chapter and with Section 713 of the Land Development Code, each applicant shall sign an affidavit (the "affidavit of awareness") indicating that the applicant is aware that, if the subject property is located in a Homeowners' Association or Condominium Association, as defined in this section, the applicant's property may be subject to additional regulations despite the issuance of a building permit by the city. 
(2)  The building division shall, at the applicant's expense as set forth by resolution as may be amended from time to time, forward by certified mail a copy of the affidavit of awareness to the governing Homeowners' Association or Condominium Association, provided that such association has registered for inclusion on the city's master list of associations. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 11-28-07)  
Secs. 22-30—22-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 10; inspection, eradication of rodent infestation required before issuance of permit for demolition of a building or structure, § 10-74. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-46. - Recovery of cost. 
(a)  All costs incurred pursuant to this article shall be paid by the owner or occupant of the premises or by the person who caused or maintained the violation. 
(b)  The building official shall execute an affidavit stating with fairness and accuracy the items of expense and the date of execution of actions authorized by this article. 
(c)  The city may institute a suit to recover such expenses against any liable person or may causesuch expenses to be charged against the property as a lien or as a special assessment collectible according to the provisions of the city Charter. 
(d)  Except with respect to a lien imposed for expenses incurred in demolition, nothing herein shall be construed as placing a lien upon property which supersedes the lien of any mortgage on such property executed and recorded prior to the existence of a lien authorized herein. 
(e)  Any lien imposed for demolition shall be a lien prior in dignity to all liens, excepting county tax liens and liens of equal dignity with county tax liens. 
(Ord. No. 89-26, § 1(6-73), 4-17-89)  
Secs. 22-47—22-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - UNSAFE STRUCTURES BOARD[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions, committees, § 2-51 et seq.; code of ethics for municipal officers and employees, § 2-287 et seq. 
 
Sec. 22-61. - Created, composition. 
There is hereby created an unsafe structures board consisting of nine (9) members appointed by the city manager, subject to confirmation by the city commission in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 89-26, § 1(6-70(A)), 4-17-89; Ord. No. 91-22, § 18, 3-4-91)  
Sec. 22-62. - Qualification of members. 
Members of the unsafe structures board shall be permanent residents of the city who possess outstanding reputations for civic activity, interest, integrity, responsibility and business or professional responsibility. All professional members of the board shall be registered and licensed by the state and county, when applicable. The representative membership of the board shall be as follows: 
(1)  A registered engineer; 
(2)  A registered architect; 
(3)  A general building contractor; 
(4)  An electrical contractor; 
(5)  An attorney at law; 
(6)  A plumbing contractor; 
(7)  A real estate appraiser; 
(8)  A real estate property manager; and 
(9)  A citizen with experience and background in the field of social problems. 
In the event the city manager cannot find properly qualified residents, the city manager may appoint a qualified nonresident within the specific categories or professions required. As an alternative to appointing board members, the city manager may use the Broward County Unsafe Structures Board to hear and dispose of cases brought by the community development department. 
(Ord. No. 89-26, § 1(6-70(C)), 4-17-89; Ord. No. 91-22, § 18, 3-4-91; Ord. No. 93-20§ 22-62, 5-19-93)  
Sec. 22-63. - Terms of office. 
In order that the terms of office of all the members of the unsafe structures board shall not expire at the same time, the initial appointments to the board shall be as follows: 
(1)  Three (3) members for the term of two (2) years; 
(2)  Three (3) members for the term of three (3) years; and 
(3)  Three (3) members for the term of four (4) years. 
Thereafter, all appointments shall be for the term of three (3) years, provided that the term of office, in all instances, shall continue until a successor is appointed and qualified. Appointments to fill any vacancy on the board shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term, but failure to fill a vacancy shall not invalidate any action or decision of the board. 
(Ord. No. 89-26, § 1(6-70(D)), 4-17-89)  
Sec. 22-64. - Organization. 
(a)  The members of the unsafe structures board shall elect a chairperson and a vice-chairperson and such other officers as may be deemed necessary or desirable, who shall serve at the will of the board. Election of officers shall be held annually at the first meeting after February first, and such officers shall hold office for one (1) year. 
(b)  Five (5) members of the board shall constitute a quorum necessary to hold a meeting or take any action. 
(c)  A majority vote of the board membership present and voting at a duly constituted meeting shall be sufficient to overrule, modify or affirm any action or decision of the building official or to take any other action within the scope of the powers and duties of the board. 
(d)  Members shall serve without compensation but shall be entitled to reimbursement for necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties, upon approval by the city commission. 
(e)  No member of the board shall sit as a voting member in any hearing on a matter in which he or she has a personal or financial interest. 
(f)  The building official, or a designee, shall be the secretary of the board but shall have no vote. 
(g)  The chairperson or the secretary may call meetings of the board, and meetings may be called by written notice signed by three (3) members of the board. 
(h)  Minutes and records shall be kept of all meetings of the board, and all meetings shall be public. 
(i)  All hearings by the board shall be open to the public, and any person whose interest may be affected by the matter on appeal shall be given an opportunity to be heard in person, or through his or her attorney. 
(j)  Witnesses may be sworn and subpoenaed by the board in a like manner as they are subpoenaed by the courts in the county. 
(k)  The hearings shall be informal and need not be conducted according to technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rules which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions. 
(l)  The rules of privilege shall be effective to the same extent that they are now, or hereafter may be, recognized in civil actions, and irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. 
(m)  The board may establish rules and regulations for its own procedure. 
(n)  The city shall provide adequate and competent clerical and administrative personnel and such technical or scientific personnel as may be reasonably required by the board for the proper performance of its duties, subject to budget limitations and shall maintain a record of all proceedings in the office of the city clerk, including but not limited to a court reporter's transcript of the proceeding, and shall make available for copying any and all portions of the record of the proceedings and may certify the same as a true copy and make a reasonable charge therefor; provided, the court reporter shall certify the copy of his or her transcript. 
(o)  The city shall provide a regular meeting place for the board. 
(Ord. No. 89-26, § 1(6-70(E)), 4-17-89)  
Sec. 22-65. - Duties and powers. 
The powers and duties of the unsafe structures board shall be as follows: 
(1)  Hear and determine appeals from actions and decisions of the building official. 
(2)  Hear and review the application of the building official for review of his or her action where his or her decision as indicated in a notice of violations has not been complied with. 
(3)  Affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the building official upon appeal or on application for review. 
(4)  Through its secretary, shall transmit the record with all exhibits, instruments, papers, and transcripts of its proceedings to the court in the event of an appeal. 
(5)  Hear and determine appeals from actions and decisions of the building official and building department pursuant to the provisions of the applicable minimum housing code. 
(6)  All other duties and powers provided for in the South Florida Building Code, Broward Edition, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 89-26, § 1(6-70(B)), 4-17-89)  
Sec. 22-66. - Conflict of interest. 
No official, board member or employee of the city charged with the enforcement of this article shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any repairs, corrections, construction or demolition which may be required, nor shall any official, board member or employee of the city give to anyone the location of any property or the names of owners thereof on which repairs, corrections or demolition have been ordered, except as otherwise directed hereinafter, until after the owners have been formally advised at which time such shall become a matter of public record. 
(Ord. No. 89-26, § 1(6-70(G)), 4-17-89)  
Sec. 22-67. - Duties of legal counsel. 
It shall be the duty of the city attorney, when so requested, to appear at all hearings before the unsafe structures board and to represent and advise the board. 
(Ord. No. 89-26, § 1(6-70(F)), 4-17-89)  
Secs. 22-68—22-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 22-81. - Inspection of unsafe buildings and structures. 
The building official, on his or her own initiative or as a result of reports by others, shall examine or cause to be examined every building or structure appearing or reported to be unsafe, and if such is found to be an unsafe building or structure, the building official shall post the property concerned and shall furnish the owner of such building or structure with written notice in the manner provided for in sections 22-82 and 22-83. 
(Ord. No. 89-26, § 1(6-71(B)), 4-17-89)  
Sec. 22-82. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  The building official shall, at least fourteen (14) days prior to posting an unsafe building, give the owner of record of the premises concerned written notice by certified or registered mail, addressed to such person's last known address. 
(b)  If proof of service by registered or certified mail is not completed by signed return receipt, then a copy of the written notice shall be affixed to the structure concerned and such procedure shall be deemed proper service, and the time for compliance, stipulated in the notice, shall be deemed to commence with the date such notice is so affixed. 
(c)  This written notice shall state the defects which constitute a violation of this section or the South Florida Building Code, or both, and shall prescribe the action to be taken to comply and the time within which compliance must be accomplished, such time shall be reasonable under the particular circumstances involved, subject to reasonable extension when requested in writing, for reasons which the building official considers justifying an extension of time. All such extensions of time shall be by written approval of the building official. 
(d)  In addition, this written notice shall explain the right of appeal of the decision of the building official to the unsafe structures board, and also advise that unless there is compliance with the instructions in the notice of violation or an appeal is filed that a public hearing before the unsafe structures board will be initiated by the building official after the time for compliance has expired. 
(Ord. No. 89-26, § 1(6-71(C)), 4-17-89)  
Sec. 22-83. - Posting. 
The building official shall post, but not before fourteen (14) days after the notice of violation hereinafter provided has been served, a signed notice in a conspicuous location on the building or structure which has been determined to be unsafe. The posted notice shall read substantially as follows: 
UNSAFE BUILDING. This building or structure is, in the opinion of the Building Official, unsafe, as defined in Section 202 of the South Florida Building Code and Chapter 22, Sections 22-81 through 22-85, Unsafe Buildings, Code of the City of Miramar. This building SHALL BE VACATED—SHALL NOT BE OCCUPIED. Action shall be taken by the owner as further prescribed by written notice previously served. THIS NOTICE SHALL NOT BE REMOVED EXCEPT BY THE BUILDING OFFICIAL. DATE _______. 
(Ord. No. 89-26, § 1(6-71(D)), 4-17-89)  
Sec. 22-84. - Recording of notice of violation. 
(a)  If the owner of the property concerned has not complied with the requirements as stated in the notice of violation within the time stipulated or has not appealed the action of the building official as stated in the notice of violation within the time specified, the building official may file an appropriate instrument in the office of the clerk of the court, to be recorded in the public records of the county, indicating that violations of the South Florida Building Code, Broward County Edition, and of section 202 thereof, and sections 22-81 through 22-85 of this Code exist upon the property involved. 
(b)  The recording of such notice shall constitute constructive notice to all concerned, as well as to any subsequent purchasers, transferees, grantees, mortgagees, lessees and all persons claiming or acquiring interest in such property. 
(c)  When the violation specified in the notice of violation has been corrected, the building official shall file a document in the public records of the county certifying that the violation has been corrected upon payment of the filing fees by the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 89-26, § 1(6-71(E)), 4-17-89)  
Sec. 22-85. - Emergency action. 
(a)  When in the opinion of the building official, there is actual or immediate danger of the failure or the collapse of a building or structure, or there is a health, windstorm or fire hazard, he or she may order the occupants to vacate, temporarily close for use or occupancy the rights-of-way thereto, sidewalks, streets or adjacent buildings or nearby area and institute such other temporary safeguards, including securing posting and demolition of the building or structure, as he or she may deem necessary under the circumstances, and may employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible. 
(b)  Costs incurred in the performance of such emergency work shall be paid by the city and upon the recording in the public records of the county a certificate executed by the building official, certifying the amount so expended and why expended, the same shall become a lien against the property involved. 
(Ord. No. 89-26, § 1(6-71(F)), 4-17-89)  
Sec. 22-86. - Special hurricane provisions. 
(1)  Definitions. 
(a)  Construction waste shall mean refuse generated from construction, destruction, renovation, repair or alteration of building and structures except debris comprised solely of material generated by excavation, land clearing or tree removal. 
(b)  Construction shall mean the process of assembling materials and erecting a structure; also, that which is built in the style or medium in which a building is built using wood, steel, concrete or masonry. 
(c)  Container shall mean any detachable metal container designed or intended to be mechanically serviced and varying in size from two (2) to forty (40) cubic yards. 
(d)  Container contractor shall mean that person, firm, or corporation designated by the city to provide garbage and trash collection services pursuant to this article. 
(e)  Construction site shall mean an area where construction is occurring. 
(f)  Hurricane watch means that there is a threat of hurricane conditions (winds of seventy-four (74) miles per hour or greater, or dangerously high water and rough seas) within twenty-four (24) to thirty-six (36) hours. 
(g)  Loose construction debris shall mean garbage, construction waste or trash left loose or unsecured at a construction site. Garbage, construction waste and trash shall have the meanings set forth in this section. 
(h)  Loose construction materials shall mean any and all construction materials, including but not limited to loose or unsecured wood, bricks, blocks, metals and tiles, that are placed at a construction site, and which materials are not being currently used in the construction at the site. 
(i)  Severe weather shall mean the weather conditions expected when the media and/or the National Weather Service give the following weather notices: tropical storm watch, tropical storm warning, hurricane watch or hurricane warning. 
(j)  Trash shall mean debris generated in the normal maintenance of landscaping (excluding large branches, trunks or stumps of trees), bottles, cans, boxes, small household appliances and other miscellaneous household debris. 
(2)  Construction waste and construction materials. 
(a)  In the event that a hurricane watch is issued by the United States Weather Bureau, the owner, occupant or user of a construction site shall comply with the requirements of the South Florida Building Code, 1999 Broward County Edition, as amended from time to time, in addition to the requirements specified herein, by taking all steps necessary to secure the construction site, including removal or securing of potentially hazardous or loose objects. 
(b)  It shall be the joint responsibility of any owner of real property upon which construction is occurring, or any contractor responsible for said construction, to ensure that all road rights-of-way remain free at all times of all construction waste and trash resulting from such construction. After a severe weather watch or warning has been suspended, the building official of the building division shall give said owner or contractor reasonable time to clear the road rights-of-way of construction waste and trash. 
(c)  It shall be the joint responsibility of any owner of real property upon which construction is occurring, or any contractor responsible for said construction, to ensure that all waste and trash resulting from the construction are contained on the real property upon which the construction occurs. Said construction waste and trash shall be kept within an area that is either wire-fenced or otherwise secured within an enclosed containment structure, to assure that construction waste and trash are not on adjacent property. Debris in open containers shall be secured by weighting with sand, covered, lashed down or picked up by a container contractor. 
(d)  During severe weather, it shall be a violation of this section for an owner of real property upon which construction is occurring or any contractor responsible for said construction, to have on or near that property loose construction debris. The construction site must be cleared of loose construction debris pursuant to section (2)(c) above. 
(e)  During severe weather, it shall be a violation of this section for an owner of the real property upon which construction is occurring, or any contractor responsible for said construction, to have on that property loose construction material, including roof tiles, that are not fastened or secured to the ground or any permanent structure. 
(f)  Media broadcasts or notices issued by the National Weather Service of severe weather are deemed sufficient notice to the owner of real property upon which construction is occurring, or any contractor responsible for said construction, to secure loose construction debris and loose construction materials against the effects of high winds. 
(g)  Materials stockpiled on top of any structure under construction shall be permanently installed by the property owner or contractor upon a warning of severe weather; provided, however, in the event such installation cannot be timely completed, then the property owner or contractor shall: 
(i)  Band together the construction materials and fasten them to the top of the structure in such a manner so as not to present a threat of their becoming airborne during sever weather; or 
(ii)  Remove the construction materials from the top of the structure and fasten down to the ground; or 
(iii)  Remove the construction materials from the job site; or 
(iv)  Store the construction materials inside a enclosed structure. 
(h)  From June 1 to November 30 of each calendar year (the National Weather Service designated hurricane season), building or roofing materials shall be loaded on a roof no earlier than twenty (20) working days prior to the permanent installation of those materials. 
(i)  The building official of the building division or his or her designee shall issue a citation for each violation of this section. Prior to the issuance of any citation for a violation of this section, the building official of the building division, or his or her designee, shall attempt to provide a verbal or written notice to the owner of the real property upon which construction is occurring or any contractor responsible for said construction. That notice shall specifically set a time period (reasonably calculated by the building official of the building division, or his or her designee) for correction of the violation. In the event the city takes emergency actions to secure a property considered in violation of this section, the property owner shall be responsible for all costs associated therewith and be billed for all charges and expenses incurred by the city. 
(3)  Special hurricane inspections. 
(a)  During a period of time designated by the United States Weather Bureau as being a hurricane watch, all furniture, display racks, material and similar loose objects in exposed outdoor sites shall be lashed to rigid construction or stored in buildings. Orders shall be oral or written and shall be given to a person on the premises most logically responsible for maintenance and the orders shall be carried out before winds of hurricane velocity are anticipated. 
(b)  Any person, firm or corporation receiving notice from the city's building official, or his or her designee, to comply with this section shall comply with that notice within the time specified on that notice. 
(c)  In situations where a person, firm or corporation fails to secure a site consistent with this section and pursuant to the orders of the city's building official, or his or her designee, the city may enter and secure the site for purposes of correcting the violation. In such an event, the person, firm or corporation responsible for the violation shall reimburse the city for its costs of cleaning up, clearing and securing the project site. This shall include demolition or other steps necessary to correct hazardous structural conditions. 
(4)  Storm shutter regulations. Consistent with the provisions regarding storm shutters as defined and set forth in the South Florida Building Code, 1999 Broward County Edition, as amended from time to time, it is prohibited during hurricane season to maintain storm shutters in a closed/secured position on a structure for periods in excess of seven (7) consecutive days unless: 
(a)  A windstorm/hurricane occurs during the seven day period, at which point the seven-day period begins anew the day after hurricane conditions have subsided; or 
(b)  Windstorm/hurricane conditions are expected to occur within thirty-six (36) hours after the seventh day. 
(5)  Penalties. 
(a)  Any person, firm, corporation or agent who violates any provisions of this section may, upon conviction, be punished by a fine to be set and amended by resolution of the city commission per violation, or imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed 60 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. However, if a violation leads to or causes damage that is considered irreparable or irreversible in nature, a fine to be set and amended by resolution of the city commission per violation and/or imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed 60 days may be imposed. 
(b)  In determining the amount of the fine, if any, the following factors shall be considered: 
(i)  The gravity of the violation; 
(ii)  Any actions taken by the violator to correct the violation; 
(iii)  Any previous violations committed by the violator. 
(c)  Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate violation. Enforcement may also be by suit for declaratory, injunctive or other appropriate relief in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  Any person, firm, corporation or agent who violates any provisions of this section may be liable for any damages caused by such violation and for the reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the building official or city in enforcing the provisions of this section, including but not limited to, the costs of enforcement inspections, preparation of enforcement reports, photographs, title searches, postage and other demonstrable administrative costs for enforcement and collection, including attorney's fees. 
(6)  Civil emergencies. 
(a)  State of emergency. 
(i)  Whenever there shall occur within the city a natural or manmade disaster or emergency, or the occurrence or threat of one that is imminent and requires immediate and expeditious action, the mayor and the city manager are designated and empowered to declare a state of emergency. In the event of the mayor's inability to act, the vice mayor is authorized to act in his or her place. In the event of the city manager's inability to act, the deputy city manager is authorized to act in his or her place. 
(ii)  The state of emergency shall be initiated by a declaration signed by the mayor and the city manager, and the state of emergency shall continue until the mayor and the city manager find that the threat or danger no longer exists and/or until an emergency meeting of a quorum of the city commission or a regular meeting can take place and terminate the state of emergency by resolution. However, the duration of each declaration of emergency is limited to seven (7) days and may be extended, as necessary, in seven-day increments. 
(iii)  During a state of emergency all laws of the city and the state shall remain in full force and effect except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the authority of the mayor or city commissioners to declare or terminate a state of emergency and take any action authorized by law when sitting in a regular or special session. 
(iv)  Additional matters as deemed necessary to effectuate the emergency powers prescribed herein. 
(b)  Declaration of emergency. The state of emergency declaration shall provide the following: 
(i)  The nature of the emergency. 
(ii)  A designation, by appropriate boundaries, of the area or areas affected. 
(iii)  The conditions which have brought the emergency about or which make possible its termination. 
(iv)  Additional matters as deemed necessary to effectuate the emergency powers prescribed herein. 
(c)  Violation of emergency orders. It shall be unlawful to violate any order that is issued during an emergency when the order is included in any declaration of emergency and is issued for the purpose of protecting life and property. 
(Ord. No. 00-34, § 2, 7-5-00; Ord. No. 14-16, § 19, 6-17-14)  
Secs. 22-87—22-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - APPEAL PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 22-101. - Authorized. 
(a)  The owner or anyone having an interest in a building or structure which has been determined to be unsafe, and concerning which a notice of violation has been served by the building official, may appeal the decision of the building official as stated in the notice of violation to the unsafe structures board. Such an appeal shall be filed prior to the expiration of the time allowed for compliance specified in such notice; provided, however that in no event shall the appeal period be less than fifteen (15) days. 
(b)  Such appeal shall be in writing, addressed to the secretary of the unsafe structures board, and shall be in the form of a certified statement, stating the reasons for such an appeal and stating wherein they consider the building official to be in error. 
(c)  Upon receipt of the appeal, the secretary of the board shall proceed to notify all parties in interest as to the time and place the unsafe structures board shall conduct a public hearing on the matter. The procedure for the serving of, and the form of notice is provided for in section 22-102. 
(Ord. No. 89-26, § 1(6-72(A)), 4-17-89)  
Sec. 22-102. - Notice of public hearing. 
(a)  If the owner or other parties having an interest in the property do not comply with the terms of the notice of violation and do not file an appeal within the time stipulated, the building official shall then apply for a public hearing to be conducted by the unsafe structures board, and the secretary of the unsafe structures board shall notify all parties in interest of the time and place of such public hearing on the matter. 
(b)  The procedure for the serving, and the form of notice shall be the same in the case where an appeal has been filed by the owner or other parties in interest and such procedure and the form of notice shall be as set forth below: 
(1)  When an appeal has been properly filed, or when the public hearing is initiated by the building official, as provided herein, the secretary of the unsafe structures board shall issue a notice in the board's name, requiring the owner of record and all parties having an interest to appear before the board in person or by an attorney at the time set forth in such notice, but not earlier than ten (10) days after service of the notice, and show cause why the decision of the building official should not be carried out. 
(2)  Service of such notices shall be by certified or registered mail to the last known address of the party being served, if known; however, failure to receive such notice shall not invalidate the same as such notice shall also be perfected by posting such notice on the property and by publishing a copy thereof in a newspaper published in Broward County, such publication to be two (2) times, one (1) week apart. 
(3)  The time for appearing and showing cause as aforesaid, and a description of the property shall be set forth in such published notice; provided, such time shall not be less than ten (10) days after the last publication of the notice. 
(4)  Any person or party who shall not appear and show cause as aforesaid shall be as fully bound by proceedings taken as if he or she had appeared and shown cause. 
(Ord. No. 89-26, § 1(6-72(B)), 4-17-89)  
Sec. 22-103. - Conduct of public hearing. 
(a)  On the day established in the notice of public hearing the unsafe structures board shall review all pertinent evidence and hear all testimony from the building official, the owner and other parties in interest and their respective witnesses. 
(b)  The board, by the issuance of a written order, may modify, rescind, or uphold the decision of the building official as recited in the notice of violation and may order the owner or persons responsible for the building or structure to vacate, or cause to be vacated forthwith, to make repairs and to take necessary action to secure the building, or to demolish the building or structure and remove the salvage, contents, debris and abandoned property from the premises, all within the time stipulated in the order by the board. 
(c)  Such order shall be entered in the minute book of the board within ten (10) days after such public hearing and a copy of such order shall be forwarded to the owner, and all parties in interest by registered mail, and a copy thereof posted on the premises. 
(d)  If the owner or those responsible shall fail to comply with the order of the board within the time stipulated therein, and such order is to repair, or secure the building to make it safe, then the city shall cause such building to be vacated, if occupied, and shall through the city or through a contractor making the lowest responsible bid, secure the building or structure. 
(e)  If the order is to demolish the building or structure and to remove the salvage, contents, debris and abandoned property from the premises, and the owner or those responsible shall have failed to comply with such order, then the city may do so thereafter through the city or through a contractor making the lowest responsible bid. 
(f)  The city may sell to the highest bidder or bidders for cash the salvage and the contents of such building or other structure so demolished which have not been removed by the owner of the land. 
(g)  If no bids are received for such salvage or contents the city may destroy that for which no bids are received. 
(h)  Bids shall be secured as provided for in section 2-241 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 89-26, § 1(6-72(C)), 4-17-89)  
Sec. 22-104. - Judicial review. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the unsafe structures board may seek judicial review of that decision in accordance with the Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 89-26, § 1(6-74), 4-17-89)  
Secs. 22-105—22-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 22-121. - Determination. 
Buildings or structures that are, or hereafter shall become unsafe, unsanitary or deficient in adequate facilities for means of egress, or which constitute a fire or windstorm hazard, or illegal or improper use, occupancy or maintenance, or which do not comply with the provisions of the applicable minimum housing code, or which have been substantially damaged by the elements, acts of God, fire, explosion or otherwise shall be deemed unsafe buildings and a permit shall be obtained to demolish the structure or bring the building to comply with the applicable codes. 
(Ord. No. 89-26, § 1(6-71(A)(a)), 4-17-89)  
Sec. 22-122. - Presumption of unsafety. 
Incomplete buildings commenced without a permit or the permit for which has expired, or completed buildings commenced without a permit or the permit for which expired prior to completion and no certificate of occupancy has been issued, shall be presumed and deemed unsafe. 
(Ord. No. 89-26, § 1(6-71(A)(b)), 4-17-89)  
Sec. 22-123. - Action required. 
Unsafe buildings or structures shall be demolished and removed from the premises concerned, or made safe, sanitary and secure in a manner required by the building official and as provided in this article, provided that where replacement, repair, alteration or demolition is required on buildings or structures within the purview of the applicable minimum housing code, the provisions of such code shall be complied with and shall control. 
(Ord. No. 89-26, § 1(6-71(A)(c)), 4-17-89)  
Sec. 22-124. - Criteria. 
The criteria set out in section 202.2 of the South Florida Building Code, Broward County Edition, shall be used by the building official in determining an unsafe building. 
(Ord. No. 89-26, § 1(6-71(A)(d)), 4-17-89)  
Secs. 22-125—22-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SWIMMING POOLS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation, Ch. 14. 
 
Sec. 22-141. - Safety barrier required; specifications. 
(a)  No swimming pool final inspection and approval shall be given by the building department, unless there has been erected a safety barrier. The safety barrier shall take the form of a screened-in patio, a wooden fence, a wire fence, a rock wall, a concrete block wall, or other materials so as to enable the owner to blend the same with the style of architecture planned or in existence on the property. 
(b)  The minimum height of the safety barrier shall be not less than four (4) feet. 
(c)  The safety barrier shall be erected either around the swimming pool or around the premises on which the swimming pool is erected; in either event, it shall enclose the area entirely, prohibiting unrestrained admittance to the enclosed area. 
(d)  Gates shall be of the spring lock type, so that they shall automatically be in a closed position at all times. 
(e)  Gates shall also be equipped with a safe lock and shall be locked when the swimming pool is not in use. 
(Code 1964, § 22-1)  
Sec. 22-142. - Permits required. 
Before any work is commenced, permits shall be secured for all swimming pools and for the safety barriers. Plans shall contain all details necessary to show compliance with the terms and conditions of these regulations. No swimming pool permit shall be issued unless simultaneously therewith a permit is secured for the erection of the required safety barrier; if the premises are already enclosed, as hereinbefore provided, a permit for the safety barrier shall not be required, if, upon inspection of the premises, the existing barrier is proven to be satisfactory. 
(Code 1964, § 22-2)  
Sec. 22-143. - Construction specifications of walls and fences. 
(a)  In the wooden type fence, the boards, pickets, louvers, or other such members, shall be spaced, constructed, and erected, so as to make the fence nonclimbable and impenetrable. 
(b)  Walls, whether of the rock or block type, shall be so erected to make them nonclimbable. 
(c)  Wire fences shall be the two-inch chain link or diamond weave nonclimbable type, or of an approved equal, with top rail. They shall be of a heavy, galvanized material. 
(Code 1964, § 22-3)  
Sec. 22-144. - Authority to disapprove barriers. 
It shall be within the discretion of the building inspector to refuse approval of any barrier which, in his opinion, does not furnish the safety requirements of this regulation, i.e., that it is high enough and so constructed, to keep the children of pre-school age from getting over or through it. 
(Code 1964, § 22-4)  
Sec. 22-145. - Maintenance of safety barrier; duty of owner, occupant. 
It shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or occupant of the premises containing the swimming pool to maintain and keep in proper and safe condition at all times the safety barrier required and erected in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1964, § 22-5)  
Sec. 22-146. - Maintenance of pool; duty of owner, occupant. 
It shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or occupant of the premises containing a swimming pool to keep such pool from becoming a health hazard to the community by becoming a breeding ground for mosquitoes, or by any other means. 
(Code 1964, § 22-6)  
Sec. 22-147. - Notice of to owner required; assessment of costs. 
In the event any person owning or occupying the premises containing a swimming pool permits the safety barrier to become in an improper and unsafe condition, or permits the swimming pool to become a health hazard to the community, the city clerk may direct a letter by certified mail to the owner or occupant of such premises, advising such owner or occupant that the city will have such safety barrier put in a proper and safe condition or correct the health hazard of the swimming pool within a period of ten (10) days from receipt of such letter. The city shall cause these repairs to be made in the event such owner or occupant fails to do so within the period prescribed, and the cost thereof shall be assessed against the property as a special assessment in the same manner as special assessments are authorized by the city clerk, and the procedure designated in the city Charter for enforcing the special assessment shall be utilized. 
(Code 1964, § 22-7)  
Sec. 22-148. - Temporary fence to enclose swimming pools while under construction. 
No person shall construct or cause to be constructed any swimming pools unless such swimming pool is completely enclosed by a fence with a minimum height of not less than four (4) feet. Such fence may be of a temporary nature but must be erected either around the swimming pool or around the premises on which the swimming pool is under construction; in either event, it shall enclose the area entirely, prohibiting unrestrained admittance to the enclosed area. However, the swimming pool need not be completely enclosed during those periods when an adult person is present on the site and actual construction is in process. This section shall only affect those pools under construction within one hundred forty (140) feet of any residence upon which a certificate of occupancy has been issued. The one hundred forty (140) feet shall be measured from the edge of the swimming pool to the closest property line containing such residence by straight line measure. 
(Code 1964, § 22-9)  
Secs. 22-149—22-165. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - MARINE STRUCTURES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Inspection, eradication of rodent infestation required before issuance of permit for demolition of a building or structure, § 10-74; marine activities and ways, Ch. 12. 
 
Sec. 22-166. - Sea wall or bulkhead required upon waterfront lands. 
All lots or parcels of land abutting any lake, river, creek, canal or channel within the city shall be bulkheaded along the entire length of any lake, creek, river or channel as hereinafter provided. Bulkheads shall be constructed wholly upon private property and their maintenance shall be a responsibility of the property owner. For the purposes of this article, a bulkhead shall be a structure placed generally parallel to the shoreline to separate land area from a water area and having as its primary purpose the retention of fill or the prevention of sliding of land. The datum plane for all elevations shall be the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey Mean Sea Level (USC & GS MSL). 
(Code 1964, § 7-1)  
Sec. 22-167. - Certificate of occupancy not to issue until bulkhead constructed. 
The certificate of occupancy shall not be issued by the city for any dwelling or other construction upon any lot or parcel of land adjacent to any lake, creek, river, canal or channel until and unless a bulkhead has been constructed along such lake, creek, river, canal or channel upon which such lot or parcel of land abuts. 
(Code 1964, § 7-2)  
Sec. 22-168. - Canal or lake front maintenance easements. 
A canal or lake front maintenance easement shall be granted to the city in all new subdivisions and shall be shown and set aside upon the plat submitted for commission approval. The easement shall be for the purpose of maintenance of the lake or canal. The easement shall extend inward or landward from the rear or waterfront property line to provide an easement width of twenty (20) feet. No permanent improvement shall be constructed in this easement unless specifically approved by the city. On notice to the property owner by the city, the property owner shall, within thirty (30) days and at his or her expense, remove improvements within the easements unless such improvements in the opinion of the city do not interfere with its maintenance operations. 
(Code 1964, § 7-3)  
Sec. 22-169. - Bulkhead design. 
The bulkhead design, drawings and specifications, shall be prepared by a registered engineer of the state and submitted to the city engineer for approval. The city engineer may at his or her option require copies of design calculations, borings or other soil investigations for his or her review prior to his or her approval. The design shall conform to accepted standards and applicable codes, and shall take into consideration a moving surcharge equal to that imposed by necessary canal maintenance equipment. Bulkheads shall be constructed of durable materials suited for the service and exposure. No wood bulkhead construction shall be permitted. The elevation of the top of the bulkhead shall be USC&GS MSL datum. 
(Code 1964, § 7-4)  
Sec. 22-170. - Bulkhead construction. 
(a)  A location sketch showing the proposed construction shall accompany the application for permit. 
(b)  After a permit for construction is obtained, the building department is to be notified twenty-four (24) hours before construction of any bulkhead or sea wall is to begin. 
(c)  If, in the opinion of the building department, poor construction practices or inferior materials are being used in the bulkhead, the work may be stopped by the building department. The unsatisfactory portion thereof shall be removed at the expense of the builder and the work shall then be allowed to proceed. 
(Code 1964, § 7-5)  
Sec. 22-171. - Exemptions to bulkhead requirements. 
Bulkheads will not be required where the banks of lakes, rivers, creeks, canals or channels are constructed as follows: 
(1)  The bank slope or incline from the rear property line landward shall not be steeper than one (1) foot vertical to four (4) feet horizontal and shall extend upwards from the rear property line to meet finish grade. Finish grade at the beginning of the slope downward to the property line shall be equal to street grade at the front of the lot. The bank slope or incline from the rear property line outward into the water area shall not be steeper than one (1) foot vertical to four (4) feet horizontal to an elevation of -5.5 USC&GS MSL. If excavation below -2.5 USC&GS MSL is in sound rock the slope may be as nearly vertical as the rock will stand. If the soil conditions are such that steeper slopes below -2.5 USC&GS MSL will be stable and satisfactory supporting information to this effect is presented to the city engineer, he may allow such greater slopes, subject to the approval of the city commission. 
(2)  The minimum bottom elevation of the lake, river, creek, canal or channel shall be -5.5 USC&GS MSL. 
(3)  No muck or other objectionable material shall be used as fill to bring the slope area, including the area measured five (5) feet landward from the top of slope, to design fill elevation. Solid sod shall be placed from the water edge to a point five (5) feet landward from the top of slope. Sod shall be St. Augustine or bitter blue or approved equal and shall be fully established before acceptance, and issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The rear or waterfront property line where slopes are used in lieu of bulkheads shall be established on the slope at elevation +2.5, USC&GS MSL datum. 
(4)  A rear yard setback of twenty (20) feet from the rear or waterfront property line measured landward therefrom shall be provided and no building construction, to include houses, swimming pools, Florida rooms, or patios, shall be permitted in this setback. Bulkheads will not be required for the construction of docks. 
(Code 1964, § 7-6)  
Sec. 22-172. - Docks; construction requirements. 
Prior to the construction of a dock within the city, the owner shall obtain approval of the proposed construction from the city building department. The amount of a dock protruding onto public property shall be at the discretion of the building department and based upon waterway width. In no case shall protrusion onto public property exceed fifteen (15) feet. Docks shall be kept in a constant state of repair by the owner. Any dock not properly constructed or maintained must be removed at the direction of the building department within fifteen (15) days of receipt of notice. 
(Code 1964, § 7-7)  
Chapter 22.5 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Growth management department, § 2-138, charges for landscaping and visual amenities regulations, land subdivision regulations and the comprehensive zoning ordinance, § 2-224(3); traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 20; utilities, Ch. 21; buildings and building structure regulations, Ch. 22; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23; subdivisions, Ch. 24; vegetation, Ch. 25; zoning, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Local government comprehensive planning and land development regulations, F.S. § 163.3161 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 22.5-1. - Authority under State Act. 
(a)  Declaration of intent to exercise. Pursuant to, and in accordance with F.S. § 163.3171, the city declares its intent to exercise authority under the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act for the total geographical area under its jurisdiction. 
(b)  Ratification of previous acts. All actions taken to this date by the city, its administrative agencies or agents, with respect to the Local Government Comprehensive Planning Act of 1975, were taken with the intent to exercise authority under such planning act for the total area under the city's jurisdiction, and all such actions are hereby ratified and confirmed. 
(Code 1964,§ 16A-1)  
Sec. 22.5-2. - Adoption of comprehensive plan elements. 
(a)  The city comprehensive plan, dated May 15, 1989, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk and in the office of the division of planning, consisting of the elements set out in subsection (b), is hereby approved and adopted, pursuant to the provisions of F.S. § 163.3184. 
(b)  The following elements of the comprehensive plan, dated May 15, 1989, are hereby approved and adopted: 
(1)  Future land use; 
(2)  Traffic circulation; 
(3)  Sanitary sewer, solid waste, drainage, potable water and natural groundwater aquifer recharge; 
(4)  Recreation and open space; 
(5)  Housing; 
(6)  Capital improvements; 
(7)  Conservation; 
(8)  Intergovernmental coordination. 
(Code 1964,§ 16A-2) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that amendments to the comprehensive plan are not set out herein, but are of file at the office of the city clerk.  
Sec. 22.5-3. - Development permits; surcharge. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed upon all development permits (as specified in paragraph (b) hereof), a surcharge to be set and amended by resolution of the city commission for the purpose of defraying the cost of implementing and maintaining a Geographic Information System ("G.I.S.") necessary to process development permit applications. The surcharge shall be used to reimburse the city for in-house and out-source services related to the G.I.S. technology capabilities of the city. The surcharge shall also be used to defray the cost of upgrading and maintaining the existing building permit system to increase its efficiency and to include on-line permitting. 
(b)  The development permits to which the surcharge shall apply shall be the following: all development applications/permits for planning and zoning, engineering and building. 
(Ord. No. 98-42, §§ 1—3, 7-1-98; Ord. No. 00-13, § 2, 12-1-99; Ord. No. 01-37, § 2, 6-20-01; Ord. No. 14-16, § 20, 6-17-14; Ord. No. 17-08, § 9, 11-14-16)  
Secs. 22.5-4—22.5-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CONCURRENCY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22.5-26. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the City of Miramar Concurrency Land Development Management Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 90-8,§ 1, 11-29-89)  
Sec. 22.5-27. - Scope. 
For purposes of this article, concurrency land development regulations include all local land development regulations contained and referenced in this article, which regulations are hereby found to be consistent with and implement the city's adopted comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 90-8,§ 2, 11-29-89)  
Sec. 22.5-28. - Adoption of other ordinances, rules and regulations consistent with comprehensive plan. 
The following provisions of the city and other federal, state, county, and regional agencies' ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations are found to be consistent with and implement the city's adopted comprehensive plan and are expressly incorporated by reference herein: 
(1)  Regulation of subdivision of land. Land Development Code section 307, as amended, of the city land subdivision regulation; 
(2)  Implementation of land use categories. Land Development Code chapter 7, use regulations, as amended, of the city zoning ordinance and the city's comprehensive plan. Whenever the permitted uses or district regulations applicable to any zoning district permit some uses that are not permitted by the applicable land use plan designation for the property, the provisions of the land use plan shall operate to prohibit those uses on that property as if such restrictions were fully set forth in this article. Where an existing lawful use of land or a structure is no longer permitted by the applicable land use plan restrictions, such use of land or structures shall be considered nonconforming unless a contrary result is specifically provided for in the land use plan; 
(3)  Control of land use activities within identified cones of influence (for potable water wells and wellfields). Ordinance No. 84-60, as amended, of the county, which is hereby adopted by reference as law by the city; 
(4)  Control of areas subject to seasonal and periodic flooding. Land Development Code Section 816, as amended, of the city; 
(5)  Provisions of adequate drainage facilities. Chapter 27-14 of the county environmental quality control board, Code of Regulations, as amended, management of stormwater discharges and non-point sources of pollution; Chapter 67-904, as amended, Laws of Florida; and Chapter 40E of the Florida Administrative Code, as amended, Rules of the South Florida Water Management District are hereby adopted as law by reference; 
(6)  Protection of environmentally sensitive lands. Ordinance No. 68-4, as amended, of the city, including section 13, site plan procedures and requirements; section 5, P planned unit development; section 5, P.I.D. planned industrial district; section 6, mining and quarrying; and the state department of environmental regulation and United States Army Corps of Engineers as specifically relate to soils, groundwater, surface water, shorelines, vegetative communities and wildlife habitats are hereby adopted as law by reference; 
(7)  Signage. Land Development Code chapter 10, signs, as amended, of the city; 
(8)  Parking spaces. Land Development Code section 808, off-street parking and loading standards, as amended, of the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-8,§ 3(a)—(h), 11-29-89; Ord. No. 17-08, § 10, 11-14-16)  
Secs. 22.5-29—22.5-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-08, §§ 11—19, adopted November 14, 2016, repealed div. 2, §§ 22.5-46—22.5-54. Former div. 2 pertained to the certification of level of service compliance and derived from Ord. No. 90-8, November 29, 1989. 
 
Secs. 22.5-46—22.5-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-08, §§ 20—30, adopted November 14, 2016, repealed div. 3, §§ 22.5-71—22.5-81. Former div. 3 pertained to development agreements and derived from Ord. No. 90-8, November 29, 1989 and Ord. No. 910-22, adopted March, 4, 1991. 
 
Secs. 22.5-71—22.5-81. - Reserved.  
Chapter 23 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Policy for naming of municipal facilities and roads, § 2-1; parks, public works and recreation department, § 2-140; local improvements special assessments procedure, § 2-266 et seq.; animals, Ch. 6; running at large of dogs and cats prohibited, § 6-27; cable television, Ch. 7; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; health, sanitation and nuisances, Ch. 10; sanitary nuisances, § 10-26 et seq.; junked, wrecked, abandoned property, § 10-46 et seq.; weeds and debris, § 10-91 et seq.; property maintenance, § 10-118 et seq.; business taxes, permits and business regulations, Ch. 11; garage sales, § 11-81 et seq.; peddlers and solicitors, § 11-101 et seq.; miscellaneous offenses, Ch. 13; injuring public property prohibited, § 13-4; riding vehicles across pedestrian overpasses prohibited, § 13-9; solid waste, Ch. 18; buildings and building structure regulations, Ch. 22; numbering of buildings, § 22-1; marine structures, § 22-166 et seq.; planning and development, Ch. 22.5; subdivisions, Ch. 24; vegetation, Ch. 25; trees, § 25-26 et seq.; removal of trees from public lands, § 25-35; zoning, Ch. 26. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 23-1. - Poles; attaching posters, cutting, disfiguring, etc. 
It shall be unlawful to attach posters or handbills to, or to cut, scratch or otherwise disfigure any telegraph, telephone, electric light, signal or other pole or gas post standing in the street. 
(Code 1964, § 15-19)  
Sec. 23-2. - Permit for excavation. 
(a)  As used in this section, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(1)  Excavation means an operation in which any structure, earth, rock or other massive material in or on the ground is moved, removed, or otherwise displaced by means of any tool, equipment or explosives and includes, without limitation, wrecking, razing, grading, trenching, digging, ditching, drilling, augering, tunneling, scraping, cable or pipe plowing, and piledriving, except maintenance activities to restore road rights-of-way to original template. 
(2)  Excavator means any person performing an excavation. 
(3)  Public right-of-way means any public streets, sidewalks, alleys, public place, city easements or right-of-way dedicated to the public within the jurisdictional limits of the City. 
(b)  No excavator shall commence or perform any excavation in any Public Right-of-Way without first having obtained a permit as is required herein, and complying with the provisions of this Ordinance. Applications for such permits shall be made to the Public Works/Utilities Department on the form prescribed by the City. The permit fee shall be $50.00. 
(c)  As a minimum, the permit application shall contain a description and sketch of work to be performed, the exact location of the excavation, the date or dates on which the excavation will occur, the date of completion of excavation, and a phone number of a representative to contact. Such permit application shall be given at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to any excavation taking place, unless an emergency exists which requires the immediate restoration of utility services. In the event of such emergency, the excavator shall make application with the public works/utilities department within twenty-four hours of such excavation, excluding weekends and holidays. 
(d)  All excavators performing any excavation in or under a public right-of-way shall restore the surface to its original condition, including the installation of sod in non-paved areas. Any opening in a paved or improved portion of a street shall be repaired and restored in compliance with the standards of the public works/utilities department. All construction and maintenance work shall be done in a manner designed to leave the work area clear of earth and debris, and in a condition as nearly as possible to that which existed before such work began. 
(e)  No such permit shall be issued unless, and until, the applicant has filed with the public works/utilities department a cash bond, in the amount approved by the public works/utilities department to insure proper restoration of the ground and laying of pavement, if any, and guarantee compliance with the time for completion of the work as stated in the application. 
(f)  At all times during the excavation, the excavator shall be responsible for maintaining the excavated area in a clean and safe condition and shall remove and properly dispose of all rubbish, excess earth rock and other debris resulting from the excavation. From time to time, as may be ordered by the city, and in all cases immediately after completion of the excavation, the excavator shall at his expense clean up and remove and properly dispose of refuse and unused material of any kind resulting from the excavation. 
(g)  The public works/utilities department shall inspect all excavations for compliance with the permit, the standards of the city, and this ordinance. 
(h)  At all times during the excavation, the excavator shall place and maintain barriers, warning devices and traffic control devices necessary for safety of the general public in accordance with the standards of Broward County and Florida Department of Transportation. Excavation trenches shall be covered or filled by a material acceptable to the public works/utilities department during times that the area is not being worked on. The excavator shall take appropriate measures to assure the protection and safety of both vehicle and pedestrian traffic. All sidewalks shall be restored to the original condition. If an excavation results in the blocking of any sidewalk for twenty-four (24) hours or more, a temporary sidewalk shall be constructed or provided. The temporary sidewalk shall be safe for travel and convenient to the users. Prior to the commencement of excavation work, the excavator shall notify all adjoining property owners of the proposed excavation. At all times during an excavation, the excavator at his sole expense, shall be responsible for the protection and preservation of all adjoining properties. 
(i)  After an excavation is commenced, the excavator shall complete all excavation and restoration work covered by the excavation permit in accordance with the time period approved by the public works/utilities department on the permit application. 
(j)  If the city determines that the permittee is not permforming the excavation in accordance with the permit or in conformance with city standards, the public works/utilities department may order suspension of the permit or stopping the work until such time as the permittee has complied with the permit or standards. In such case, the permittee shall take all necessary precautions to leave the work area in safe and secure condition and otherwise comply with all other provisions of this ordinance. 
(k)  Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall forfeit the bond amount and shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Code 1964, § 6-6, Ord. No. 93-13, 3-7-93)  
Sec. 23-3. - Building permit required. 
(a)  No street, roadway, alley, bridge, drainage swale, driveway approach, or sidewalk shall be constructed in the city without there first having been secured a building permit from the city and detailed plans of such construction submitted and approved by the building department and a fee paid to the city, such fee to be calculated in accordance with the estimated cost of the construction. 
(b)  The building department shall not issue any permit to any of such construction unless the same complies with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1964, § 20-3)  
Sec. 23-4. - Public rights-of-way. 
The document entitled "Minimum Standards Applicable to Public Rights-of-Way Under Broward County Jurisdiction," as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted as a regulation governing the construction of public improvements in the city. 
(Code 1964, § 20-1)  
Sec. 23-5. - Drainage swale requirements. 
(a)  The area immediately adjacent to the paved road surface extending to the right-of-way line or to the edge of sidewalk is primarily intended for the drainage of the paved roadway by percolation of the water through the natural sand soil. This area is not intended for parking vehicles and shall not be paved with any type of impervious material except for driveway approaches as outlined next. At the point where the driveway approach intersects the right-of-way line, the width for the driveway approach may not exceed the following percentages within the corresponding zoning district: 
Zoning District Percentage E25 R30 R-3A70 B65 R-140 R-1B50 R-270 R-370 B-165 M65 M-165 
However, in the event a larger paved area is desired for access, the property owner must provide for subsurface drainage areas or other methods to handle the runoff resulting from the additional area being proposed. 
(b)  A permit from the building department must be obtained for this construction. Maintenance of such subsurface drains must be performed by the property owner. Prior to application for permit, the property owner shall submit a proposed plan or sketch, including details of construction, to the building department for approval. No such restrictions are applied within the following zoning districts: A, A-1, P, T, RV-1. 
(c)  Drainage of paved areas on private property shall not drain into the public right-of-way. 
(d)  Sodding of the swale area and right-of-way is encouraged and permitted up to the edge of the paved roadways. 
(e)  All drainage swale areas shall be constructed to conform with the sketch designated as exhibit A herein. 
 
(f)  The abutting property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the swale area. 
(Code 1964, § 20-4)ms 2511, line drawing  
Sec. 23-6. - Plans showing road substrata to be submitted and approved. 
(a)  Prior to commencing any road construction within the city limits, plans must be submitted to the city engineer showing a cross-section of the existing soil substrata of the road right-of-way upon which such road is to be constructed. If plans so submitted do not show the substrata is suitable for the construction of roads, the city engineer shall so notify the builder/developer and advise him or her in writing to remove the objectionable subbase. It shall be the duty of the builder/developer, individual partnership or corporate entity to see that the city is notified when the subbase of the road-bed is ready for inspection. No rocks shall be laid until such inspection has been made and the subbase approved. 
(b)  If, in the opinion of the engineer, subsurface borings are necessary, work may be halted until the results of these borings are obtained and then the city engineer may request additional excavation and/or correction of the subbase. 
(Code 1964, § 20-7)  
Sec. 23-7. - Road construction specifications. 
All roadbeds shall be free of muck for the distance of the width of the paving plus three (3) feet from both edges of the pavement. Limerock course shall have a minimum width two (2) feet greater than the asphalt and a compacted thickness of eight (8) inches of grade no. 2 limerock compacted to a density of ninety-five (95) percent per modified proctor. An asphalt prime coat shall then be applied to the road surface, and a tack coat shall be applied prior to the laying of one (1) inch of type S-1 asphaltic concrete. 
(Code 1964, § 20-8)  
Sec. 23-8. - Test of road by core borings, costs; removal of nonconforming road. 
If, in the opinion of the city engineer, a road is deemed suspect of having improper or insufficient material, the city's engineer may direct a test laboratory to perform necessary core borings, cost of which shall be paid by the ten (10) percent cash bond held by the city. In the event such materials do not come up to specifications, the city engineer may direct the contractor to remove that portion of such road that does not conform. 
(Code 1964, § 20-9)  
Sec. 23-9. - Use of certain blocks, rocks, etc., prohibited. 
Pyramid-shaped decorative cement blocks and/or large rocks, stones or boulders used along street rights-of-way, drives, walks, or other places commonly used by the public are declared a public hazard, and the use of same along street rights-of-way, drives or public walks of the city is hereby prohibited. This section shall not apply to dome-shaped decorative blocks used along street rights-of-way, provided that such blocks are no more than twelve (12) inches in diameter and located at least twelve (12) inches from the edge of pavement. 
(Code 1964, § 20-10)  
Sec. 23-10. - Protection of manhole covers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than authorized personnel of the utility company and the department of public works, to remove or lift a manhole cover within the city. 
(Code 1964, § 20-11)  
Sec. 23-11. - Obstructing sidewalks. 
No person shall obstruct, cause to be obstructed or allow to be obstructed, any sidewalk in the city. This prohibition shall include, but not be limited to, any barrier, sprinkler system, obstacle or other impediment that prevents or hinders free access or use of the sidewalk. 
(Code 1964, § 20-14)  
Sec. 23-12. - Special exceptions. 
(a)  The city commission may grant special exceptions to any of the requirements of this chapter. Such special exceptions shall be in the form of resolutions upon receipt of an application from the property owner and payment of a fee to be set and amended by resolution of the city commission. The application shall be accompanied by a set of engineering plans for the proposed work and a certified survey showing crown of road elevations and drainage slopes for roads abutting the property in question. 
(b)  Prior to granting a special exception, the city commission shall find that the proposed special exception will not create a drainage problem and will not conflict with the provisions of Section 25-1. The city commission may make the granting of a special exception contingent upon the applicant's compliance with such stipulations and safeguards as it may deem necessary to ensure compliance with the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(Code 1964, § 20-15; Ord. No. 14-16, § 21, 6-17-14)  
Sec. 23-13. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-08, § 31, adopted November 14, 2016, repealed § 23.13. Former § 23-13 pertained to the vacation of abandonments and easements and derived from Ord. No. 94-21, adopted February 16, 1994.  
Sec. 23-14. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Encroachment shall mean an obstruction placed in the desired path or location of a sidewalk and includes, but is not limited to, trees, landscape beds, paved swales, fences, mailboxes, walls, poles and landscape berms. 
Placement conflict shall mean a rare tree, or a protest from the property owner, that impedes the installation of the sidewalk at the right-of-way line. 
Property line or right-of-way line shall mean the common line identifying the end of the public or private right-of-way and the beginning of the abutting private property. 
Public right-of-way shall means any street, sidewalk, drainage system, swale, easement or utility dedicated to the public within the jurisdictional limits of the city. 
Sidewalk shall mean any improved path or area provided within a part of a public or private right-of-way that is designated and ordinarily used for pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. No. 01-19, § 2, 2-21-01)  
Sec. 23-15. - Location of newly installed sidewalks. 
(a)  New sidewalks shall be located in such a manner as to establish a uniform network of sidewalks. New sidewalks shall be placed in the public right-of-way abutting the private property line. All encroachments that conflict with the sidewalk installation shall be removed with the following exceptions: 
(1)  When a sidewalk placement conflict contributes substantially to the character of the community and interferes with the sidewalk installation, a conflict analysis will be conducted by the city's development review committee to determine where the sidewalk is to be placed. Such sidewalk placement should preserve the character of the community and conform to all other sidewalks located within the immediate area to maintain a consistent and uniform appearance. 
(2)  If the placement of the sidewalk along the property line creates an adverse or unsafe condition (e.g. encroachment on setback requirement for parked vehicle in driveway), a conflict analysis will be conducted by the city's development review committee to determine the appropriate placement of the sidewalk. Such sidewalk placement should conform to all other sidewalks located within the immediate area to maintain a consistent and uniform appearance. 
(b)  A new sidewalk may be located over an existing underground public utility unless, in the opinion of the city's development review committee, the sidewalk would interfere with the expansion of underground utilities. 
(c)  A new sidewalk may replace a portion of an existing swale unless, in the opinion of the city's development review committee, such replacement would adversely impair the functionality of the swale for storm water purposes. 
(Ord. No. 01-19, § 2, 2-21-01)  
Sec. 23-16. - Exemption. 
Sidewalks located within the Traditional Neighborhood Development ("TND") Districts are exempt from the requirements of section 23-15. 
(Ord. No. 01-19, § 2, 2-21-01)  
Secs. 23-17—23-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - NEWSRACKS 
 
Sec. 23-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Distributor shall mean the person or any other legal entity owning or responsible for placing or maintaining a newsrack in a public right-of-way. The terms distributor, owner or publisher shall be used conjunctively throughout this article and shall apply jointly and severally to those of them owning or maintaining the newsrack in a public right-of-way. 
Newsrack shall mean any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used, or maintained for the display, sale or distribution of newspapers or other news periodicals or advertising circulars. 
Owner shall mean the owner of the newsrack. 
Parkway shall mean any area within a right-of-way which is not a pathway or roadway. 
Pathway shall mean any surface provided for the use of pedestrians and bicycle riders. 
Public property shall mean parks, squares, plazas and any and all other real property owned by the city. 
Publisher shall mean the publisher of the newspaper or other news periodical vended within the scope of this article. 
Recovery area shall mean that space, as determined by department of transportation specifications, which is measured from the edge of the roadway outward and which is required to be clear of fixed objects. DOT specifications shall be indicated in Table III-12, from the Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways. The spatial relationships determined by DOT are as follows: 
Table III-12 
Minimum Width of Roadside Recovery Area 
	Below 

35 m.p.h. 	Design 

Speed 

35 m.p.h. 

45 m.p.h. 	50 m.p.h. 

& above 
Rural, feet 	6 	14 	30*** 
*Urban, feet 	4** 	4** 	14 
 
;note; *From face of curb. 
;note; **On projects where the four-foot minimum offset would place the obstruction in substantial conflict with the sidewalk or when utility poles would create an unreasonable conflict with requirements of the National Safety Code and other alternatives are deemed impractical, the minimum may be reduced to two and one-half (2½) feet. On reconstruction projects for which it is not feasible to provide this width as shown in the table above, obstructions should be placed at the right-of-way line. 
;note; ***For low volume collector and local roads the maximum clearance practicable should be used with twenty (20) feet as a minimum when the projected (twenty-year) ADT is less than one thousand six hundred (1,600) vehicles per day or fourteen (14) feet minimum when the ADT is less than seven hundred fifty (750). 
Right-of-way shall mean all that area which is dedicated to use by the public for pedestrian and vehicular travel and includes, but is not limited to, roadways, parkways and pathways. 
Roadway shall mean that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
Sidewalk shall mean any service area provided for that part of a public right-of-way which is designed and ordinarily used for pedestrian travel. 
Street shall mean all of that area dedicated to public use for public traffic purposes and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks. 
Visibility triangle shall mean all that area at the intersections of two (2) roadways within a sight triangle created by measuring thirty (30) feet from the apex of the intersection of the two (2) roadways. 
(Code 1964, § 20-17(a)) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 23-32. - Standards. 
After the effective date of the ordinance from which this article was derived, all newsracks placed, erected, maintained or operated within a public right-of-way or other public property within the city shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  No newsracks shall be placed or located on a roadway. 
(2)  No newsrack shall be permitted to rest upon, in or over any pathway, except where there is no available parkway area in the immediate vicinity of the proposed location. However, under no circumstances shall a newsrack be allowed at any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians or bicycle riders is reduced to less than four (4) feet. 
(3)  No advertising shall be permitted upon newsracks other than the identification or promotion of the periodical offered therein. 
(4)  No newsrack shall exceed fifty-four (54) inches in height, fifty (50) inches in width, or twenty-four (24) inches in depth. 
(5)  No newsrack shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any property or to any permanently fixed object not owned by the distributor of the newsrack, unless the prior written consent of the owner of such property or object is obtained in a notarized affidavit. No newsracks shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to a tree. 
(6)  Newsracks may be placed, chained or otherwise attached to one another; however, no more than five (5) single and/or double newsracks may be joined or placed together in this manner, and a space of no less than one thousand (1,000) feet, on the same side of the street, shall separate each group of five (5) single and/or double newsracks so attached. 
(7)  Each newsrack shall be constructed, installed and maintained in a safe and secure condition, and with sufficient weighting to deter vandalization and to prevent the newsrack from becoming a hazard in severe weather. Hurricane precautions shall be as indicated in the South Florida Building Code, Broward Edition. Whenever a hurricane warning is in effect in Broward and/or Dade County area, the distributor, owner or publisher shall immediately, within eight (8) hours of the issuance of such hurricane warning, remove the newsracks belonging to such distributor, owner or publisher from the public rights-of-way and place them in a secure storage area. Any newsracks not removed within eight (8) hours of the imposition of a hurricane warning may be removed by the city in accordance with the emergency removal procedures provided for by section 23-36. 
(8)  The location and installation of all newsracks within the city shall comply with this article. No newsrack shall be installed or located in an area which unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(9)  Each newsrack shall be maintained in a clean, neat and attractive condition and in good repair at all times so that: 
a.  It is reasonably free of dirt and grease; 
b.  It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in the visible painted areas thereof; 
c.  It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted metal areas thereof; 
d.  The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the publications therein are viewed are unbroken and reasonably free of cracks, dents, blemishes and discoloration; 
e.  Any rack card which is inserted in the front of a newsrack shall be reasonably free of tears, peeling or fading; 
f.  The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly misshapen; 
g.  Any coin-return mechanism or other mechanical parts are in proper working order. 
(10)  No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained: 
a.  Within ten (10) feet of any marked crosswalk; 
b.  Within thirty (30) feet of any fire hydrant, fire callbox or other emergency facility; 
c.  Within ten (10) feet of any driveway; 
d.  Within ten (10) feet ahead of, and ten (10) feet to the rear of a traffic sign regulating moving traffic or within five (5) feet of the outer end of any bus stop; 
e.  Within the recovery area adjacent to a public street, except where the application of this restriction to a particular location has the effect of prohibiting placement of newsracks at that location. Newsracks shall be located as far as possible from the edge of the roadway, but in no event shall a newsrack be placed at less than two and one-half (2 1/2) feet from the edge of the curb, as specified by DOT specifications referenced in section 23-31; 
f.  Within six (6) feet of any display window on public property; 
g.  Within twenty (20) feet of any police station driveway, fire station driveway, ambulance station driveway, entrance to hospital emergency room or other emergency facility; 
h.  Within a visibility triangle; 
i.  At any location which would obscure traffic-control signs from the visibility of motorists. 
(Code 1964, § 20-17(b))  
Sec. 23-33. - Identification, registration and indemnification. 
(a)  Each newsrack shall have affixed to it in a readily visible place the telephone number of a working telephone service to call to report a malfunction or to secure a refund in the event of a malfunction of the coin-return mechanism and shall also provide the name and address of the publisher, owner or distributor to receive the notice provided for in this article. 
(b)  Although no permit or license is required prior to the placement of newsracks, any person who places or maintains such a newsrack shall notify in writing the code enforcement board of the location or of a change in location for such newsrack. The written notification shall be particular as to the location, furnishing the closest street address and a brief description of the location. 
(c)  At the time of registration, each publisher owner or distributor of a newsrack shall execute and file with the code enforcement board an indemnification and hold harmless agreement relieving the city, its officials, employees and boards from any and all claims, suits, actions, demands, damages, costs and liabilities arising from the installation, maintenance or operation of such newsrack owned or maintained by such publisher, owner or distributor, together with all costs and attorney's fees, including any appellate fees. 
(d)  The owner, distributor or publisher shall receive from the city a copy of any claim letter submitted to the city in accordance with F.S. § 768.28 and shall in any event defend any and all such actions, claims, demands, or suits on behalf of the city through defense counsel selected by the owner, distributor or publisher at the owner's, distributor's or publisher's sole cost and expense. 
(e)  Simultaneously with the filing of the required indemnity, each owner, distributor or publisher registering shall maintain or cause to be maintained comprehensive general liability insurance providing insurance against claims for personal injury or property damage arising or occurring by virtue of the installation, maintenance, operation or presence of such newsracks. The insurance shall be issued by insurance companies duly authorized to write insurance coverage in the state and shall afford minimum protection of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per occurrence. The owner, distributor or publisher shall furnish such certificates of insurance for the coverages specified hereunder to the city's risk manager, with a copy to the code enforcement board prior to the issuance of such permit. The city's risk manager shall be given written notice of any lapse, cancellation or material modification of such coverage and shall promptly procure substitute coverage and serve it upon the risk manager. All insurance companies issuing this insurance shall be rated A:X or better per A.M. Best's Key Rating Guide, latest edition. If an owner, distributor or publisher is self-insured, a self-insurance certificate acceptable to the city's risk manager may be accepted in lieu of a certificate of insurance. 
(Code 1964, § 20-17(c))  
Sec. 23-34. - Abandonment. 
No newsrack shall remain empty for a period of fifteen (15) consecutive days. In the event a newsrack remains empty for that period, it shall be deemed abandoned, and may be removed in accordance with the provisions of this article. For purposes of this section, the word "empty" means: (1) A newsrack without any contents; or (2) a newsrack with contents which bear a date fifteen (15) days prior to the date of inspection. 
(Code 1964, § 20-17(d))  
Sec. 23-35. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any newsrack installed, used or maintained in violation of this article may, after twenty (20) days' written notice mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person designated by the publisher, owner or distributor under the registration provisions of section 23-33(b), be removed and stored in a convenient and safe place by an employee of the code enforcement board, unless the violation is cured before expiration of that twenty-day period or a hearing is requested as provided in this section. The notice shall: 
(1)  Identify the newsrack at issue and specifically describe the offending condition and all required action necessary to correct that condition; 
(2)  Advise that unless within twenty (20) days of receipt of the notice the specified condition is cured or a written request for a hearing before the code enforcement board is filed with the board at an address set forth in the notice, the identified newsrack will be removed by the city pursuant to this section. 
(b)  If the publisher, owner or distributor of a newsrack which is the subject of such a notice of violation files with the code enforcement board, within twenty (20) days of receipt of such notice, a written request for a hearing, a hearing shall be granted as a matter of right, and the filing of this hearing request shall operate as an automatic stay of the twenty-day compliance period, until such time as the code enforcement board has held a hearing on the alleged violation and rendered a decision thereof, and the expiration of the thirty-day appeal period provided in this section. 
(c)  The order of proof at the code enforcement board hearing shall be: 
(1)  The applicable code enforcement officer shall present the facts to the code enforcement board and shall have the right to present witnesses and other relevant evidence to the code enforcement board. 
(2)  The publisher, owner or distributor or attorney of the publisher, owner or distributor shall have the right to cross examine the city's witnesses, including the code enforcement officer. 
(3)  The burden to rebut this evidence shifts to the publisher, owner or distributor if and only if the code enforcement officer has presented a prima facie case of a violation of this article. 
(4)  In order to find a publisher, owner or distributor guilty of a violation of this article, the code enforcement board must find that by a preponderance of all the evidence presented at the hearing, that is by the greater weight of that evidence, the publisher, owner or distributor has committed a violation of this article. 
(5)  The city attorney may act as an advisor to the code enforcement board but may not act as an advisor to the prosecuting officer. 
(6)  Formal rules of evidence or civil procedure shall not apply, but will be observed, and the proceedings shall be compatible with the standards for due process of law. 
(d)  Any publisher, owner, distributor or the code enforcement division dissatisfied with the code enforcement board's decision may appeal such decision to the city commission. Any appeal shall be filed with the city clerk's office within thirty (30) days of receipt of the code enforcement board's written decision, and shall operate as an automatic stay of the code enforcement board's decision, which stay shall continue in force until completion of any timely review thereof to the city commission or subsequently to any court of law. 
(e)  This section shall apply to removal procedures for which no hearing has been requested on a timely basis, under subsection (a) of this section and further shall not apply to emergency removals under section 23-36. Any newsrack removed from a public right-of-way or property shall be stored at the cost of the distributor, providing that the prevailing party causing a reversal on appeal shall be excused from such costs. The city shall be reimbursed by the publisher, owner or distributor for all costs incurred in the removal and storage of all newsracks removed from public rights-of-way or property by the city. Within ten (10) days after the removal of any newsrack from public rights-of-way or property, the city shall send the distributor, owner or publisher of the newsrack by certified mail, return receipt requested, notice of removal. The city is hereby authorized to sell the newsrack at a public sale if the newsrack is not claimed by the distributor within a period of ninety (90) days from the date of removal and if no hearing has been timely requested as provided by this section. On or before ten (10) days prior to sale, the city shall advertise notice of the sale in a daily newspaper of general circulation in the city. All unpaid removal and storage costs and advertisement costs shall be paid out of the proceeds of the sale of the newsracks. The remaining balance of the sale proceeds shall become the property of the city and be transferred to the city's general fund. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, if the limitations imposed on newsracks by this article prevent installation, maintenance or use of a newsrack at a location where the code enforcement board finds that it does not pose a health or safety hazard to pedestrians, vehicles or residents, then the city commission may permit that publisher, owner or distributor to install, maintain and use that newsrack at that location. 
(Code 1964, § 20-17(e))  
Sec. 23-36. - Emergency removal. 
(a)  In an emergency, as determined by the police chief, building official or their designees, where the installation, use or maintenance of any newsrack poses an imminent and immediate health or safety hazard to pedestrians or vehicles, the city shall, where feasible, give telephone notice to the newsrack owner of the nature of the emergency and afford the owner the opportunity to remove or otherwise relocate the newsrack. Where telephone notice is not feasible or where the owner fails to remove or relocate the newsrack following telephone notice of the emergency, the police chief, building official or any person designated by same may summarily and temporarily remove or relocate such newsrack, but only to the extent necessary to avoid the health or safety hazard at issue. Immediately following removal or relocation of any newsrack under these emergency procedures, the owner shall be provided written notice of the action and the nature of the emergency necessitating such action by certified mail, return receipt requested. Upon failure of the owner to claim the newsrack within thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice, the newsrack shall be disposed of pursuant to section 23-35(d). 
(b)  The owner of any newsrack removed or relocated under this section may file a written request, which must be filed within thirty (30) days of receipt of the removal notice, for a hearing before the code enforcement board to dispute the determination of an emergency and/or the removal or relocation by the city, and the owner, in addition, may present a claim to retake possession of the newsrack prior to the hearing. A hearing so requested shall be granted as a matter of right at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board and shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 23-35(c). Any newsrack owner, publisher or distributor dissatisfied with the decision of the code enforcement board at such hearing may appeal such decision to the city commission within thirty (30) days of such decision. 
(c)  Following removal of the newsrack by the city, the distributor shall be notified of same by certified mail, return receipt requested. If the newsrack is neither claimed within thirty (30) days of receipt of the certified letter nor a hearing requested within thirty (30) days of removal, by certified mail, disposal shall be made pursuant to section 23-35(d). 
(Code 1964, § 20-17(f))  
Sec. 23-37. - Appeals. 
Any distributor, owner or publisher aggrieved by a finding, determination, notice or action taken under the provisions of this article may appeal to the city commission. An appeal must be perfected within thirty (30) days of the receipt of notice of any protested action or decision by delivering to the office of the city clerk, with a copy to the secretary of the code enforcement board, a letter of appeal, briefly stating therein the basis for the appeal. A hearing shall be held on the next available agenda of the city commission not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt of the letter of appeal. The appellant shall be given at least five (5) days' notice of the time and place of the hearing. The city commission will give the appellant the customarily reasonable time to be heard and will then hear from a representative of the code enforcement board and any other appropriate city personnel. At the conclusion of the hearing the city commission shall make a final and conclusive determination which will affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the code enforcement board. The determination shall be reduced to writing and signed by the mayor and filed in the office of the city clerk within ten (10) days of the hearing, and a copy shall be sent to the appellant. The decision shall be effective when filed with the city clerk. The decision of the city commission may be appealed as provided by law. 
(Code 1964, § 20-18; Ord. No. 91-22, § 20, 3-4-91)  
Sec. 23-38. - Penalty. 
Violation of this article may at the option of the city be prosecuted as provided by law pertaining to civil prosecutions in county court for failure to comply with this Code, may be presented to the code enforcement board pursuant to the provisions of section 2-66 et seq., or may be subject to any other civil action deemed appropriate by the city. 
(Code 1964, § 20-19)  
Secs. 23-39—23-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 14-10, § 2, adopted Feb. 5, 2014, repealed Art. III, §§ 23-56—23-70, which pertained to use of public rights-of-way by private communication systems and derived from Code 1964, §§ 20-51—20-65. 
 
Secs. 23-56—23-74. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PLACEMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF FACILITIES FOR COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-06, § 2, adopted January 17, 2018, in effect, repealed art. IV, §§ 23-76—23-94 and enacted a new art. IV as set out herein. Former art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 14-10, adopted February 5, 2014. 
 
Sec. 23-75. - Intent and purpose. 
It is the intent of the city to promote the public health, safety and general welfare by: providing for the placement and maintenance of communications facilities and wireless communications facilities in the public rights-of-way within the city; adopting and administering reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with state and federal law, including F.S. § 337.401, as it may be amended, the city's home-rule authority, and in accordance with the provisions of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 and other federal and state law; establishing reasonable rules and regulations necessary to manage the placement and maintenance of communications facilities and wireless communications facilities in the public rights-of-way by all communications services dealers and pass-through providers; and minimizing disruption to the public rights-of-way. In regulating its public rights-of-way, the city shall be governed by and shall comply with all applicable federal and state laws. The placement and maintenance of wireless communications facilities on private property or property owned, leased or controlled by the city, other than rights-of-way, is governed by Section 814 of the City's Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 18-06, § 2, 1-17-18)  
Sec. 23-76. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meanings given. Where not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not otherwise defined in this section or in any permit that may be granted pursuant to this article shall be given the meaning set forth in the Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. § 151 et seq., as amended (collectively the "Communications Act"), and if not defined in the Communications Act, as defined by Florida Statutes; and, if not defined by Florida Statutes, shall be construed to mean the common and ordinary meaning. 
Abandonment shall mean the permanent cessation of all uses of a communications facility or wireless communications facility; provided that this term shall not include cessation of all use of a facility within a physical structure where the physical structure continues to be used. By way of example, and not limitation, cessation of all use of a cable within a conduit, where the conduit continues to be used, shall not be "abandonment" of a facility in public rights-of-way. 
Antenna means communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in providing wireless services. 
Applicable codes means uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to those codes enacted solely to address threats of destruction of property or injury to persons, or local codes or ordinances adopted to implement F.S. § 337.401(7). The term includes objective design standards adopted by ordinance that may require a new utility pole that replaces an existing utility pole to be of substantially similar design, material, and color or that may require reasonable spacing requirements concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment. The term includes objective design standards adopted by ordinance that may require a small wireless facility to meet reasonable location context, color, stealth, and concealment requirements. 
City shall mean Miramar, Florida, an incorporated municipality of the State of Florida, in its present form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, or enlarged form. 
City utility pole means a utility pole owned by the city and located in the right-of-way. 
Collocate or collocation means to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace one (1) or more wireless facilities on, under, within, or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole. The term does not include the installation of a new utility pole or wireless support structure in the public rights-of-way. 
Communication space shall mean the space on a utility pole primarily used for the placement of cable television, broadband, fiber, and telephone wires used to deliver communications services. 
Communications facilities provider means a person (other than a communications services provider) operating one (1) or more communications facilities located within the city, who is engaged, directly or indirectly, in the business of leasing, licensing, subleasing, subletting or hiring to one (1) or more communications service providers all or a portion of the tangible personal property used in a communications facility within the city. A pass-through provider may be a communications facility provider. 
Communications facility or facility or system shall mean any permanent or temporary plant, equipment and property, including but not limited to cables, wires, conduits, ducts, fiber optics, poles, antennae, converters, splice boxes, cabinets, hand holes, manholes, vaults, drains, surface location markers, appurtenances, and other equipment or pathway placed or maintained or to be placed or maintained in the public rights-of-way of the city and used or capable of being used to transmit, convey, route, receive, distribute, provide or offer communications services. Communications facilities may be wired, wireless, or both. Communications facilities may be placed or maintained within city rights-of-way by communications services providers, communications facilities providers, or by pass-through providers in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
Communications services shall mean the transmission, conveyance or routing of voice, data, audio, video, or any other information or signals, including video services, to a point, or between or among points, by or through any electronic, radio, satellite, cable, optical, microwave, or other medium or method now in existence or hereafter devised, regardless of the protocol used for such transmission or conveyance. The term includes such transmission, conveyance, or routing in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, code, or protocol of the content for purposes of transmission, conveyance, or routing without regard to whether such service is referred to as voice-over-Internet-protocol services or is classified by the Federal Communications Commission as enhanced or value-added. The term does not include: 
(a)  Information services. 
(b)  Installation or maintenance of wiring or equipment on a customer's premises. 
(c)  The sale or rental of tangible personal property. 
(d)  The sale of advertising, including, but not limited to, directory advertising. 
(e)  Bad check charges. 
(f)  Late payment charges. 
(g)  Billing and collection services. 
(h)  Internet access service, electronic mail service, electronic bulletin board service, or similar online computer services. 
Communications services provider shall mean any person who, upon registering with the city, provides communication services and who either remits tax per Chapter 202 of Florida Statutes, is a pass through provider, or places or maintains a communications facility in the city's rights-of-way. 
Distributed antenna system, or DAS, is a network of spatially separated antenna nodes connected to a common source via a transport medium that provides wireless service within a geographic area or structure. DAS antenna elevations are at or below the clutter level and node installations are compact. 
Existing structure means a structure within the city's public right-of-way that exists at the time an application for permission to place a communications facility on the preexisting structure is filed with the city. The term includes utility poles and any structure that: 
(i)  Can structurally support the attachment of a communications facility; 
(ii)  Can be modified or repurposed to support the attachment of a communications facility; or 
(iii)  Can be removed and replaced with a structure of similar design and purpose as the original existing structure that supports the attachment of a communications facility. 
FCC shall mean the Federal Communications Commission. 
In public rights-of-way or in the public rights-of-way shall mean in, on, over, under or across the public rights-of-way. 
Information service means the offering of a capability for generating, acquiring, storing, transforming, processing, retrieving, using, or making available information via communications services, including, but not limited to, electronic publishing, web-hosting service, and end-user 900 number service. The term does not include video service. 
Micro wireless facility means a small wireless facility having dimensions no larger than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height and an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches. 
Ordinance shall mean this article. 
Pass-through provider shall mean any person who, upon registering with the city, places or maintains a communications facility in the city's rights-of-way and that does not remit communications service taxes as imposed by the city pursuant to F.S. ch. 202. 
Person shall include any individual, children, firm, association, joint venture, partnership, estate, trust, business trust, syndicate, fiduciary, corporation, organization or legal entity of any kind, successor, assignee, transferee, personal representative, and all other groups or combinations, and but shall not include the city to the extent permitted by applicable law. 
Place or maintain or placement or maintenance or placing or maintaining shall mean to erect, construct, install, maintain, place, repair, extend, expand, remove, occupy, locate or relocate. A communications services provider, communications facilities provider or pass-through provider that owns or exercises physical control over communications facilities in public rights-of-way, such as the physical control to maintain and repair, is "placing or maintaining" the facilities. A party providing service only through resale or only through use of a third party's unbundled network elements is not "placing or maintaining" the communications facilities through which such service is provided. The transmission and receipt of radio frequency signals through the airspace of the public rights-of-way is not placing or maintaining facilities in the public rights-of-way. 
Public rights-of-way shall mean a public right-of-way, public utility easement, highway, street, bridge, tunnel, pier, waterway, dock, wharf, court, lane, path, or alley or any other property for which the city is the authority that has jurisdiction and control and may lawfully grant access to such property pursuant to applicable law, and includes the surface, the air space over the surface and the area below the surface to the extent the city holds a property interest therein. "Public rights-of-way" shall not include private property. "Public rights-of-way" shall not include any real or personal city property except as described above and shall not include city buildings, fixtures, poles, conduits, facilities or other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the public rights-of-way. 
Registrant or facility owner shall mean a communications services provider, communications facilities provider or pass-through provider or other person that has registered with the city in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
Registration and register shall mean the process described in this article whereby a communications services provider, communications facility provider, or pass-through provider provides certain information to the city. 
Repurposed structure means an existing structure that has been renovated, reconfigured, or replaced with a similar structure so as to continue serving its primary existing purpose while also supporting the attachment of communications facilities through stealth design or otherwise that is approximately in the same location as the existing structure and in such a manner that does not result in a net increase in the number of structures located within the city's public rights-of-way and does not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular access, and is compliant with applicable codes. To "repurpose an existing structure" shall mean the act of renovating, reconfiguring or replacing an existing structure as described above. 
Small wireless facility means a wireless communications facility that meets the following qualifications: 
(a)  Each antenna associated with the facility is located inside an enclosure of no more than 6 cubic feet in volume or, in the case of antennas that have exposed elements, each antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of no more than 6 cubic feet in volume; and 
(b)  All other wireless equipment associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than 28 cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services, and utility poles or other support structures. 
Stealth design means a method of camouflaging any tower, antenna, wireless communications facility, or other communications facility, including, but not limited to, supporting electrical or mechanical equipment, which is designed to enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses and be as visually unobtrusive as possible. Stealth design may include a repurposed structure or a wrap. 
Surrounding neighborhood means the area within a five hundred (500) foot radius of a communications facility site or proposed communications facility site. 
Utility pole means a pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part to provide communications services or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, signage, or a similar function. The term includes the vertical support structure for traffic lights but does not include a horizontal structure to which signal lights or other traffic control devices are attached and does not include a pole or similar structure 15 feet in height or less unless an authority grants a waiver for such pole. A Utility Pole is not transformed into a Communications Facility solely by the Collocation or Attachment of a Communications Facility. 
Video service means the transmission of video, audio, or other programming service to a purchaser, and the purchaser interaction, if any, required for the selection or use of a programming service, regardless of whether the programming is transmitted over facilities owned or operated by the video service provider or over facilities owned or operated by another dealer of communications services. The term includes point-to-point and point-to-multipoint distribution services through which programming is transmitted or broadcast by microwave or other equipment directly to the purchaser's premises, but does not include direct-to-home satellite service. The term includes basic, extended, premium, pay-per-view, digital video, two-way cable, and music services. 
Wireless communications facility means equipment or facilities located within a city right-of-way, used to provide wireless communications service and may include, but is not limited to, antennae, towers, equipment enclosures, cabling, antenna brackets, fiber optic cable or other cables, and other such equipment. New poles for wireless communications facilities, other than new poles required for the installation of small wireless facilities, shall be of a size and configuration that is comparable to other utility poles that are traditionally and customarily located within the same or similarly sized rights-of-way. Wireless communications facilities within a right-of-way may be comprised of "Distributed Antenna Systems". Wireless communications facilities may be placed or maintained within city rights-of-way by communications services providers, communications facilities providers or by pass-through providers in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
Wireless services means any services provided using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, using wireless facilities. 
Wireless support structure means a freestanding structure, such as a monopole, a guyed or self-supporting tower, or another existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. The term does not include a utility pole. 
Wrap means an aesthetic covering depicting scenic imagery, such as vegetation, which blends with the surrounding area. 
(Ord. No. 18-06, § 2, 1-17-18)  
Sec. 23-77. - Registration for placing or maintaining communications facilities or wireless communications facilities in public rights-of-way. 
(a)  Registration and compliance with article. A communications services provider, communications facilities provider, or pass-through provider that desires to place or maintain a communications facility or wireless communications facility in public rights-of-way in the city shall first register with the city in accordance with this article. Subject to the terms and conditions prescribed in this article, a registrant may place or maintain a communications facility or wireless communications facility in public rights-of-way. A communications services provider, communications facilities provider, or pass-through provider with an existing communications facility or wireless communications facility in the public rights-of-way of the city as of the effective date of this article has sixty (60) days from the effective date of this article to comply with the terms of this article, including, but not limited to, registration, or be in violation thereof. 
(b)  Registration is not conveyance. A registration shall not convey any title, equitable or legal, in the public rights-of-way. Registration under this article governs only the placement or maintenance of communications facilities or wireless communications facilities in public rights-of-way. Registration does not excuse a communications services provider, communications facilities provider, or pass-through provider from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before locating its facilities on the city's or another person's facilities. Registration does not excuse a communications services provider, communications facilities provider, or pass-through provider from complying with all applicable law, including city ordinances, codes or regulations, including this article. 
(c)  Registration components. Each communications services provider, communications facilities provider, or pass-through provider that desires to place or maintain a communications facility or wireless communications facility in public rights-of-way in the city shall file a single registration with the city that shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name of the registrant; 
(2)  Name, address and telephone number of the registrant's primary contact person in connection with the registration and of the person to contact in case of an emergency; 
(3)  Reserved; 
(4)  Evidence of the insurance coverage required under this article and acknowledgment that registrant has received and reviewed a copy of this article, and 
(5)  A copy of federal or state certification authorizing the registrant to provide communications services, if any; 
(6)  If the registrant is a corporation, proof of authority to do business in the State of Florida, which may be satisfied by the number of the corporate certification or by other means; and 
(7)  A security fund in accordance with this article. 
(d)  City Manager review. The city manager or designee shall review the information submitted by the registrant. If the registrant submits information in accordance with subsection (c) above, the registration shall be effective and the city shall notify the registrant of the effectiveness of registration in writing. If the city determines that the information has not been submitted in accordance with subsection (c) above, the city shall notify the registrant in writing of the non-effectiveness of registration, and reasons for the non-effectiveness. The city shall so notify a registrant within thirty (30) days after receipt of registration information from the registrant. 
(e)  Cancelling registration. A registrant may cancel a registration upon written notice to the city that the registrant will no longer place or maintain any communications facilities or wireless communications facilities in public rights-of-way and will no longer need to obtain permits to perform work in the public rights-of-way. A registrant cannot cancel a registration if the registrant continues to place or maintain any communications facilities or wireless communications facilities in public rights-of-way. 
(f)  Registration nonexclusive. Registration shall be nonexclusive. Registration shall not establish any right or priority to place or maintain a communications facility or wireless communications facility in any particular area in public rights-of-way within the city. Registrations are expressly subject to any future amendment to or replacement of this article and further subject to any additional city ordinances, as well as any state or federal laws that may be enacted. 
(g)  Registration renewal. A registrant shall renew its registration with the city by April 1 of even numbered years in accordance with the registration requirements in this article, except that a registrant that initially registers during the even numbered year when renewal would be due or the odd numbered year immediately preceding such even numbered year shall not be required to renew until the next even numbered year. Within thirty (30) days of any change in the information required to be submitted pursuant to subsection (c), a registrant shall provide updated information to the city. If no information in the then-existing registration has changed, the renewal may state that no information has changed. 
Failure to renew a registration may result in the city restricting the issuance of additional permits until the communications services provider, communications facilities provider, or pass-through provider has complied with the registration requirements of this article. 
(h)  Permit required. In accordance with applicable city ordinances, codes or regulations and this article, a permit shall be required of a communications services provider, communications facilities provider, or pass-through provider that desires to place or maintain a communications facility or wireless communications facility in public rights-of-way. An effective registration shall be a condition of obtaining a permit. Notwithstanding an effective registration, permitting requirements shall continue to apply. A permit may be obtained by or on behalf of a registrant having an effective registration if all permitting requirements are met. 
(i)  Compensation for placement and maintenance. A registrant that places or maintains communications facilities or wireless communications facilities in the public rights-of-way shall be required to pay compensation to the city as required by applicable law and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 18-06, § 2, 1-17-18)  
Sec. 23-78. - Placement or maintenance of a communications facility or a wireless communications facility in public rights-of-way. 
(a)  Registrant compliance. Registrant agrees at all times to comply with and abide by all applicable provisions of the state statutes and city ordinances, codes and regulations in placing or maintaining a communications facility or wireless communications facility in public rights-of-way. 
(b)  No work without permits; emergency exception. A registrant shall not commence to place or maintain a communications facility or wireless communications facility in public rights-of-way until all applicable permits have been issued by the city or other appropriate authority, except in the case of an emergency. The term "emergency" shall mean a condition that affects the public's health, safety or welfare, which includes an unplanned out-of-service condition of a pre-existing service. Registrant shall provide prompt notice to the city of the placement or maintenance of a communications facility or wireless communications facility in public rights-of-way in the event of an emergency. Registrant acknowledges that as a condition of granting such permits, the city may impose reasonable rules or regulations governing the placement or maintenance of a communications facility or wireless communications facility in public rights-of-way. Permits shall apply only to the areas of public rights-of-way specifically identified in the permit. The city may issue a blanket permit to cover certain activities, such as repair activities, that may otherwise require individual permits or may impose lesser requirements. 
(c)  Limited exceptions to work without permits. A registrant shall be allowed to perform the following limited work within the public rights-of-way without first obtaining a permit provided that such proposed limited work does not involve excavation, or the closure of a sidewalk or vehicle lane: 
(1)  Routine maintenance or emergency maintenance; or 
(2)  Replacement of existing wireless facilities with wireless facilities that are substantially similar or of the same or smaller size; or 
(3)  Installation, placement, maintenance, or replacement of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cables strung between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable codes by or for a communications services provider authorized to occupy the rights-of-way and who is remitting taxes under F.S. ch. 202. 
(Ord. No. 18-06, § 2, 1-17-18)  
Sec. 23-79. - Permit application to install new or replacement existing communications facilities or wireless facilities in public rights-of-way, excluding small wireless facilities. 
Permit application components. As part of any permit application to place a new or replace an existing communications facility or wireless communications facility, excluding small wireless facilities attached to new, existing, or replacement poles required for their installation, in public rights-of-way, the registrant shall provide a proposal for construction of the communications facility or wireless communications facility. The registrant shall provide all of the following items to the City Engineer, or designee, to review the permit application to enforce reasonable rules and regulations for the installation and maintenance of communication facilities or wireless communications facilities unless the City Engineer, or designee, determines that an item is not required: 
(1)  An engineering plan signed and sealed by a Florida Registered Professional Engineer, or prepared by a person who is exempt from such registration requirements as provided in F.S. § 471.003, identifying the location of the proposed facility, including a description of the facilities to be installed, where it is to be located, and the approximate size of facilities and equipment that will be located in public rights-of-way; 
(2)  A description of the manner in which the facility will be installed (i.e. anticipated construction methods and/or techniques); 
(3)  A traffic maintenance plan for any disruption or obstruction of the public rights-of-way; 
(4)  Information on the ability of the public rights-of-way to accommodate the proposed facility, including information that identifies all above-ground facilities currently existing in the areas to which the permit application applies, and extending one thousand (1,000) feet beyond said areas within the city if available (such information shall be provided without certification as to correctness, to the extent obtained from other persons with facilities in the public rights-of-way); 
(5)  If appropriate given the facility proposed, an estimate of the cost of restoration to the public rights-of-way; 
(6)  The timetable for construction of the project or each phase thereof, and the areas of the city which will be affected; 
(7)  An inventory of all existing communications facilities or wireless communications facilities that the registrant or the registrant's predecessors in interest has previously placed in the areas to which the permit application applies, and extending five hundred (500) feet beyond said areas within the city as well as any other areas within the city which the city finds reasonably necessary to review the permit application; 
(8)  A full color photo-simulation showing the proposed new communication facility poles and wireless support structures installed in accordance with the application from the point of view of properties adjacent to the proposed site; 
(9)  A temporary sidewalk closure plan, if appropriate given the facility proposed, to accommodate placement or maintenance of the communications facility; 
(10)  For project permits that involve multiple collocations or attachments to existing structures, repurposed structures or installation of multiple new wireless support structures, the applicant shall only be required to provide a structural certification by a Florida licensed professional engineer as to each type of facility, not for each facility proposed as part of the overall project. No such certification is required with respect to wireline pole attachment installations made in the communications space of utility poles; 
(11)  In order to assess the impacts on the city's public rights-of-way resources, the impact on surrounding neighborhoods and other properties within the permit area, and the potential for collocations or use of existing structures or repurposed structures, identification of all above-grade structures in the city's public right-of-way within a five hundred (500) foot radius of the proposed new communications facility (including utility poles, equipment boxes, below-grade and above-grade communications service facilities and antennae) shall be provided (such information may be produced without certification as to correctness to the extent obtained from other registrants with facilities in the city's public rights-of-way). No such identification is required with respect to wireline pole attachment installations made in the communications space of utility poles or for small wireless facility installations; 
(12)  An application for a permit to install new communications facility pole(s) or new wireless support structures (as opposed to collocations, applications to use an existing structure, or wireline pole attachment installations made in the communication space of utility poles) shall include a signed statement in a form acceptable to the City from a Florida licensed professional engineer that it is not feasible to locate applicant's proposed facilities on existing poles along the proposed route and all the facts relied upon in the applicant's attempt to both collocate or attach the proposed new communications facilities on existing structures within the city's public rights-of-way, as well as on property outside the city's public rights-of-way, within a five hundred (500) foot radius of the proposed new communications facility; and 
(13)  Such additional information requested by the city that the city finds reasonably necessary to review the permit application. 
(Ord. No. 18-06, § 2, 1-17-18)  
Sec. 23-80. - Regulations for communication facilities or wireless facilities in public rights-of-way. 
(a)  Public safety telecommunications services. The city shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional communications facilities or wireless communications facilities within the public rights-of way if there is insufficient space to accommodate all of the requests to place and maintain facilities in that area of the public rights-of-way, for the protection of existing facilities in the public rights-of-way, to accommodate city plans for public improvements or projects that the city determines are in the public interest and to the extent not prohibited by applicable law, to prevent interference with the operations of public safety telecommunications services, or to accommodate traffic safety issues raised by the city, the county, FDOT or any other agency with regulatory authority over any right-of-way within the city. 
(b)  Interference with property owners; undergrounding. All communications facilities and wireless communications facilities shall be placed and maintained so as not to materially interfere with the use of the public rights-of-way by the public and so as not to cause unreasonable interference with the rights of property owners who adjoin any of the public rights-of-way. All communications facilities and wireless communications facilities shall be placed and maintained so as not to create interference with the operations of public safety telecommunications services. The registrant shall endeavor, when practicable, to install all communications facilities or wireless communications facilities underground. To the extent not inconsistent with public service commission regulations, the city may require the use of trenchless technology (i.e., directional bore method) for the installation of facilities in the public rights-of-way as well as joint trenching or the co-location of facilities in existing conduit. In making such requests, the city shall take into consideration several factors including inconvenience to the public and other users of rights-of-way and the economic and technical feasibility of such requests. The registrant shall be liable for the displacement, damage or destruction of any property, irrigation system or landscaping as a result of the placement or maintenance of its facility within the public rights-of-way. The city manager or designee may issue such rules and regulations concerning the placement or maintenance of a communications facility or wireless communications facility in public rights-of-way as may be consistent with this article and other applicable law. 
(c)  Wireless facility locations. Wireless communications facilities, excluding small wireless facilities attached to an existing, replacement or new pole or structure, shall be located in public utility easements or arterial rights-of-way whenever possible. Placement of wireless communications facilities in locations other than a public utility easement, or in rights-of-way other than arterial rights-of-way shall be justified by an engineering analysis from the applicant to the satisfaction of the city engineer prior to the issuance of any permit. Whenever wireless communications facilities must be placed in a right-of-way with residential uses on one or both sides, neither poles, equipment, antennas or other structures shall be placed directly in front of a residential structure. If a right-of-way has residential structures on only one side, the wireless communications facilities shall be located on the opposite side of the right-of-way whenever possible. All wireless communications facilities shall be located such that views from residential structures are not significantly impaired. Newly installed poles for wireless communications facilities should be located in areas with existing foliage or other aesthetic features in order to obscure the view of the pole. No communications facility shall be placed or maintained in the swale area on the side of a collector roadway or local roadway where the city has documented plans to install a sidewalk of five (5) feet in width or more, multi purpose trail, or any other project in the right-of-way, nor shall such communications facility be located in such a manner that would preclude a five (5) foot clear pathway for the planned sidewalk. 
(d)  Notice to property owners. Prior to the issuance of any permit pertaining to the placement and maintenance of communication facilities or wireless communications facilities within the public rights-of-way, excluding permits for small wireless facilities that may be attached to existing or replacement poles or structures as well as new poles or structures required to be installed to attach a small wireless facility, the city manager or designee may require the registrant to issue notice of the work to property owners who adjoin such rights-of-way (the "notification area"), and based on the scope of the proposed work, the number of affected property owners, and the potential severity of the impact to such property owners, may further require the registrant to hold a public information meeting for purposes of answering questions and taking comments from affected property owners. The notification area may be expanded at the city's discretion and notice shall be affected in a manner deemed appropriate by the city manager or designee. Should a public information meeting be required, the registrant shall submit a report to the city manager or designee, no later than ten (10) days after such meeting, stating the public comments received and any responses provided by the registrant. The registrant shall meet with city staff as soon as practical to review comments received at the public information meeting, and attempt to resolve all negative comments or issues raised. No permits shall be issued by the city until this process, if required, has been completed. 
(e)  Safety practices. All safety practices required by applicable law or accepted industry practices and standards shall be used during the placement or maintenance of communications facilities or wireless communications facilities. 
(f)  Restoration of rights-of-way. A registrant shall, at its own expense, restore the public rights-of-way to at least its original condition before such work in public rights-of-way, subject to the city's satisfaction upon inspection. Registrant shall warrant its restoration for a period of twelve (12) months after completion of such restoration. If the registrant fails to make such restoration within ten (10) calendar days after completion of construction, or such other time as may be required by the city, the city may after written notice to the registrant, perform such restoration using city employees, agents or contractors, and charge all costs of the restoration against the registrant in accordance with F.S. § 337.402, as it may be amended, and require reimbursement within thirty (30) days after the submission of the bill by the city to the registrant. Alternatively, at the sole discretion of the city, the city may seek to recover expenses, costs and loss from restoring the right-of-way, against the registrant's construction bond pursuant to section 23-88. 
(g)  Removal or relocation. Removal or relocation at the direction of the city of a registrant's communications facility or wireless communications facility in public rights-of-way shall be governed by the provisions of F.S. §§ 337.402, 337.403 and 337.404, as they may be amended. 
(h)  Activities authorized by permit. A permit from the city constitutes authorization to undertake only certain activities on public rights-of-way in accordance with this article, and does not create a property right or grant authority to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the public rights-of-way. 
(i)  Maintenance of facilities. A registrant shall maintain its communications facility or wireless communications facility in public rights-of-way in a manner consistent with accepted industry practice and applicable law. 
(j)  Excavation in public rights-of-way. In connection with excavation in the public rights-of-way, a registrant shall, where applicable, comply with the Underground Facility Damage Prevention and Safety Act set forth in F.S. ch. 556, as it may be amended. 
(k)  Compliance with applicable standards. Registrant shall place or maintain a communications facility or wireless communications facility in public rights-of-way in compliance with all applicable standards as established by all local, state or federal law and in conformance with the city ordinances, codes and regulations. Registrant shall use and exercise due caution, care and skill in performing work in the public rights-of-way and shall take all reasonable steps to safeguard work site areas. 
(l)  Coordination with other scheduled work. In the interest of the public's health, safety and welfare, upon request of the city, a registrant shall coordinate placement or maintenance activities under a permit with any other work, construction, installation or repairs that may be occurring or scheduled to occur within a reasonable timeframe in the subject public rights-of-way. The city may require a registrant to alter reasonably its placement or maintenance schedule for permitted work as necessary so as to minimize disruptions and disturbance in the public rights-of-way. The city may provide a more definite time frame based on specific city construction or maintenance schedules. 
(m)  Interference with other utilities. A registrant shall not place or maintain its communications facilities or wireless communications facilities so as to interfere, displace, damage or destroy any other utilities or facilities, including but not limited to, sewers, gas or water mains, storm drains, pipes, cables or conduits of the city or any other person's facilities lawfully occupying the public rights-of-way of the city. All communications facilities and wireless communications facilities shall be placed and maintained so as not to create interference with the operations of public safety telecommunications services. 
(n)  No warranties or representations. City makes no warranties or representations regarding the fitness, suitability or availability of public rights-of-way for the registrant's communications facilities or wireless communications facilities and any performance of work or costs incurred by registrant or provision of services shall be at registrant's sole risk. Nothing in this article shall affect the city's authority to add, vacate or abandon public rights-of-way and city makes no warranties or representations regarding the availability of any added, vacated or abandoned public rights-of-way for communications facilities. 
(o)  Inspections. The city shall have the right to make such inspections of facilities placed or maintained in public rights-of-way as it finds necessary to ensure compliance with this article. In the event the city determines that a violation exists with respect to registrant's placement or maintenance of facilities in the public rights-of-way that is not considered to be an emergency or danger to the public health, safety or welfare, the city will provide registrant no less than three (3) days written notice setting forth the violation and requesting correction. 
(p)  Proposed plans for installation. A permit application to place a new or replace an existing communications facility or wireless communications facility in public rights-of-way shall include plans showing the location of the proposed installation of facilities in the public rights-of-way. If the plans so provided require revision based upon actual installation, the registrant shall promptly provide revised plans or "as-builts" upon completion of any installation or construction. The plans shall be in a digitized format showing the two-dimensional location of the facilities based on the city's geographical database, or other format acceptable to the city. The registrant shall provide such plans at no cost to the city. The city shall maintain the confidentiality of such plans and any other information provided in accordance with F.S. § 202.195, as it may be amended. 
(q)  City right to place or maintain utilities. The city reserves the right to place and maintain, and permit to be placed or maintained, sewer, gas, water, electric, storm drainage, communications, and other utilities and facilities, cables or conduit, and to do, and to permit to be done, any underground and overhead installation or improvement that may be deemed necessary or proper by the city in public rights-of-way occupied by the registrant. Registrant may allow city facilities to be co-located within city's public rights-of-way through the use of a joint trench during registrant's construction project. Such joint trench projects shall be negotiated in good faith by separate agreement between registrant and city and may be subjected to other city rights-of-way requirements. The city further reserves without limitation the right to alter, change, or cause to be changed, the grading, installation, relocation or width of the public rights-of-way within the limits of the city and within said limits as same may from time to time be altered. 
(r)  Request to raise or lower facilities. Subject to applicable law, a registrant shall, on the request of any person holding a permit issued by the city, temporarily support, protect, raise or lower its communications facilities or wireless communications facilities to permit the work authorized by the permit. The expense of such temporary support, protection, raising or lowering of facilities shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the registrant shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The registrant shall be given not less than thirty (30) days advance written notice to arrange for such temporary relocation. If the city requests the temporary support, protection, raising or lowering of a facility for a public purpose, the city shall not be charged for the temporary support, protection, raising or lowering of the facility. 
(s)  Waiver. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral use of city rights-of-way by communications service providers, and pass-through providers, in violation of state or federal law. The waiver provisions listed in this subsection apply only where a registrant's application for the placement of a communications facility or wireless communications facility in a city right-of-way does not meet the criteria for approval as required by this section. A request for a waiver shall include all information described in this subsection and any other reasonable information the city may require. The city may deny the request for a waiver if it does not comply with the requirements of this section. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of a waiver from the requirements of this section, which may be granted by the city manager or designee: 
(1)  In the event that the applicant files for a waiver, the applicant shall file the appropriate application fee. 
(2)  The city manager or designee shall consider the following factors in determining whether to grant a waiver: 
(i)  A detailed explanation, with supporting engineering or other data, as to why a waiver from the requirements of this section is required in order to allow the registrant/applicant to have nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral use of city rights-of-way; 
(ii)  Availability of co-location opportunities; 
(iii)  Size and height of the proposed facilities; 
(iv)  Location and separation distances of the proposed facilities; 
(v)  Location of the nearest residential units or residentially zoned properties; 
(vi)  Adjacent and nearby topography, tree coverage and foliage; 
(vii)  Design of the proposed facilities with particular reference to elimination of visual impacts of such facilities; 
(viii)  Any other factors the city determines to be relevant. 
(3)  Conditions of waiver. In granting any waiver, the city may impose conditions to the extent the city concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effects of the proposed facility, excluding a small wireless facility inclusive of the existing, replacement or new pole to which the small wireless facility is attached, on adjoining properties or to protect the health, safety and welfare of the city and the residents. 
(t)  Regular maintenance required. Each communications facility within the city's public rights-of-way, including any appurtenant features incorporated therewith under this article, shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition at all times. Specifically, but not without limiting the generality of the foregoing, each communications facility in the city's public rights-of-way shall be regularly maintained so that: 
(1)  It is free of graffiti visible from the city's public rights-of-way or surrounding neighborhood at grade. All graffiti shall be removed within thirty (30) days from receipt of notice thereof by the city that graffiti exists on the communications facility or any portion thereof. A fine of $50.00 per day shall be imposed for each and every day of non-compliance after receipt of notice by the city. Enforcement shall be pursuant to Section 2-335 of the city code; and 
(2)  It is reasonably free of dirt and grease, rust and corrosion in visible metal areas, chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint that is visible from the city's public right-of-way at grade. All such conditions shall be remedied within thirty (30) days from receipt of notice thereof from the city. A fine of $50.00 per day shall be imposed for each and every day of non-compliance after receipt of notice by the city. Enforcement shall be pursuant to Section 2-335 of the city code. 
(u)  No signage in rights-of-way. Registrants shall not place or maintain signage on communications facilities in city public rights-of-way, unless otherwise required by federal or state law, provided; however, that existing structures that lawfully supported signage before being repurposed may continue to support signage as otherwise permitted by law or city code, as may be amended from time to time. 
(v)  Sight Triangle. Except on existing structures, no new communications facility shall be constructed or installed within a triangular shaped area of land, known as a "sight triangle", and measured in accordance with FDOT standards. 
(w)  FAA markings. Communications facilities not requiring FAA painting or marking shall have an exterior hard durable finish that enhances compatibility with adjacent uses, as approved by the city engineer. 
(x)  Sight triangles in intersections. Sight triangles located at the intersection of a local street or driveway within a right-of-way under county, state or federal jurisdictions, may be subject to the sight triangle requirements of those jurisdictions. 
(z)  Ground equipment distance requirements. Ground equipment, communications facility poles and wireless support structures, excluding equipment that supports a small wireless facility, in the city's public rights-of-way must be spaced a minimum of three hundred (300) linear feet apart from each other, along the line of general vehicular travel along the same side of the street, except that no distance requirement shall apply to collocations on existing structures. 
(aa)  Shot clock. The city's action on proposals to place or maintain communications facilities shall be subject to the applicable standards and time frames set out in F.S. §§ 365.172(13) and 337.401(7), as may be amended from time to time; and 47 U.S.C. § 1455 (a) and Orders issued by the FCC, as same may be amended from time to time. All Federal and State "shot clock" timeframe guidelines that apply to any particular permit are hereby recognized by the city, and the city will make all reasonable efforts to comply therewith. 
(Ord. No. 18-06, § 2, 1-17-18)  
Sec. 23-81. - Location, height, size, and design standards for new and replacement communications facilities and wireless communication facilities. 
(a)  Lighted signals and street lights. A communications facility shall not have any type of lighted signal, lights, or illuminations unless required by an applicable federal, State, or local rule, regulation, the FAA or law; provided, however, the city may require the installation of an LED street light on a new communications facility pole or wireless support structure or an existing structure functioning as a light pole. 
(b)  Dimension requirements for communication facilities equipment. Subject to height limits and antenna volume limits, equipment that may be associated with communications facilities (excluding equipment associated with small wireless facilities) attached to an existing structure or a new communications facility pole or a new wireless support structure, not including associated antenna(s), electric meter, telecom demarcation box, battery-back up power systems, grounding equipment, or power transfer switch, shall not exceed seventeen (17) cubic feet. 
(c)  Antenna dimensions. Subject to height limits and equipment volume limits, each antenna that may be associated with the installation of a communications facility shall not exceed more than six (6) cubic feet in volume. Each antenna that is exposed and not concealed within a concealment enclosure shall fit within an imaginary enclosure that does not exceed six (6) cubic feet. 
(d)  State distance requirements. No communications facility shall be placed or maintained in the city's public rights-of-way in violation of minimum distance separation from edge of pavement requirements in accordance with the State of Florida Department of Transportation Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways, Table 3-13, Minimum Width of Clear Zones, as amended from time to time. Communications facilities otherwise prohibited by this section shall be permitted if installed on an existing structure or repurposed structure located in these areas. 
(e)  Florida Building Code compliance. In addition to the requirements of this article, all permitted facilities shall comply with the applicable provisions of the Florida Building Code. Communications facilities shall be considered to be structures under building risk category IV, structures, Chapter 16, section 1620—1621, high velocity hurricane zone area. Signed and sealed design and wind load calculations shall be provided by a Florida licensed professional engineer and a permit under the Florida Building Code shall be required. 
(f)  Size and height of facility poles. The size and height of wireless communications facility poles, excluding those new or replacement poles required for the installation of a small wireless facility, shall be no greater than the size and height of any other communications facility poles located in the same or similar type rights-of-way within the city. If there is no communications facility pole in a same or similar type right-of-way, then the wireless communications facility pole shall be no greater than the size and height of the nearest utility pole. 
(g)  Stealth design for above ground facilities. Stealth design for above-ground communications facilities, and in particular, communications facility poles and wireless support structures, shall be utilized wherever possible in order to minimize the visual impact of communications facilities on, and preserve compatibility with, surrounding neighborhoods, and in order to eliminate the need to locate any ground or elevated equipment on the exterior of a communications facility or existing structure. Stealth design is not required with respect to wireline pole attachment installations made in the communication space of utility poles. Nothing contained in this section shall be interpreted to prohibit the co-location of antennas on existing poles due to antenna height requirements. 
To the extent reasonably practicable for the site, stealth design features shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  For new communications facility poles and new wireless support structures, as well as existing structures in the city's public rights-of-way, (i) top mounted antennas within enclosures that do not extend the diameter of the supporting communications facility pole, wireless support structure, existing structure or other support structure at the level of antenna attachment, or (ii) side mounted antennas within enclosures that extend no more than two (2) feet beyond the exterior dimensions of the supporting structure at the level of antenna attachment shall be utilized. For purposes of calculating the above, the dimensions of the supporting communications facility pole, wireless support structure, existing structure or other support structure do not include any platform, rack, mount or other hardware used to attach an antenna or antenna enclosure to the supporting structure. Nothing contained in this subparagraph (1) shall be construed to limit stealth design as specified in other subparagraphs below. 
(2)  The use of foliage and vegetation based on conditions of the specific area where the facility is to be located. Trees shall be determined and approved by the city's landscape plans examiner under separate permit. 
(3)  Equipment wraps (the imagery in a wrap shall not contain any advertising). 
(4)  Flag poles. 
(5)  Street light fixtures. 
(6)  Other stealth design proposed by an applicant and approved by the city based on unique circumstances applicable to the facility or the location or both. 
(h)  Ground equipment clustering. In order to avoid the clustering of multiple items of ground equipment in a single area, a maximum of two (2) ground equipment boxes may be grouped together in any single location. 
(1)  For purposes of this subsection (h) of the code, ground equipment if it has a minimum volume of 6 cubic feet. Individual ground equipment boxes shall not exceed forty five (45) cubic feet and shall not exceed five (5) feet in height. 
(i)  Florida Building Code compliance for stealth components. All stealth designed communications facilities components, including associated hardware, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the high velocity zone criteria specified in the Florida Building Code, Chapter 16 and considered as structures under building risk category II. Design and wind load calculations shall be provided per ASCE 7—10 (170 MPH). Calculations should be accompanied by Miami-Dade County Notice of Acceptance (NOA)/Product Approvals. 
(Ord. No. 18-06, § 2, 1-17-18)  
Sec. 23-82. - Termination of registration. 
(a)  The involuntary termination of a previously effective registration may only be accomplished by an action of the city commission. The city may declare the registration terminated and revoke and cancel all privileges granted under that registration if: (a) a federal or Florida authority suspends, denies, or revokes a registrant's certification or license to provide communications service, (b) the registrant's placement and maintenance in the public rights-of-way presents an extraordinary danger to the general public or other users of the public rights-of-way, (c) the registrant abandons all of its communications facilities and wireless communications facilities in the public rights-of-way, or (d) a pass-through provider fails to comply with the requirements of section 23-94. 
(b)  Prior to such termination for any of the reasons set forth in this section, the city manager or his designee shall notify the registrant in writing setting forth the matters pertinent to such reasons and describing the proposed action of the city with respect thereto. The registrant shall have sixty (60) days after receipt of such notice within which to cure the violation, or within which to present a plan, satisfactory to the city commission, to accomplish the same. 
(c)  In the event of a vote by the city commission to terminate the registration, the registrant shall, within a reasonable time following such termination, provide an acceptable plan for transferring ownership of the communications facilities or wireless communications facilities to another person in accordance with this article or shall remove or abandon the facilities and take such steps as are necessary to render every portion of the facilities remaining in the public rights-of-way of the city safe. If the registrant has either abandoned its facilities or chooses to abandon its facilities, the city may either (a) require the registrant or the registrant's bonding company to remove some or all of the facilities from the public rights-of-way and restore the public rights-of-way to its condition immediately prior to the removal; or (b) require that some or all of the facilities be removed and the public rights-of-way restored to its such condition at the registrant's expense, using city employees, agents or contractors, and charge any and all costs to the registrant and require reimbursement; or (c) utilize or allow other persons to utilize the registrant's abandoned facilities. The obligations of the registrant hereunder shall survive the termination of a registration. In the event of a declaration of termination of registration, this provision does not permit the city to cause the removal of any facilities that are used to provide another service for which the registrant holds a valid certification or license with the governing federal or state agency, where required, and is properly registered with the city, for such certificated service, where required. 
(Ord. No. 14-10, § 3, 2-5-14)  
Sec. 23-83. - Suspension of permits. 
(a)  Reasons for suspension. Subject to section 23-80 below and to providing reasonable notice and an opportunity to cure, the city manager or designee may suspend a permit issued or deny an application for a subsequent permit to a registrant for work in the public rights-of-way for one or more of the following: 
(1)  Failure to satisfy permit conditions, or conditions set forth in this article or other applicable city ordinances, codes or regulations governing placement or maintenance of communications facilities or wireless communications facilities in public rights-of-way, including without limitation, failure to take reasonable safety precautions to alert the public of work at the work site, or to restore any public rights-of-way; 
(2)  Misrepresentation or fraud by registrant in a registration or permit application to the city; 
(3)  Failure to properly renew or ineffectiveness of registration. 
(4)  Failure to relocate or to remove facilities as may be lawfully required by the city. 
(b)  Notice. After the suspension or denial of a permit pursuant to this section, the city shall provide written notice of the reason to the registrant. 
(Ord. No. 18-06, § 2, 1-17-18)  
Sec. 23-84. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals process. Final, written decisions of the city manager or designee suspending or denying a permit, denying an application for a registration or denying an application for renewal of a registration are subject to appeal. An appeal must be filed with the city within thirty (30) days of the date of the final, written decision to be appealed. Any appeal not timely filed as set forth above shall be waived. The city shall hear or appoint a hearing officer to consider the appeal. The hearing shall occur within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the appeal, unless waived by the registrant, and a written decision shall be rendered within twenty (20) days of the hearing. Upon correction of any grounds that gave rise to a suspension or denial, the suspension or denial shall be lifted. 
(b)  Other remedies. Nothing in this article shall affect or limit the remedies the city has available under applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 18-06, § 2, 1-17-18)  
Sec. 23-85. - Conditional use of public rights-of-way. 
(a)  In the event registrant desires to use its existing facilities or to construct new facilities for the purpose of providing other utility or non-utility services to existing or potential consumers or resellers, by providing any other services other than the provision of communications service, or for providing any other use to existing or potential consumers, a registrant shall seek such additional and separate authorization from city for such activities as may be required by applicable law. 
(b)  To the extent that any person or registrant leases or otherwise uses the facilities of a person that is duly registered or otherwise authorized to place or maintain facilities in the public rights-of-way of the city, such person or registrant shall make no claim, nor assert any right, which will impede the lawful exercise of the city's rights, including requiring the removal of such facilities from the public rights-of-way of the city, regardless of the effect on registrant's ability to place or maintain its own communications facilities or wireless communications facilities in public rights-of-way of the city. 
(Ord. No. 18-06, § 2, 1-17-18)  
Sec. 23-86. - Transfer or control, sale or assignment of assets. 
(a)  If a registrant transfers, sells or assigns its registration or its facilities in the public rights-of-way, incident to a transfer, sale or assignment of the registrant's assets, the transferee, buyer or assignee shall be obligated to comply with the terms of this article. Written notice of any such transfer, sale or assignment shall be provided to the city within thirty (30) days of the effective closing date of the transfer, sale or assignment. If the transferee, buyer or assignee is a current registrant, then the transferee, buyer or assignee is not required to re-register. If the transferee, buyer or assignee is not a current registrant, then the transferee, buyer or assignee shall register as provided in section 23-77 within sixty (60) days of the transfer, sale or assignment. If permit applications are pending in the registrant's name, the transferee, buyer or assignee shall notify the appropriate city officials that the transferee, buyer or assignee is the new applicant. 
(b)  Any mortgage, pledge, lease or other encumbrance on the communications facilities or wireless communications facilities shall be subject and subordinate to the rights of the city under this article and applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 18-06, § 2, 1-17-18)  
Sec. 23-87. - Insurance. 
(a)  A registrant shall provide, pay for and maintain satisfactory to the city the types of insurance described herein. All insurance shall be from responsible companies duly authorized to do business in the State of Florida and having a rating in Best's Insurance Guide of A or better or having a rating acceptable to the city. All insurance coverage shall be primary over any city insurance coverage. Further, all insurance coverage shall be "by occurrence" rather than on a "claims made" basis. All liability policies shall provide that the city is an additional insured in the endorsement. The required coverages must be evidenced by properly executed certificates of insurance forms. The certificates must be signed by the authorized representative of the insurance company and shall be filed and maintained with the city annually. Thirty (30) days advance written notice by registered or certified mail must be given to the city of any cancellation, intent not to renew or reduction in the policy coverages. The insurance requirements may be satisfied by evidence of self-insurance or other types of insurance acceptable to the city. 
(b)  The limits of coverage of insurance required shall be not less than the following: 
(1)  Worker's compensation and employer's liability insurance. Employer's liability—Five hundred thousand dollar ($500,000.00) limit each occurrence, five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) limit per each employee. 
(2)  Comprehensive general liability. Bodily injury and property damage—Three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) combined single limit each occurrence. Said coverage shall not exclude contractual liability, products/completed operations or independent contractors. 
(3)  Business automobile liability. Bodily injury and property damage—Three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) combined single limit each occurrence. 
(c)  Umbrella or excess liability. Registrant may satisfy the minimum limits required above for either commercial general liability, business auto liability and employer's liability coverage under umbrella or excess liability. The umbrella or excess liability shall have an aggregate limit not less than the highest "each occurrence" limit for commercial general liability, business auto liability or employer's liability. The city shall be specifically endorsed as an "additional insured" on the umbrella or excess liability, unless the certificate of insurance states the umbrella or excess liability provides coverage on a "follow-form" basis. 
(d)  Self-insurance. Registrant may satisfy the insurance requirements and conditions of this section under a self-insurance plan and/or retention. Registrant agrees to notify the city, and/or indicate on the certificate(s) of insurance, when self-insurance is relied upon or when a self-insured retention exceeds one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). The city reserves the right, but not the obligation, to request and review a copy of the registrant's most recent annual report or audited financial statement, which the registrant agrees to furnish for the purpose of determining the registrant's financial capacity to self-insure. 
(e)  Right to review. City, by and through its risk management department, reserves the right to review, modify, reject or accept any required policies of insurance or self-insurance, including limits, coverages, or endorsements, herein from time to time throughout the life of this section. City reserves the right, but not the obligation, to review and reject any insurer or self-insurer providing coverage because of its poor financial condition or failure to operate legally. 
(f)  This section shall not be construed to affect in any way the city's rights, privileges and immunities as set forth in F.S. § 768.28. Insurance under this section shall run continuously with the presence of the registrant's facilities in the public right-of-way and any termination or lapse of such insurance shall be a violation of this section and subject to the remedies as set forth herein. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city may, in its sole discretion, require increased or decreased levels of insurance for any other object placed in the city's rights-of-way by way of individual license agreements. 
(Ord. No. 18-06, § 2, 1-17-18)  
Sec. 23-88. - Indemnification. 
A registrant shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold harmless and defend the city, its officials, boards, members, agents and employees, against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings, judgments for damages or equitable relief, and costs and expenses incurred by the city arising out of the placement or maintenance of its communications facilities or wireless communications facilities in public rights-of-way, regardless of whether the act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this article, provided, however, that a registrant's obligation hereunder shall not extend to any damages caused solely by the negligence, gross negligence or wanton or willful acts of the city. This provision includes, but is not limited to, the city's reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in defending against any such claim, suit or proceedings. City agrees to notify the registrant, in writing, within a reasonable time of city receiving notice, of any issue it determines may require indemnification. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from participating in the defense of any litigation by its own counsel and at its own cost if in the city's reasonable belief there exists or may exist a conflict, potential conflict or appearance of a conflict. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted: (1) as denying to either party any remedy or defense available to such party under the laws of the State of Florida; (2) as consent by the city to be sued; or (3) as a waiver of sovereign immunity beyond the waiver provided in F.S. § 768.28, as it may be amended. 
(Ord. No. 18-06, § 2, 1-17-18)  
Sec. 23-89. - Construction bond. 
(a)  Prior to performing any permitted work in the public rights-of-way, the city shall require the registrant to establish in the city's favor a construction bond in an amount equal to a minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the cost of the work being permitted to secure the restoration of the public rights-of-way and to ensure the registrant's faithful performance of the construction or other work in the public rights-of-way, in accordance with applicable sections of the City Code. 
(b)  In the event a registrant fails to complete the work in accordance with the provisions of the permit and this article, or fails to complete all restoration work in the right-of-way as required in section 23-80, including but not limited to repair or replacement of damaged landscaping, structures, hardscape, underground utility facilities, structures or equipment, or any other item or feature disturbed by the permitted work, there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the registrant, or the cost of completing the work, plus a reasonable allowance for attorney's fees, up to the full amount of the bond. 
(c)  No less than twelve (12) months after completion of the construction and satisfaction of all obligations in accordance with the bond, the registrant may request the city manager or designee to remove the requirement to continue the construction bond and the city shall release the bond within ten (10) days. Notwithstanding, the city shall require a new bond for any subsequent work performed in the public rights-of-way. 
(d)  The construction bond shall be issued by a surety having a minimum rating of A-1 in Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition; shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney; and shall provide that: 
"Unless released by the city, this bond may not be canceled, or allowed to lapse, until sixty (60) days after receipt by the city, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice from the issuer of the bond of intent to cancel or not to renew." 
(e)  The rights reserved by the city with respect to any construction bond established pursuant to this section are in addition to all other rights and remedies the city may have under this section, or at law or equity, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to the construction bond will affect any other right the city may have. 
(Ord. No. 18-06, § 2, 1-17-18)  
Sec. 23-90. - Security fund. 
At the time of registration and as a condition of receiving its first permit to place or maintain a communications facility or wireless communications facility in public rights-of-way after the effective date of this article, the registrant shall be required to file with the city, for city approval, an annual bond, cash deposit or irrevocable letter of credit in the sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) having as a surety a company qualified to do business in the State of Florida, and acceptable to the city manager or designee, which shall be referred to as the "security fund." The security fund shall be conditioned on the full and faithful performance by the registrant of all requirements, duties and obligations imposed upon registrant by the provisions of this article. The bond or guarantee shall be furnished annually or as frequently as necessary to provide a continuing guarantee of the registrant's full and faithful performance at all times. In the event a registrant fails to perform its duties and obligations imposed upon the registrant by the provisions of this article, subject to section 23-90 of this article, there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally from the security fund and/or from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the registrant, plus a reasonable allowance for attorneys' fees, up to the full amount of the security fund. The city may in its reasonable discretion accept a corporate guarantee of the registrant or its parent company. 
(Ord. No. 18-06, § 2, 1-17-18)  
Sec. 23-91. - Enforcement remedies. 
(a)  In addition to any other remedies available at law, including but not limited to F.S. § 166.0415, and F.S. ch. 162, or equity or as provided in this article, the city may apply any one (1) or combination of the following remedies in the event a registrant violates this article, or applicable local law or order related to the public rights-of-way: 
(1)  Failure to comply with the provisions of the article or other law applicable to occupants of the public rights-of-way, may result in imposition of penalties to be paid by the registrant to the city in an amount of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(2)  In addition to or instead of any other remedy, the city may seek legal or equitable relief from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  Before imposing a fine pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section, the city shall give written notice of the violation and its intention to assess such penalties, which notice shall contain a description of the alleged violation. Following receipt of such notice, the registrant shall have ten (10) days to either: (a) cure the violation to the city's satisfaction and the city shall make good faith reasonable efforts to assist in resolving the violation; or (b) file an appeal with the city to contest the alleged violation. Section 23-83 shall govern such appeal. If no appeal is filed and if the violation is not cured within the thirty-day period, the city may collect all fines owed, beginning with the first day of the violation, through any means allowed by law. 
(c)  In determining which remedy or remedies are appropriate, the city shall take into consideration the nature of the violation, the person or persons bearing the impact of the violation, the nature of the remedy required in order to prevent further violations, and such other matters as the city determines are appropriate to the public interest. 
(d)  Failure of the city to enforce any requirements of this article shall not constitute a waiver of the city's right to enforce that violation or subsequent violations of the same type or to seek appropriate enforcement remedies. 
(e)  In any proceeding before the city where there exists an issue with respect to a registrant's performance of its obligations pursuant to this article, the registrant shall be given the opportunity to provide such information as it may have concerning its compliance with the terms and conditions of this article. The city may find a registrant that does not demonstrate compliance with the terms and conditions of this article in default and apply any one (1) or combination of the remedies otherwise authorized by this article. 
(f)  The city manager or designee shall be responsible for administration and enforcement of this article, and is authorized to give any notice required by law. 
(Ord. No. 18-06, § 2, 1-17-18)  
Sec. 23-92. - Reports and records; inspections. 
(a)  A registrant shall provide the following documents to the city as received or filed: 
(1)  Upon reasonable request, any pleadings, petitions, notices, and documents, which may directly impact the obligations under this article and which are reasonably necessary for the city to protect its interests under this article. 
(2)  Any request for protection under bankruptcy laws, or any judgment related to a declaration of bankruptcy. 
(b)  Nothing in this subsection shall affect the remedies registrant has available under applicable law. 
(c)  In addition, the city may, at its option, and upon reasonable notice to the registrant, inspect the facilities in the public rights-of-way to ensure the safety of its residents. 
(d)  The city shall keep any documentation, books and records of the registrant confidential to the extent required under Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 18-06, § 2, 1-17-18)  
Sec. 23-93. - Abandonment of a communications facility or wireless communications facility. 
(a)  Upon abandonment of a communications facility or wireless communications facility owned by a registrant in the public rights-of-way, the registrant shall notify the city of such abandonment within ninety (90) days. 
(b)  The city may direct the registrant by written notice to remove all or any portion of such abandoned facility at the registrant's sole expense if the city determines that the abandoned facility's presence interferes with the public health, safety or welfare, which shall include, but shall not be limited to, a determination that such facility: 
(1)  Compromises safety at any time for any public rights-of-way user or during construction or maintenance in public rights-of-way; 
(2)  Prevents another person from locating facilities in the area of public rights-of-way where the abandoned facility is located when other alternative locations are not reasonably available; or 
(3)  Creates a maintenance condition that is disruptive to the public rights-of-way's use. 
In the event of [(b)](2), the city may require the third person to coordinate with the registrant that owns the existing facility for joint removal and placement, where agreed to by the registrant. 
(c)  In the event that the city does not direct the removal of the abandoned facility, the registrant, by its notice of abandonment to the city shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by the city or another person at such third party's cost. 
(d)  If the registrant fails to remove all or any portion of an abandoned facility as directed by the city within a reasonable time period as may be required by the city under the circumstances, the city may perform such removal and charge the cost of the removal against the registrant. 
(Ord. No. 18-06, § 2, 1-17-18)  
Sec. 23-94. - Force majeure. 
In the event a registrant's performance of or compliance with any of the provisions of this article is prevented by a cause or event not within the registrant's control, such inability to perform or comply shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result, provided, however, that such registrant uses all practicable means to expeditiously cure or correct any such inability to perform or comply. For purposes of this article, causes or events not within a registrant's control shall include, without limitation, acts of God, floods, earthquakes, landslides, hurricanes, fires and other natural disasters, acts of public enemies, riots or civil disturbances, sabotage, strikes and restraints imposed by order of a governmental agency or court. Causes or events within registrant's control, and thus not falling within this section, shall include, without limitation, registrant's financial inability to perform or comply, economic hardship, and misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance by any of registrant's directors, officers, employees, contractors or agents. 
(Ord. No. 18-06, § 2, 1-17-18)  
Sec. 23-95. - Reservation of rights. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to amend this article as it shall find necessary in the lawful exercise of its police powers. 
(b)  This provisions of this article shall be applicable to all communications facilities and wireless communications facilities placed in the public rights-of-way on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which the provisions derive and shall apply to all existing communications facilities and wireless communications facilities placed in the public rights-of-way prior to the effective date of this article, to the full extent permitted by state and federal law, except that any provision of this article regarding size, composition, or location of physical facilities shall not apply to physical facilities lawfully placed within any city right-of-way prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which such provision is derived. 
(Ord. No. 18-06, § 2, 1-17-18)  
Sec. 23-96. - No liability or warranty. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to make or hold the city responsible or liable for any damage to persons or any property whatsoever, from any cause whatsoever, arising from the use, operation or condition of the registrant's communications facilities or wireless communications facilities; or by reason of any inspection or reinspection authorized herein or failure to inspect or reinspect. Nor shall the issuance of any permit or the approval or disapproval of any placement or maintenance of the registrant's communications facilities or wireless communications facilities as authorized herein constitute any representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind by, nor create any liability upon, the city or any official, agent or employee thereof. 
(Ord. No. 18-06, § 2, 1-17-18)  
Sec. 23-97. - Pass-through provider fees and charges. 
(a)  Pass-through providers shall pay to the city on an annual basis an amount equal to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per linear mile or portion thereof of communications facilities or wireless communications facilities placed and/or maintained in the city's rights-of-way. For purposes of this section, the city's rights-of-way do not include rights-of-way that extend in or through the city but are state, county or another authority's rights-of-way. 
(b)  The amounts charged pursuant to this section shall be based on the linear miles of rights-of-way where communications facilities or wireless communications facilities are placed, not based on a summation of the lengths of individual cables, conduits, strands or fibers. 
(c)  Any annual amount charged shall be reduced for a prorated portion of any twelve (12) month period during which the pass-through provider remits taxes imposed by the city pursuant to F.S. ch. 202. 
(d)  Annual payments shall be due and payable on March 1 of each year. Fees not paid within ten (10) days after the due date shall bear interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month from the date due until paid. The acceptance of any payment required hereunder by the city shall not be construed as an acknowledgement that the amount paid is the correct amount due, nor shall such acceptance of payment be construed as a release of any claim which the city may have for additional sums due and payable. All fee payments shall be subject to audit by the city, and assessment or refund if any payment is found to be in error. If such audit results in an assessment by and an additional payment to the city, such additional payment shall be subject to interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month until the date payment is made. 
(e)  If the payments required by this section are not made within ninety (90) days after the due date, the city manager or designee may withhold the issuance of any permits to the registrant until the amount past due is paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 18-06, § 2, 1-17-18)  
Sec. 23-98. - Small wireless facilities. 
(a)  Application Required. Prior to applying for a permit for a small wireless facility, registration must be submitted pursuant to 23-77 of the Code. In order to apply for a permit to install a small wireless facility, an applicant must submit all of the following items to the City Engineer to review the permit application for compliance with reasonable rules and regulations for installing small wireless facilities, and applicable codes. All items are required unless exempted by the City Engineer or designee: 
(1)  An engineering plan signed and sealed by a Florida Registered Professional Engineer, or prepared by a person who is exempt from such registration requirements as provided in F.S. § 471.003, identifying the location of the proposed facility, including a description of the facilities to be installed, where it is to be located, and the approximate size of facilities and equipment that will be located in public rights-of-way; 
(2)  A description of the manner in which the facility will be installed (i.e. anticipated construction methods and/or techniques); 
(3)  A traffic maintenance plan for any disruption or obstruction of the public rights-of-way; 
(4)  Information on the ability of the public rights-of-way to accommodate the proposed facility, including information that identifies all above-ground facilities currently existing in the areas to which the permit application applies, and extending fifty (50) feet beyond said areas within the city if available (such information shall be provided without certification as to correctness, to the extent obtained from other persons with facilities in the public rights-of-way); 
(5)  If appropriate given the facility proposed, an estimate of the cost of restoration to the public rights-of-way; 
(6)  The timetable for construction of the project or each phase thereof, and the areas of the city which will be affected; 
(7)  Such additional information requested by the city that the city finds reasonably necessary to review the permit application; 
(8)  A visual depiction identifying and documenting how the proposed small wireless facility meets applicable codes; 
(9)  A temporary sidewalk closure plan, if appropriate given the facility proposed, to accommodate placement or maintenance of the communications facility; 
(10)  For project permits that involve multiple collocations or attachments to existing structures, repurposed structures or installation of multiple new wireless support structures, the applicant shall only be required to provide a structural certification by a Florida licensed professional engineer as to each type of facility, not for each facility proposed as part of the overall project. No such certification is required with respect to wireline pole attachment installations made in the communications space of utility poles; 
(11)  Proof of compliance with the construction bond requirement in section 23-88. 
(b)  Application Process. Within 14 days after receiving an application for a permit to collocate a small wireless facility, the city shall determine and notify the applicant by electronic mail as to whether the application is complete. If an application is deemed incomplete, the city shall specifically identify the missing information. An application is deemed complete if the city fails to provide notification to the applicant within 14 days. Pursuant to F.S. § 337.401(7), as amended from time to time, a complete application to collocate a small wireless facility is deemed approved if the city fails to approve or deny the application within 60 days after receipt of the application. If the city does not use the 30-day negotiation period provided in subsection (c)(1) below, the parties may mutually agree to extend the 60-day application review period. The city shall grant or deny the application at the end of the extended period. A permit issued pursuant to an approved collocation application shall remain effective for 1 year unless extended by the city. Ord. 
(c)  Alternate Location Procedure. Within 14 days after the date of filing a complete application for a small wireless facility, the city may request that the proposed location of a small wireless facility be moved to another location in the right-of-way and placed on an alternative city utility pole or support structure or may place a new utility pole. 
(1)  The city and the applicant may negotiate the alternative location, including any objective design standards and reasonable spacing requirements for ground-based equipment, for 30 days after the date of the request. At the conclusion of the negotiation period, if the alternative location is accepted by the applicant, the applicant must notify the city of such acceptance and the application shall be deemed granted for any new location for which there is agreement and all other locations in the application. If an agreement is not reached, the applicant must notify the city of such non-agreement and the city shall grant or deny the original application within 90 days after the date the application was filed. 
(2)  A request for an alternative location, an acceptance of an alternative location, or a rejection of an alternative location must be in writing and provided by electronic mail. 
(d)  Written Approval or Denial. The city shall notify the applicant of approval or denial by electronic mail. The city shall approve a completed application for installation of a small wireless facility unless it does not denied, the city shall specify in writing the basis for denial, including the specific code provision(s) on which the denial was based, and send the documentation to the applicant by electronic mail on the day the city denies the application. The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the city and resubmit the application within 30 days after notice of the denial is sent to the applicant. The city shall approve or deny the revised application within 30 days after receipt or the application is deemed approved. Any subsequent review shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial. 
(e)  Placement of Utility Poles. If an applicant seeks to place utility poles in the public rights-of-way to support collocation of a small wireless facility, then the application must include an attestation from the applicant that small wireless facilities will be collocated on the utility pole or structure and small wireless facilities will be utilized by a wireless services provider to provide service within 9 months from the date the application is granted. 
(f)  Height. The height of a small wireless facility shall not exceed 10 feet above the utility pole or structure upon which the small wireless facility is to be collocated. The height for a new utility pole is limited to the tallest existing utility pole as of July 1, 2017, located in the same right-of-way, other than a utility pole for which a waiver has previously been granted, measured from grade in place within 500 feet of the proposed location of the small wireless facility. If there is no utility pole within 500 feet, the height of the utility pole upon which the small wireless facility is to be collocated shall not exceed 50 feet. 
(g)  Consolidated Application. An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities within the city may, at the applicant's discretion, file a consolidated application to receive a single permit for the collocation of up to 30 small wireless facilities. If the application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the city may separately address small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete information has been received or which are denied. 
(h)  Basis for Denial. The city may deny a proposed collocation of a small wireless facility in the public rights-of-way if the proposed collocation: 
(1)  Materially interferes with the safe operation of traffic control equipment; 
(2)  Materially interferes with sight lines or clear zones for transportation, pedestrians, or public safety purposes; 
(3)  Materially interferes with compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act or similar federal or state standards regarding pedestrian access or movement; 
(4)  Materially fails to comply with the 2010 or latest edition of the Florida Department of Transportation Utility Accommodation Manual; or 
(5)  Fails to comply with applicable codes. 
(i)  Collocation on city utility poles. 
(1)  The rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a city utility pole shall be $150 per pole annually. Payment shall be submitted by March 1 st of each year to the city's Finance Department. 
(2)  The city may reserve space on city utility poles for future public safety uses. If replacement of the city utility pole is necessary to accommodate the collocation of the small wireless facility and the future public safety use, the pole replacement is subject to make-ready provisions and the replaced pole shall accommodate the future public safety use. 
(3)  For a city utility pole that supports an aerial facility used to provide communication services or electrical service, the city and applicant shall comply with the process for make-ready work under 47 U.S.C. § 224 and implementing regulations. The good faith estimate of the city for any make-ready work necessary to enable the pole to support the requested collocation will include pole replacement, if necessary. 
(4)  For a city utility pole that does not support an aerial facility used to provide communications services or electric service, the authority shall provide a good faith estimate for any make-ready work necessary to enable the pole to support the requested collocation, including necessary pole replacement, within 60 days after receipt of a complete application. Make-ready work, including any pole replacement, shall be completed within 60 days after written acceptance of the good faith estimate by the applicant. Alternatively, the city may require the applicant seeking to collocate a small wireless facility to provide a make-ready estimate at the applicant's expense for the work necessary to support the small wireless facility, including pole replacement, and perform the make-ready work. If pole replacement is required, the scope of the make-ready estimate is limited to the design, fabrication, and installation of a utility pole that is substantially similar in color and composition. 
(5)  The make-ready work specified in subsections (3) and (4) above shall be subject to the city's usual construction restoration standards for work in the right-of-way. The replaced or altered city utility pole shall remain the property of the city. 
(j)  Waiver. The city's design standards set forth in the City Code for small wireless facilities may be waived by the city manager or designee upon a showing that the design standards are not reasonably compatible for the particular location of a small wireless facility or that the design standards impose an excessive expense for a small wireless facility. The waiver shall be granted or denied within 45 days after the date of the request. 
(k)  Permitting. An applicant for installation of a small wireless facility shall obtain a right-of-way permit from the city, except to the extent applicable law prohibits the City from requiring a permit. 
(l)  Airport Airspace. A structure granted a permit and installed pursuant to this section shall comply with chapter 333, Florida Statutes, and federal regulations pertaining to airport airspace protections. 
(m)  No Authorization to Collocate on City Utility Poles or HOA Restricted Pole. This section does not authorize a person to collocate small wireless facilities or micro wireless facilities on a city utility pole or erect a wireless support structure in a location subject to covenants, conditions, restrictions, articles of incorporation, and bylaws of a homeowners' association. 
(n)  Prohibition against Placement in Location where Facilities are Placed Underground. A wireless service provider, including a communications services provider and communications facilities provider, shall, in relation to a small wireless facility, utility pole or wireless support structure in the public rights-of-way, comply with nondiscriminatory undergrounding requirements of the city that prohibit above-ground structures in the public rights-of-way. 
(o)  Distance Separation between Ground Mounted Equipment for Small Wireless Facilities. If the ground mounted equipment is in addition to the equipment attached to a pole for a small wireless facilities, then that ground-mounted equipment associated with a small wireless facility in the public rights-of-way must be spaced a minimum of two hundred fifty (250) linear feet apart from ground-mounted equipment associated with another small wireless facility. 
(p)  Small wireless facilities shall not be subject to the minimum separation distances set forth in section 23-80 of the city code, except as expressly permitted by law. 
(q)  Unless expressly exempted, all regulations throughout this chapter apply to small wireless facilities. 
(Ord. No. 18-06, § 2, 1-17-18)  
Sec. 23-99. - Preemption. 
In the event any provision of this ordinance is specifically preempted, or judicially determined to be preempted by state or federal law, then the preempted provision shall automatically be deemed null and void and the superseding provision of state or federal law shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 18-06, § 2, 1-17-18)  
ARTICLE V. - TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 23-100. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Arterial road, collector road, and local street are as defined in Section 201 of the City of Miramar Land Development Code. 
Street segment shall mean that portion of a local street that lies between two (2) arterial, or collector, streets. 
Traffic calming devices shall mean modifications to streets, sidewalks, or rights-of-way that affect traffic patterns. Traffic calming measures include, but are not limited to, speed humps, speed cushions, roadway paving modifications, pedestrian refuges, curb chokers, roundabouts, and diagonal diverters. 
(Ord. No. 10-14, § 2, 9-15-10)  
Sec. 23-101. - Traffic management team. 
(a)  The city's traffic management team is hereby established, and shall consist of one (1) representative from each of the following departments: Community development, engineering, fire-rescue, police, and public works. The engineering department representative shall serve as the chair of the team. 
(b)  The traffic management team shall review all city-owned and maintained street traffic calming requests and make a determination of approval or disapproval for each properly completed request for traffic calming on city-owned street segments. The traffic management team may request the assistance and solicit the input of members of city staff. 
(Ord. No. 10-14, § 2, 9-15-10)  
Sec. 23-102. - Traffic calming devices and measures; standards; design approval. 
(a)  The installation of traffic calming devices, and the modification of streets, sidewalks, or rights-of-way within the city shall comply with the city's engineering standards and applicable federal, state, and local law. 
(b)  Design plans for any traffic calming device installation or modification shall be reviewed and approved by the traffic management team prior to implementation. 
(c)  After traffic management team approval, design plans for traffic calming installations or modifications shall be reviewed and approved by the city's engineering department prior to installation or modification. 
(d)  All traffic calming devices installed or roadway modifications performed shall be subject to inspection and final approval by the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-14, § 2, 9-15-10)  
Sec. 23-103. - Requests for traffic calming measures on privately-owned streets. 
Any request for the implementation of traffic calming devices on privately-owned roadways shall be submitted to the city's engineering department. The approval and permitting process is as follows: 
(1)  A private road owner or duly authorized representative of a homeowner's association ("HOA") shall provide design and engineering specification plans to the engineering department that indicate the proposed location of the traffic calming device. 
(2)  The engineering department shall review and provide comments to the owner or HOA representative. All comments must be addressed and plan modifications shall be resubmitted to the engineering department for review. 
(3)  Once the design plans receive engineering department approval, the contractor shall submit a construction permit application to the city. The permit application shall be accompanied by a copy of the contractor's license, insurance, bid documents and the permitting fee. 
(4)  The permitting fee amount shall be based upon the construction cost listed on the contractor's bid documents and the city's schedule of engineering fees, as adopted by resolution of the city commission. 
(5)  All traffic calming devices installed or roadway modifications performed on privately-owned roadways shall be subject to inspection and final approval by the city. 
(6)  The city reserves the right to inspect, on an as needed basis, the constructed and/or installed parts of the traffic calming devices to ensure they are being properly maintained, including inspection of all painting, markings, and signage. 
(7)  All the costs associated with the implementation, maintenance, or removal of traffic calming measures on a privately-owned roadway, such as the planning, design, review, construction, inspection, and removal, shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner(s). 
(Ord. No. 10-14, § 2, 9-15-10)  
Sec. 23-104. - Requests for traffic calming measures on city-maintained streets; criteria. 
(a)  Traffic calming request form. Residents and property owners within the city desiring implementation of traffic calming devices and measures on a city-maintained street segment may file a request for consideration with the city's traffic management team by completing a traffic calming request form, and submitting the request form and a properly completed petition to the city's engineering department. 
(b)  Petition. The traffic calming request form shall be accompanied by a standard petition form provided by the city, signed by at least sixty (60) percent of the affected property owners of record for each property located on the affected street segment(s). The petition shall include the applicable name, home address, affected property address, telephone number, and signature of each property owner signifying support of the traffic calming measure request. 
(c)  Affected property owners. 
(1)  Cul-de-sac. The "affected property owners" for installations on a public cul-de-sac or no-outlet condition roadway shall be all homeowners with lots having direct access onto the subject roadway. 
(2)  Public through street. The "affected property owners" for installations on a public through street shall be defined as all homeowners located within a quarter-mile band width perpendicular to the centerline of the roadway extending a half-mile along the roadway in each direction from the proposed installation. 
(Ord. No. 10-14, § 2, 9-15-10)  
Sec. 23-105. - Traffic studies; street segment qualification scoring. 
(a)  Traffic studies. At the direction of the traffic management team, the city may conduct a traffic study to collect data regarding the traffic speeds and volumes present on the affected street segment(s). The study may be performed by the police department or the city's traffic engineer. The traffic management team shall designate the dates, times, and frequency of any traffic studies performed under this article. 
(b)  Traffic speed. The traffic study shall collect data on traffic speeds more than five (5) miles per hour (mph) above the posted speed limit. Once the average speed is computed, every mph that is more than five (5) mph over the posted speed limit will be scored at five (5) points, not to exceed fifty (50) total points. 
(c)  Traffic volume. The traffic study shall also collect data on traffic volume. Once the average daily traffic volume is computed, one (1) point will be assigned for every one hundred (100) vehicles in the average. 
(d)  Qualification scoring. For a street segment to qualify for traffic management team consideration for the implementation of traffic calming devices and measures, the combined traffic speed and volume score calculated pursuant to this section must total forty (40) or higher. 
(Ord. No. 10-14, § 2, 9-15-10)  
Sec. 23-106. - Traffic studies; city-maintained street segment selection scoring. 
(a)  Priority scoring criteria. Traffic calming projects shall be prioritized by need utilizing the following street segment selection scoring point system: 
(1)  One (1) point for every one (1) percentage of vehicles traveling ten (10) mph over the posted speed limit as documented in the traffic study. 
(2)  Five (5) points for each elementary school fifteen (15) mph school zone on the affected street segment. 
(3)  Five (5) points for each public facility, such as parks, community centers, and schools, which generate a significant number of pedestrians on the street segment. 
(4)  Five (5) points if the street segment is a designated pedestrian route. 
(5)  Five (5) points if the street segment is a designated bicycle route. 
(6)  Five (5) points if the street segment is a designated transit route. 
(7)  Five (5) points if there is not continuous sidewalk on at least one (1) side of the street segment. 
(b)  Priority rating. To determine the street segment priority rating, the total qualification score, as described in section 23-105, and the total selection score shall be added together. Final street segment priority ratings shall be compared against each other and prioritized in descending order. 
(c)  When prioritizing projects, the traffic management team shall also consider the project size and complexity, compatibility with other transportation projects, and budget availability. 
(Ord. No. 10-14, § 2, 9-15-10)  
Sec. 23-107. - Available traffic calming solutions for city maintained local streets. 
The city's traffic management team may employ three (3) types of traffic calming solutions: education, enforcement, and engineering. All of these approaches shall be considered when designing a traffic calming project based on solutions that best serve the many uses of the neighborhood and the street system. 
(1)  Education. Education alerts people to ways they can help ease traffic problems. The city may make a variety of educational materials and activities available that can be targeted to both the specific street segment and the general public. 
(2)  Enforcement. Enforcement enlists the help of the city's police department to focus enforcement efforts on the applicable street segment and to increase community awareness of speeding problems. Police officers may use traditional enforcement and community awareness efforts, such as deploying speed trailers and variable message boards to monitor speeds and show drivers how fast they are driving, and may provide safe driving tips and information to drivers. 
(3)  Engineering. The city may utilize engineering tools including a variety of traffic calming devices and measures, such as those described in this article, that can reduce speed, decrease traffic volumes, and improve safety. 
(Ord. No. 10-14, § 2, 9-15-10)  
Sec. 23-108. - Notification to property owners of traffic calming consideration. 
The members of the traffic management team, or a designated representative thereof, shall conduct a public awareness campaign to provide property owners of record of the affected city-maintained streets with notice of the team's review of selected traffic calming devices and measures prior to implementation. 
(Ord. No. 10-14, § 2, 9-15-10)  
Sec. 23-109. - Removal of traffic calming devices and measures. 
(a)  City-maintained street. If a resident desires the removal of traffic calming devices implemented on a city-maintained street segment, a written request for removal shall be submitted to the traffic management team, via the engineering department, accompanied by a standard petition form provided by the city, signed by at least sixty (60) percent of the affected property owners of record for each property located on the affected street segment(s) in accordance with section 23-104. 
(b)  Traffic management team review. The traffic management team shall review properly completed requests for removal and may take actions necessary to determine if the traffic calming devices and measures are still required or if the removal request may be granted. 
(c)  Privately-owned street. If the traffic calming devices implemented on a privately-owned roadway are to be removed, the property owner(s) or HOA representative shall notify the city's engineering department, either in person or via certified mail, prior to the removal. The affected roadway shall be returned to its original configuration and must be brought into compliance with any and all federal, state, and local requirements. The city reserves the right to inspect the roadway, post-removal, to ensure it meets all applicable requirements. 
(Ord. No. 10-14, § 2, 9-15-10)  
Sec. 23-110. - City initiated traffic calming measures exempt. 
This Article V shall not in any manner apply to, restrict or limit the city's ability, absence a request or petition, to implement traffic calming devices and measures on any city-maintained local, collector, or arterial road for the safety of the public. 
(Ord. No. 10-14, § 2, 9-15-10)  
Chapter 25 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Charges for landscaping and visual amenities regulations, land subdivision regulations and the comprehensive zoning ordinance, § 2-224(3); fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; open burning restrictions, § 9-2; sanitary nuisances, § 10-26 et seq.; weeds and debris, § 10-91 et seq.; property maintenance, § 10-118 et seq.; solid waste, Ch. 18; buildings and building structure regulations, Ch. 22; planning and development, Ch. 22.5; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 25-1. - Landscaping and visual amenities regulations adopted by reference; availability of copies. 
The "Landscaping and Visual Amenities Ordinance of the City of Miramar", as amended, shall be incorporated into this Code by reference only. 
(1)  Three (3) copies of the landscape ordinance and all amendments thereto shall be available at the office of the city clerk for inspection by the public. 
(2)  Copies of the landscape ordinance and all amendments thereto will be available for sale by the city clerk to the public at a reasonable price to be determined by the clerk. 
(Code 1964, § 20A-1)  
Secs. 25-2—25-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TREES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Local improvements special assessments procedure, § 2-266 et seq.; weeds and debris, § 10-91 et seq.; buildings and building structure regulations, Ch. 22; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23. 
 
Sec. 25-26. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Buildable area shall mean the portion of a site within the required yard areas on which a structure or improvements may be erected. 
Tree shall mean any self-supporting woody perennial plant which has a trunk diameter of three (3) inches measured three (3) feet above grade, and has a minimum overall height of ten (10) feet. 
Yard area shall mean the front, side and rear yard areas as established and required by the comprehensive zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1964, § 8-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 25-27. - Applicability. 
The terms and provisions of this article shall apply to real property as follows: 
(1)  All vacant and undeveloped property. 
(2)  All property in all zoning classifications that is intended to be redeveloped. 
(3)  The yard areas of all developed property. 
(Code 1964, § 8-2)  
Sec. 25-28. - Exceptions to provisions. 
(a)  In the event that any tree shall be determined to be in a hazardous or dangerous condition so as to endanger the public health, welfare or safety, and requires immediate removal without delay, verbal authorization by phone may be given by the building department and the tree removed without obtaining a written permit as herein required. 
(b)  During the period of an emergency such as a hurricane, tropical storm, flood or any other act of God, the requirements of this article may be waived by the building department. 
(c)  All licensed plant or tree nurseries shall be exempt from the terms and provisions of this article only in relation to those trees planted and growing on the premises of such licensee, which are so planted and growing for the sale or intended sale to the general public in the ordinary course of said licensee's business. 
(d)  All property developed with owner occupied single-family and two-family dwellings shall be exempt from the terms and provisions of section 25-27(c). 
(e)  The following types of trees shall be exempt from the terms and provisions of this article: 
(1)  Schinus Terebinthinfolius (Brazilian Pepper Tree). 
(2)  Metopium Toxiferum (Poison Wood). 
(Code 1964, § 8-5)  
Sec. 25-29. - Environmental control hearing board; created; composition. 
A three-member city environmental control hearing board is hereby created and established, which shall consist of the director of the community development department, the director of the public works department and the director of the parks and recreation department, or their staff designees. 
(Code 1964, § 8-8; Ord. No. 14-16, § 22, 6-17-14)  
Sec. 25-30. - Appeals from decisions of the community development department. 
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the community development department in the enforcement of any terms or provisions of this article, may appeal to the environmental control hearing board by filing within 15 days after the date of the decision complained of, a written notice of appeal thereof with the mayor, with a copy to the city clerk, which shall set forth concisely the decision appealed from and the reasons or grounds for the appeal. Each appeal shall be accompanied by a fee to be set and amended by resolution of the city commission to cover the cost of publishing and mailing notices of hearing. The environmental control hearing board shall hear and consider all facts material to the appeal and render a decision promptly. The environmental control hearing board may affirm, reverse or modify the decision appealed from, provided that the environmental control hearing board shall not take any action which conflicts with or nullifies any of the provisions of this article. The decision of the environmental control hearing board shall constitute final administrative review, and no rehearing on reconsideration shall be considered. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the environmental control hearing board may apply to the courts of the state for a review thereof. The word "decision" as used herein shall not include the filing of any action by the building department in any court. 
(Code 1964, § 8-7; Ord. No. 14-16, § 23, 6-17-14)  
Sec. 25-31. - Permits for tree removal required; application information and review; issuance. 
(a)  Required. No person, directly or indirectly, shall cut down, destroy, remove or move, or effectively destroy through damaging, any tree situated on property described above without first obtaining a permit as herein provided. 
(b)  Application. Permits for removal, relocation or replacement of trees covered herein, shall be obtained by making application for permit to the building department. The application shall be accompanied by a written statement indicating the reasons for removal, relocation or replacement of trees and four (4) copies of a legible site plan drawn to a minimum scale of one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet, indicating the following: 
(1)  Location of all existing or proposed structures, improvements and site uses, properly dimensioned and referenced to property lines, setback and yard requirements and spatial relationships. 
(2)  Existing and proposed site elevations, grades and major contours. 
(3)  Location of existing or proposed utility services. 
(4)  The name, common and botanical, size and location of all trees on the site designating the trees to be retained, removed, relocated, or replaced. Groups of trees in close proximity may be designated as "clumps" of trees with the predominate type and estimated number and average diameter noted. 
(5)  Tree information required above shall be summarized in legend form on the plan and shall include the reason for the proposed removal, relocation or replacement. 
(c)  Application review. Upon receipt of a proper application, the building department shall review the application which may include a field check of the site and referral of the application to other departments or agencies as necessary to determine any adverse effect upon the general public welfare, adjacent properties or city services and facilities. 
(d)  Issuance for removal. No permit shall be issued for tree removal unless one (1) of the following conditions exists: 
(1)  The tree is located in the buildable area or yard area where a structure or improvements may be placed and it unreasonably restricts the permitted use of the property. 
(2)  The tree cannot be relocated on or off the site because of the age, type, or size of the tree. 
(3)  The tree is diseased, injured, in danger of falling, too close to existing or proposed structures, interferes with utility service, creates unsafe vision clearance, or conflicts with other ordinances or regulations. 
(4)  It is in the welfare of the general public that the tree be removed for a reason other than set forth above. 
(e)  Relocation or replacement. As a condition to the granting of a permit, the applicant may be required where practical to relocate the tree being removed or required to replace the tree being removed with a tree somewhere within the site of the type that will attain an overall height of fifteen (15) feet and a trunk diameter of at least three (3) inches, measured three (3) feet above grade, and shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in overall height when planted. 
(Code 1964, § 8-3)  
Sec. 25-32. - Tree protection. 
(a)  During construction, protective barriers shall be placed around all trees to be retained on the site to prevent the destruction or damaging of the trees. 
(b)  No attachments or wires other than those of a protective nature shall be attached to any tree. 
(Code 1964, § 8-4)  
Sec. 25-33. - Permit required to cut, prune, plant, etc., trees and shrubs on streets. 
No person shall, without a written permit from the building department, cut, prune, unreasonably break, incline, injure, remove, plant, or in any other way deface any living tree, shrub or vine, in a public way or park or easement, or cut, disturb or interfere in any way with the roots of any tree, shrub or vine in a public way, park or easement. 
(Code 1964, § 20-12)  
Sec. 25-34. - Planting of certain trees in public utility easements prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall plant or cause to be planted in any public utility easement, any casuarina trees (Australian pine trees), melaleuca trees, Brazilian oak, rubber tree, or ficus tree. 
(b)  If any trees, hedges, or other plant growth shall cause damage or destruction to any sidewalk, curb, gutter, street pavement, water, gas or sewer line piping, or other city-owned property, the code enforcement officer shall notify the owner of such trees, etc., by notice in writing to cut down, destroy, or remove such trees, etc., within ten (10) days from the date of receipt of such notice. In the event such owner shall fail or refuse to cut down, destroy or remove the trees, etc., within ten (10) days, then the city clerk shall cause such trees to be removed or destroyed, and shall charge the cost thereof against the owner, and the amount of the cost to the city shall be constituted a lien upon the property. 
(Code 1964, § 20-13)  
Sec. 25-35. - Removal of trees from public lands. 
No tree shall be removed from any public park or public right-of-way except in accordance with section 25-33. 
(Code 1964, § 8-6) 
Cross reference— Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23.  
Sec. 25-36. - Standards of tree maintenance. 
(a)  Any person who administrates tree maintenance practices within the City shall adhere to the standards contained in American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A-300, current edition, which are hereby incorporated be reference into this Code. Not less than three (3) copies of such standards are filed in the Office of the City Clerk. 
(b)  All trees within the City, other than those species delineated in subsection (c) below, shall be trimmed in accordance with the provisions contained in the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A-300, current edition. 
(c)  The following tree species shall not be exempted from the provisions of American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A-300, current edition, however they may be topped provided that the upper branches are progressively tipped so as to duplicate the natural form. 
(1)  Australian Pine. 
(2)  Norfolk Pine. 
(Code 1964, § 8-10; Ord. No. 01-30, § 3, 5-2-01)  
ARTICLE III. - MISCELLANEOUS FEES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Sections 2 and 3 of Ord. No. 91-15, adopted Jan. 28, 1991, amended Ch. 25 by adding §§ 25-37 and 25-38 thereto. For classification purposes, the editor has included these provisions in a new Art. III. 
 
Sec. 25-37. - Removal of visual obstructions. 
The following regulatory use fee is hereby enacted by the city to be charged to the property owner(s) or other person found to be responsible for allowing the existence of a visual obstruction which is hereby defined to mean foliage, vegetation, barricades, signage, or other items of personality which are creating a visual obstruction to any public right-of-way and/or traffic-control and/or traffic regulatory device: 
For removal by the city of each visual obstruction device (inclusive of labor, materials and transportation expenses), a regulatory fee will be set and amended by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 91-15, § 2, 1-28-91; Ord. No. 14-16, § 24, 6-17-14)  
Sec. 25-38. - Removal of unsafe trees. 
The following regulatory use fee will be charged to by the city against property owner(s) or other persons found responsible for allowing trees to fall into the public rights-of-way or upon any traffic-control device or traffic regulatory signal, or trees which appear to be in imminent danger of falling: 
For removal of each tree by the city or its agents (inclusive of on-site labor, materials and travel time, a regulatory fee will be set and amended by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 91-15, § 3, 1-28-91; Ord. No. 14-16, § 25, 6-17-14) 


LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE 
CITY OF 
MIRAMAR, FLORIDA 

____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council, 2001 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
MIRAMAR, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Wayne M. Messam 
Mayor 
____________ 
Yvette Colbourne 
Vice Mayor 
____________ 
Winston F. Barnes 
Maxwell B. Chambers 
Darline B. Riggs 
City Commissioners 
____________ 
Weiss Serota Helfman 
Cole & Bierman, P.L. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Vernon E. Hargay, City Manager 
Whittingham Gordon, Assistant City Manager 
Michael Moore, Assistant City Manager 
____________ 
Nasif Alshaier 
Michele Fil-Aime 
Wayne Lomax 
Debra Scialabba 
Matthew Thompson 
Planning & Zoning Board Members 
____________ 
Denise A. Gibbs 
City Clerk 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF MIRAMAR 
AT THE TIME OF PUBLICATION 
____________ 
1996 
CITY COMMISSION 
Vicki Coceano, Mayor 
Marjorie J. Conlan, Vice Mayor 
Daniel Lewis, Commissioner 
Sandra R. Lucas, Commissioner 
Lori C. Moseley, Commissioner 
____________ 
PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD 
Peter Maceri, Chairperson 
Kevin Fernander, Vice Chairperson 
Ralph Beren 
Steve Bogert 
A.R. "Sandy" Enos 
Charles Holiday 
Michael McMahon 
____________ 
CITY ADMINISTRATION 
Eric M. Soroka, City Manager 
Weiss, Serota & Helfman, City Attorney 
Jaye M. Epstein, Community Development Director 
Betty S. Tarno, City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    As adopted in 2001, this Land Development Code constitutes a publication of the Land Development Code of the City of Miramar. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the publication were the ordinance adopting said Land Development Code, adopted June 5, 2000, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of the volume, the reader can locate ordinance included herein. 
Index 
    The general index of the Code has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology and still others in language generally used by city officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing. With this looseleaf system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to the holders of the Codes with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Successfully keeping this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
    The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of John Dombroski, Vice President, and Anne Wilson and Janet Cramer, Editors, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout both the recodification and the republication projects. 
    The publishers are most grateful to the city staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on the recodification project. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publishers have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
2001 
MUNICIPAL CODE 
CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Land Development Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date
Adopted Included/
Omitted Supp. No. 11-10  9-21-11 Included 19 12-05 11-30-11 Included 20 12-07 11-30-11 Included 20 12-10  3-21-12 Included 21 13-02 10- 3-12 Included 22 13-03 10-17-12 Included 22 13-10  5-15-13 Included 23 13-15  8-21-13 Included 24 14-01 11- 6-13 Included 24 14-08 11-18-13 Included 24 00-19  1-19-00 Included 25 14-11  2- 5-14 Included 25 14-15  7- 2-14 Included 26 15-04 11-24-14 Included 27 15-05 11-24-14 Included 27 15-10  2- 4-15 Included 28 16-04  1-27-16 Included 29 16-05  1-27-16 Included 29 17-07 11-14-16 Included 30 17-17  9-19-17 Included 31 18-01 11- 1-17 Included 31 18-05 11-27-17 Included 31 18-07  3- 7-18 Included 32 18-14  9-17-18 Included 33 19-07 11-28-18 Included 33  
Chapter 1 - AUTHORITY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16-04, § 2(Exh. B), adopted Jan. 27, 2016, repealed Ch. 1, §§ 101-104. Section 1(Exh. A) of said ordinance reenacted Ch. 1, §§ 101-109, as set our herein. Former Ch. 1 pertained to purpose and applicability. See Code Comparative Table for historical derivations. 

Sec. 101. - Title. 
    This Code of the City of Miramar Land Development Regulations shall be entitled and may be referred to as the Land Development Code ("LDC" or "Code"). 
(Ord. No. 16-04, § 1(Exh. A), 1-27-16) 
Sec. 102. - Authority and Purpose. 
    This Land Development Code is enacted pursuant to the requirements and authority of the Community Planning Act, F.S. Ch. 163, Part II and the general powers confirmed in F.S. Ch. 166 (Municipalities) and the Article VIII, Section 2, Florida Constitution of 1968. 
    The purpose of this LDC is to implement further the Comprehensive Plan ("the Plan") of the City by establishing regulations, procedures and standards for review and approval of all development and use of land and water in the City in addition to and in more detail than those in the Plan. Further, this LDC is adopted in order to foster and preserve public health, safety, comfort and welfare, and to aid in the harmonious, orderly, and progressive development of the City. It is the intent of this Code that the development process in the City of Miramar be efficient, in terms of time and expense; effective, in terms of addressing the natural resource and public facility implications of proposed development; and equitable, in terms of consistency with established regulations and procedures, respect for the rights of property owners, and the consideration of the interests of the citizens of the City. 
(Ord. No. 16-04, § 1(Exh. A), 1-27-16) 
Sec. 103. - Applicability. 
    103.1. General Applicability . Unless otherwise permitted as an exception under Section 103.2 or allowed to continue as a nonconforming use, all existing, proposed and new development and uses of land in the City of Miramar shall conform strictly to the provisions of this Code. Except as expressly provided in this Code, no development and use of land shall be undertaken without prior approval and issuance of a development order pursuant to the provisions of this LDC. The fact that a development order, permit or decision has been issued by an officer or employee with ostensible authority over the interpretation or enforcement of this Code shall not estop or otherwise prevent the City from strict enforcement of the provisions of this Code. 
    103.2. Exceptions . 
103.2.1. The provisions of this LDC and any amendments hereto shall not affect development which has been previously approved and is otherwise exempted in accordance with the provisions of this subsection, or the nonconformity section of this Code. 
103.2.2. The provisions of this LDC shall not affect development, or portions thereof, which has gained a vested right to complete development pursuant to Florida law, prior to January 20, 2016. Upon completion of such vested development, or portions thereof, each non-vested and vested development project with regard to future development expansion or redevelopment will be subject to the then currently effective provisions of this Code. 
103.2.3. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Code, properties zoned "PUD" (Planned Unit Development) prior to the effective date of this Code shall be permitted to complete development of the portion(s) of the project having a valid and current Conceptual Development Plan ("CDP") that includes specific land development standards adopted by the City Commission. If no such conceptual development plan exists, or such plan has expired, such development shall conform to the provisions of this Code. Modifications to approved conceptual or Master Development Plans ("MDPs") shall be approved in accordance with Section 103.3.2 of this Code. 
    103.3. Vested Rights . 
103.3.1. Vested Rights Determination. Any property owner that claims vested rights with respect to changes in the City's laws and regulations may seek a vested rights determination and hearing as provided by the Code of Ordinances. 
103.3.2. Modifications to vested development orders. 
(a)  Any development order determined to be valid and vested pursuant to provisions of this LDC, or pursuant to any vested rights procedure pursuant to this LDC, may be modified and approved by one of the following procedures based on the criteria stated herein: Administrative approval by the Community and Economic Development Department Director, or final site plan approval by the City Commission. 
Modifications shall not be permitted which would permit a use not otherwise permitted within a zoning district, permit a conditional use as permitted use, or violate the provisions of nonconforming uses and structures. 
Any change to a vested development order which would normally require the granting of a variance prior to receiving final site plan approval shall be processed to the City Commission. The Commission at its discretion shall determine the extent to which the site must comply with the development standards in effect at the time the variance would be granted. 
(b)  Modifications to vested development orders requiring administrative approval . Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the LDC, the following changes shall be approved administratively by the Community and Economic Development Department Director after review by the Development Review Committee ("DRC"). These developments may proceed according to the development standards in effect at the time the vested rights were established: 
(1)  Any increase in the average and/or minimum lot size of a zoning pod within an approved residential zoning parcel; 
(2)  Any decrease in the number of dwelling units in a zoning parcel; 
(3)  Any qualified site plan exemption pursuant to Chapter 3; 
(4)  Any minor amendments/alterations to approved conditional uses pursuant to Chapter 3; or 
(5)  Any minor changes to utilities, rights-of-way, bicycle and pedestrian paths, water bodies, open space and landscaped areas, signs and amenities. 
Any change set forth in this subsection that is also identified in section 103.3.2(c) shall be governed by that later provision. 
(c)  Modifications to vested development orders requiring final site plan approval . The following changes shall be required to obtain final site plan approval by the City Commission pursuant to Chapter 3 and shall comply with the development standards in effect at the time the project will receive such approval. 
The un-built portions of the applicable zoning parcel(s)/pod(s) sought to be modified shall comply in its/their entirety with the aforementioned development standards, however, the changes shall not be applied to other specifically delineated pods/parcels within a master planned development and/or plat which are not being modified: 
(1)  Any change in zoning district; 
(2)  Any increase in the number of dwelling units within a zoning parcel; 
(3)  Any decrease in the setbacks of proposed structures; 
(4)  Any decrease in the landscape area or open space area within a zoning parcel; 
(5)  Any increase in the height of a structure; 
(6)  Any decrease in the number of parking spaces; or 
(7)  Any change to a vested development order which materially affects the development of the entire unbuilt portion of a zoning pod/parcel. 
(Ord. No. 16-04, § 1(Exh. A), 1-27-16) 
Sec. 104. - Official Zoning Map. 
    104.1. Adoption of the Official Zoning Map. The City of Miramar is divided into zones or districts, as shown on the Official Zoning Map and described in this Land Development Code. The zoning map, together with all explanatory matter thereon, shall be considered a part of this LDC. The zoning map is the official record of zoning status of areas within the City. A copy shall be maintained by the Community and Economic Development Department, and is available for review on the City's official website. The boundaries of the various zoning districts are hereby established as shown on a map entitled "The Zoning Map of the City of Miramar." The Official Zoning Map shall bear the seal of the City under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Section 104 of the Land Development Code of the City of Miramar, Florida" together with the date of adoption. 
    104.2. Amendments to the Official Zoning Map . Amendments to the Official Zoning Map shall be made in accordance with the procedures and standards of this Code. An amendment to the zoning map does not need an amendment to this LDC that textually recognizes the amendment to this Section or the Code, except for the notation to be placed on the zoning map as set forth in Section 104.1. Any amending ordinance shall provide that such changes or amendments, including rezoning of a parcel of land, shall not become effective until thirty (30) days from the date of rendition of the ordinance, and if appealed or otherwise judicially contested, until resolution of any judicial contests or appeals. Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning Map which may from time to time be made or published, the Official Zoning Map which shall be stored in the Community and Economic Development Department when not in use and readily available to the public, shall be the final authority as the current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings, and other structures in the City. 
    104.3. Recording amendments . The change or amendment shall be duly recorded within five (5) business days after the 30-day period has expired and resolution of any judicial contests or appeals. No zoning changes shall be made on the Official Zoning Map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this Code. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person or persons shall be considered a violation of this Code and punishable as provided in this Code, the Miramar City Code of Ordinances, or Florida Statutes. 
    104.4. Replacement . In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the City Commission may adopt a new, or replacement, Official Zoning Map which shall supersede the prior Official Zoning Map. The new map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original zoning ordinance or any subsequent amendment. The new Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the following words: "This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted (date of adoption of map being replaced) as part of the Land Development Code of the City of Miramar, Florida." Unless the prior map has been lost, or has totally been destroyed, it shall be preserved together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
    104.5. Interpretation of District Boundaries . Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply: 
(a)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(b)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be so construed. 
(c)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be so construed. 
(d)  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks. 
(e)  Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow the high water mark and in the event of change in the shoreline shall be construed as moving within the high water mark; boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other water bodies shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(f)  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections (a) through (e) above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on said zoning map. 
(g)  In cases where the actual location of physical features varies from those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections (a) through (f) above, the City Commission shall interpret the district boundaries. 
    104.6. Water areas . All areas within the City which are under water and not shown as included within any zoning district shall be subject to all the requirements of the district which immediately adjoins or abuts the water area. If the water area adjoins two or more districts, the boundaries of each district shall be construed to extend into the water area in a straight line as projected until they intersect a projected line from other district boundaries. 
    104.7 Vacations; built-up land . Whenever any street, alley or other right-of-way is vacated by official action of the City Commission, the use district and area regulations governing the property abutting upon each side of such street, alley or right-of-way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation and all area included within the vacation shall thereafter be subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended use districts. In all cases where land is built up by fill, reliction, or accretion, upon areas formerly under water, the use district and area regulations applying to the land immediately adjoining or upland of such built-up land shall be automatically extended thereto. 
(Ord. No. 16-04, § 1(Exh. A), 1-27-16) 
Sec. 105. - Comprehensive Plan. 
    105.1. Purpose . The City of Miramar Comprehensive Plan was adopted and amended pursuant to the requirements and authority of the Community Planning Act, F.S. Ch. 163, Part II, and all other applicable regulations. The purposes of the Plan are defined in F.S. Ch. 163 and the Plan. 
    105.2. Adoption of Comprehensive Plan . The City's Comprehensive Plan consists of the one volume book entitled Comprehensive Plan - Goals, Objectives and Policies To Guide Future Growth and Community Improvement, which includes nine (9) elements and four (4) sub-elements entitled Future Land Use Element, Transportation Element, Housing Element, Potable Water/Aquifer Recharge Sub-Element, Sanitary Sewer Sub-Element, Solid Waste Sub-Element, Stormwater Management Sub-Element, Conservation Element, Recreation and Open Space Element, Intergovernmental Coordination Element, Capital Improvements Element, and Public School Facilities Element. The Comprehensive Plan also includes an Introduction Section, a Statement of Legislative Intent, two (2) map exhibits, and an appendix consisting of maps. The Plan was initially adopted by Ordinance No. 89-31 (adopted May 15, 1989), with subsequent amendments. 
    105.3. Legal Status of the Plan . 
(a)  Generally . To the extent consistent with the Community Planning Act, the Comprehensive Plan shall be interpreted as setting forth general guidelines and principles for the growth and development of the city. Goals, policies, and objectives within the Comprehensive Plan are internally consistent, and any reading of the Comprehensive Plan to suggest an internal inconsistency shall be construed in such a manner so as to maintain the internal consistency of the Comprehensive Plan. 
(b)  Conflicts with other regulations . The Comprehensive Plan is cumulative and supplemental to existing City regulations for the development of land. Where the Comprehensive Plan conflicts with existing land development regulations, the Comprehensive Plan shall supersede existing land development regulations to the effect of the conflict until such existing land development regulations are amended to be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. The City Commission shall be the final determiner as to consistency. 
(c)  Development orders to be consistent with Comprehensive Plan . No development order shall be issued under the provisions of this Land Development Code, unless the development order is consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the Comprehensive Plan. 
    105.4 Amendments to the Comprehensive Plan. Amendments to the Plan shall be made in accordance with the procedures and standards of Florida law and this Code, as described in Section 401. 
(Ord. No. 16-04, § 1(Exh. A), 1-27-16) 
Sec. 106. - City Commission. 
    106.1. Powers and Duties . In addition to any authority granted to the City Commission ("Commission") by Florida law, the Charter of the City of Miramar, and the Code of Ordinances of the City of Miramar, the Commission shall have the powers and duties listed herein in regard to this Land Development Code. The Commission's authority shall include, but not be limited to, approval, approval with conditions or modifications or denial: 
(a)  To take such action deemed desirable and necessary to implement the provisions of this LDC and the Comprehensive Plan; and 
(b)  To hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, determination made by any administrative official or the DRC acting pursuant to this LDC, except where state, county, or City regulations or this Code specifically provide otherwise; and 
(c)  To consider all applications for development included in Table 1, pursuant to adopted procedures and take action as may be appropriate. 
Table 1 
COMMISSION ACTION APPLICATION TYPE ADOPT & 
AMEND APPROVE/ 
DENY ENTER 
INTO EXTEND HEAR & 
DETER- 
MINE RE- 
APPROVE Abandonment of Right-of-Way ? Appeal ? Community Appearance - New Construction ? Community Appearance - Renovation 1 ? Community Appearance - Telecommunication 1 ? Comprehensive (Land Use) Plan Map Amendment ? Comprehensive Plan Text Amendment ? Compliance Plan 2 ? Conditional Use ? ? ? Cure Plan ? Development Agreement ? Development of Regional Impact ? Extended Hours License (alcoholic beverages) ? Flexibility/Reserve Unit Allocation 3 ? Lake Excavation and Resource Extraction 4 ? ? ? Land Development Code Text Amendment ? Plat ? Plat Exemption 1 ? Plat Waiver ? Resolution Modification ? Rezoning ? Site Plan (Amendment) 1 ? ? ? Site Plan (Amendment) - Telecommunication 1 ? ? ? Site Plan - New Construction ? ? ? Temporary Use Permit 1 ? Traffic Ways Amendment ? Vacation of Easements ? Variance 5 ? ? ? Zoning Relief Request ? 1 in certain cases per adopted procedure 
2 for approval of funding 
3 coinciding with a conditional use or rezoning 
4 as a conditional use 
5 for all development and redevelopment, except for regulations pertaining to single family and duplex properties  
(Ord. No. 16-04, § 1(Exh. A), 1-27-16; Ord. No. 17-07, § 2, 11-14-16) 
Sec. 107. - Planning and Zoning Board. 
    107.1. Creation . The existing advisory planning and zoning board is hereby reconstituted as the Planning and Zoning Board ("Board"). 
    107.2. Powers and Duties . The planning and zoning board shall have the powers and duties listed herein and as further set forth in Table 2 in regard to this LDC. The planning and zoning board shall act as an advisory board to the city commission on the following matters, except for variances from setback requirements and regulations pertaining to single-family and duplex residences, in which case the planning and zoning board shall have final authority: 
(1)  To act as the local planning agency as provided in section F.S. § 163.3174; and 
(2)  To make recommendations to the city administration and city commission regarding revisions to the LDC and in regard to adoption and amendment of the official zoning map; and 
(3)  To review and make recommendations to the Commission on the following development approvals included in Table 2, pursuant to adopted procedures; and 
(4)  To review and approve variances from any LDC provisions affecting individual single-family and duplex residences. The Board's authority shall include, but not be limited to, approval, approval with conditions or modifications, or denial; and 
(5)  To review and make recommendations to the Commission on any other matter referred to it by the Commission. 
Table 2 
PLANNING AND ZONING 
BOARD ACTION 1 APPLICATION TYPE APPROVE/ 
DENY REVIEW AND 
RECOMMEND Comprehensive (Land Use) Plan Map Amendment ? Comprehensive Plan Text Amendment ? Conditional Use ? Development Agreement ? Development of Regional Impact ? Land Development Code Text Amendment ? Rezoning ? Variance (for single-family and duplex properties) ? Zoning Relief Request ? 1 pursuant to adopted procedures  
    107.3. Membership . The Board shall be composed of seven (7) members appointed by the Commission plus one nonvoting member appointed by the Broward County School Board. The procedure to appoint non-School Board members, qualifications for membership, terms of office, filling of vacancies, attendance, and provisions for legal counsel shall be as provided for in the City Code. The School Board shall determine the qualifications for membership, term of office, method for the filling of a vacancy, and attendance requirements for its appointed member. 
    107.4. Officers . Annually in June, or in the event no meeting is held in June at the next meeting thereafter at which a quorum of the Board is present, the Board shall elect a chairperson ("Chair") and vice-chairperson ("Vice-Chair") from among its members who are eligible to vote and may create and fill such other offices as necessary. Terms of all offices shall be for one year, or until their successors have been elected, whichever event shall be longer in duration, with eligibility for re-election. During their term of service as an officer of the Board, all officers shall at all times be required to be duly qualified members of the Board. 
    107.5. Meetings, Hearings and Procedures . 
107.5.1. Quorum . Except as provided in this section, no meeting of the Board shall be called to order, nor shall any business be transacted by the Board, without a quorum consisting of at least four members of the Board being present. The chair and vice-chair shall be considered and counted as a member. When a quorum does not exist, those members of the Board who are present may convene for the purposes of continuing a public hearing, holding a workshop, or scheduling a special meeting. 
107.5.2. Time of regular and special meetings . 
(a)  Regular meetings of the Board shall be held no less often than once every month. Special meetings may be called by the Chair of the Board, a majority of the members of the Board, a majority of the Commission, or the City Manager. 
(b)  In the event of a lack of business to be conducted or when it becomes apparent that there will be an inability to assemble a present quorum, the Chair of the Board, the Community & Economic Development Director, or the City Manager, may cancel a Board meeting. In the event that it becomes apparent that a quorum will not be obtained and that a Board meeting is cancelled, any item scheduled for consideration or advertised for a public hearing shall be automatically continued until the next meeting. If the Board meeting is not cancelled and the Board is unable to obtain a quorum, consideration of a matter scheduled for a hearing or discussion shall be postponed due to lack of a quorum, and the Chair of the Board shall continue consideration of the item scheduled for hearing or discussion until the next scheduled or special meeting thereafter. In the case of delays caused by other reasons, the meeting should be rescheduled to the next established Board meeting. The City Clerk shall notify all members of the date of the continued meeting. 
107.5.3. Public meetings . All meetings of the Board and its committees shall be public meetings, open to the public, and noticed to the public. All records of such meetings shall be public records. The Board shall have the power to develop rules of procedure, and in the absence of adopted rules, the Board shall use Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, most recent edition, as its rules of procedure. 
107.5.4. Vote . No action of the Board shall be valid, unless authorized by a majority vote of the membership voting. However, the School Board-appointed member shall have no vote and shall not be counted in determining the required majority. Board members present but abstaining from voting shall not be counted in determining the required majority. 
107.5.5. Records . The city administration shall keep minutes of all Board proceedings, showing evidence presented, the names of all witnesses giving testimony, any findings of fact by the Board, and the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or abstaining from voting, such fact. All of the foregoing records shall be public records, available for copying and inspection during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 16-04, § 1(Exh. A), 1-27-16; Ord. No. 17-07, § 3, 11-14-16) 
Sec. 108. - Development Review Committee. 
    108.1. Creation and Purpose . There is hereby established a Development Review Committee ("DRC") in order to facilitate communication and coordination between departments responsible for development review. 
    108.2. Powers and Duties . The DRC shall review and render recommendations on applications for development included in Table 3. 
Table 3 
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE ACTION 1 APPLICATION TYPE APPROVE/DENY REVIEW AND 
RECOMMEND Abandonment of Right-of-Way ? Compliance Plan ? Comprehensive (Land Use) Plan Map Amendment ? Comprehensive Plan Text Amendment ? Conditional Use ? Cure Plan ? Development Agreement ? Development of Regional Impact ? Engineering Roadway Plans ? Land Development Code Text Amendment ? Plat ? Plat Exemption 1 ? Plat Waiver ? Rezoning ? Site Plan ? Site Plan (Amendment) 1 ? Site Plan (Amendment) - Telecommunication 1 ? Traffic Ways Amendment ? Temporary Use Permit 1 ? Vacation of Easement ? Variance (except for homeowner) i.e. single-family and duplex properties ? 1 pursuant to adopted procedures; in some cases these applications may be subject to Commission approval  
    108.3. Membership . 
(a)  The DRC shall be composed of representatives from the Planning and Building Divisions of the Community and Economic Development Department; the Construction and Facilities Management Department; the Fire-Rescue Department; the Parks and Recreation Department; the Police Department; the Public Works Department; the Utilities Department; and the Director of the Community and Economic Development Department. The City Manager shall approve the designation of each department's representatives, excepting the Director of the Community and Economic Development Department. The City Manager may appoint other staff members to the DRC, as non-member advisers to the DRC to assist the DRC in carrying out its duties and responsibilities. DRC members shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager. 
(b)  The Community and Economic Development Director shall designate a staff member to serve as the chairperson and another individual to serve as vice-chairperson of the DRC to preside over its meetings. The Chair may request the participation, as adviser to the DRC and as a non-DRC Board member, of professional experts or legal counsel, as needed. The Chair may request the participation, as an adviser to the DRC and non-DRC Board member, of a representative from an adjacent municipality or from a county, regional or state agency, if it is determined that a proposed development would impact the adjacent municipality or county, or if the other agencies or professional experts can provide expertise concerning the proposed development. 
    108.4. Meetings and Procedures . 
108.4.1. Time of regular and special meetings . 
(a)  Regular meetings of the DRC shall be held according to a schedule as established from time to time by the Chair. Special meetings may be called by the Chair when the need arises. 
(b)  In the event of a lack of business to be conducted or when it becomes apparent that there will be an inability to assemble a majority of regular DRC members, the Chair of the DRC or the City Manager, may cancel a DRC meeting. In the event that it becomes apparent that a majority of members present will not be obtained and that a DRC meeting is cancelled, any item scheduled for consideration or advertised for a public hearing shall be automatically continued until the next meeting. If the DRC meeting is not cancelled and the DRC is unable to obtain a majority, consideration of a matter scheduled for a hearing or discussion shall be automatically postponed, and the Chair of the DRC shall continue consideration of the item scheduled for hearing or discussion until the next scheduled or special meeting thereafter. In the case of delays caused by other reasons, the meeting should be rescheduled to the next established DRC meeting. The DRC secretary shall notify all members of the date of the continued meeting. 
108.4.2. Records . The DRC shall make their recommendations in writing. The Chair shall prepare written summaries which include the date, members present and the recommendations of the committee. The Community and Economic Development Department shall keep minutes of all DRC proceedings. 
108.4.3. Public meetings . All meetings of the Board and its committees shall be public meetings, open to the public, and noticed to the public. The applicant and their representatives may be invited by the Chair. The DRC shall have the power to develop rules of procedure, and in the absence of adopted rules, the DRC shall use Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, most recent edition, as its rules of procedure. 
(Ord. No. 16-04, § 1(Exh. A), 1-27-16; Ord. No. 17-07, § 4, 11-14-16) 
Sec. 109. - Community Appearance Board. 
    109.1. Creation and Purpose . There is hereby established a Community Appearance Board ("CAB") in order to review development proposals from both an aesthetic and a technical perspective, to ensure compliance with the City's established design standards, and to coordinate with the simultaneous DRC review of proposed site plans. 
    109.2. Powers and Duties . The CAB shall conduct the review of and render recommendations on applications for the proposed development and redevelopment of all properties, including City properties, other than individual single-family homes and duplex units. 
    109.3. Membership . The CAB shall consist of at least one consulting architect. During the initial CAB meeting for a development proposal, the consulting architect shall be accompanied by a registered landscape architect and a member of the City's planning staff, who shall serve as the Chair. The appointed design professionals shall be: 
(1)  a consulting architect, licensed and registered in the State of Florida, to provide expertise in architectural design and construction; and 
(2)  a landscape architect, registered in the State of Florida, to provide expertise in the proposed landscaping and site design. Members of the CAB are appointed by and shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager. 
    The Community and Economic Development Director shall designate a staff member to serve as the chairperson of the CAB to preside over its meetings, document the proceedings and shall report findings to the City Manager. 
    The City's cost recovery ordinance shall be used to cover the consultant review expenses as needed. The CAB may call on the Community and Economic Development Director or any other city staff as necessary to complete its review. 
    109.4. Meetings and Procedure . 
109.4.1. Time of regular and special meetings . Meetings of the CAB shall be held upon need, subsequent to the submittal and resubmittal of development proposals in-line with the timeline of the site plan review for these projects. Special meetings may be called by the Chair when the need arises. Additional Board rules of procedure may be established by the Community and Economic Development Department and the contracted CAB consultant architects, once they are appointed. 
109.4.2. Records . The CAB shall make their recommendations in writing and plan markups. The Chair shall prepare written summaries which include the date, members present and the recommendations of the Board. The Community and Economic Development Department shall keep minutes of all CAB proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 16-04, § 1(Exh. A), 1-27-16) 
Chapter 2 - DEFINITIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-01, § 1(Exh. A), adopted November 1, 2017, repealed ch. 2, §§ 201 and 202 and enacted a new ch. 2 as set out herein. Former ch. 2 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 00-19, adopted January 19, 2000; Ord. No. 03-01, adopted October 2, 2002; Ord. No. 01-36, adopted June 20, 2001; Ord. No. 03-15, adopted May 21, 2003; Ord. No. 07-04, adopted November 29, 2006; Ord. No. 07-07, adopted November 29, 2006; Ord. No. 11-10, adopted September 21, 2011; Ord. No. 13-15, adopted August 21, 2013; Ord. No. 14-11, adopted February 5, 2014; Ord. No. 15-05, adopted November 24, 2014; and Ord. No. 17-07, adopted November 14, 2016. 

Sec. 201. - General terms. 
    Accessory building or structure means a separate, subordinate building or structure devoted to an accessory use on the same plot with a building which is occupied by, or devoted to a principal use. A barn located in the rural zoning district may exceed the area of the principal structure. 
    Accessory dwelling units (ADU) means a dwelling unit attached or detached from the principal single-family dwelling unit and shall be considered an accessory use to such dwelling unit. 
    Accessory use means a use that is subordinate to and serves a principal use; is subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principal use; and is located on the same lot or lots under the same ownership and in the same land use district as the principal use. 
    Accident potential hazard area or airport hazard space means an area within 5,000 feet of the approach or departure end of a runway or in proximity to an airport in which aircraft may maneuver after takeoff or before landing and are subject to the greatest potential to crash into a structure or the ground. 
    Acquiring authority means the governmental entity proposing to acquire private property for public transportation or other public purposes pursuant to eminent domain proceedings or pursuant to negotiation in lieu of or under threat of the power of eminent domain. Acquiring authorities include, but are not limited to, the city, the county, the FDOT or other condemning authority. 
    Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is new construction. 
    Adult congregate living facility (ACLF) means any housing facility as follows: 
(A)  Any housing facility licensed by the State of Florida for more than eight unrelated elderly individuals; or 
(B)  Any not-for-profit housing facility for unrelated elderly individuals; or 
(C)  Any housing facility which provides a life-care environment. A life-care environment shall include, but is not limited to, creation of a life estate in the facility itself and provision of on-site or off-site medical care. 
    Adult entertainment establishment or regulated use. 
(1)  An adult theater, adult bookstore/adult novelty store/adult video store, adult motel, adult domination and submission parlor, adult dancing establishment, nude entertainment establishment; or other establishment or business operated for commercial gain where an employee, operator, or owner exposes his or her specified anatomical area for viewing by patrons, including but not limited to massage establishments, whether or not licensed pursuant to F.S. Ch. 480, tanning salons, modeling studios, or lingerie studios. 
(2)  Excluded from this definition are educational institutions and schools, as defined in section 11-133 of the City Code, where the exposure of specified anatomical areas is associated with a curriculum or program. 
(3)  An establishment that possesses an adult entertainment license, as provided in section 11-139 of the City Code, is presumed to be an adult entertainment establishment. 
    Adversely affected person means an individual requesting a development permit or decision; any person having a legally recognizable interest in the development permit, which interest is directly and adversely affected by a decision, and which interest is different than the interest of the community as a whole; or any person having a definite interest exceeding the general interest in the community good shared in common with all citizens. Factors to be considered in determining the sufficiency of a person's interest include, but shall not be limited to: (i) proximity of the person's property to the property at issue in the decision; (ii) character of the neighborhood including the existence of common restrictive covenants and set-back requirements that directly relate to the property at issue in the decision; and (iii) the fact that the person is among those entitled to receive notice of the decision-making proceeding resulting in the decision appealed from. 
    Airport means any area of land, or any manmade object or facility located thereon, which is used, or intended for use, for the landing and takeoff of aircraft and any appurtenant areas which are used, or intended for use, for airport buildings or other airport facilities or rights-of-way, together with all airport buildings and facilities located on that area. 
    Airport elevation means the highest point of an airport's usable landing area measured in feet above mean sea level. 
    Airport obstruction means any structure, object of natural growth, existing condition or use of land which would exceed the Federal obstruction standards as contained in 14 CFR Sections 77.21, 77.23, 77.25 and 77.28 as may be amended from time to time, or which obstruct the airspace required for flight of aircraft in landing and take-off at an airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or take-off of aircraft. 
    Airspace height means the height limits determined in all zoning districts in accordance with section 705 of this Code, which shall be fixed by reference to mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified. 
    Alcoholic beverage. A beverage containing more than one percent of alcohol by weight, including but not limited to, beer and wine. 
(1)  It shall be prima facie evidence that a beverage is an alcoholic beverage if proof exists that: 
a.  The beverage in question was or is known as whiskey, moonshine whiskey, shine, rum, gin, tequila, vodka, scotch, scotch whiskey, brandy, beer, malt liquor, or by other similar name or names; or 
b.  The beverage was or is contained in a bottle or can labeled as any of the above names, or a name similar thereto, and the bottle or can bears the manufacturer's insignia, name, or trademark. 
(2)  A person who, by experience in the handling of alcoholic beverages, or who by taste, smell, or drinking of such alcoholic beverages has knowledge of the alcoholic nature thereof, may testify as to his or her opinion about whether such beverage is an alcoholic beverage. 
    Alcoholic beverage sales A.P.S. beer and wine means the sale of alcoholic beverages, specifically limited to beer and or wine, by an establishment licensed by the Florida Division of Alcoholic Beverages and Tobacco as an Alcoholic Package Store (A.P.S.) for consumption off the premises of the establishment selling the alcoholic beverages. 
    Alcoholic beverage sales A.P.S. beer, wine and liquor means the sale of alcoholic beverages, which may include beer, wine and or liquor, by an establishment licensed by the Florida Division of Alcoholic Beverages and Tobacco as an Alcoholic Package Store (A.P.S.) for consumption off the premises of the establishment selling the alcoholic beverages. 
    Alcoholic beverage sales C.O.P. beer and wine means the sale of alcoholic beverages, specifically limited to beer and or wine, by an establishment licensed by the Florida Division of Alcoholic Beverages and Tobacco for consumption on the premises (C.O.P.) of the establishment selling the alcoholic beverages. 
    Alcoholic beverage sales C.O.P. beer, wine and liquor means the sale of alcoholic beverages, which may include beer, wine and or liquor, by an establishment licensed by the Florida Division of Alcoholic Beverages and Tobacco for consumption on the premises (C.O.P.) of the establishment selling the alcoholic beverages. 
    Alternative tower structure means a design mounting structure that camouflages or conceals the presence of an antenna or telecommunications tower, for example, flag poles, manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles, utility poles and similar alternative designs. An antenna mounted on a utility pole shall be subject to all requirements as stated in the ordinance from which this section is derived. See also "stealth facility or tower." 
    Amusement business means a building, group of buildings, structures, or outdoor facilities used for recreational purposes and includes the use of coin operated or digital currency interactive entertainment machines. 
    Animal means a living organism other than a plant or bacterium, including fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals other than human beings; every living nonhuman creature. 
    Animal, small (domesticated) mean an animal no larger than the largest breed of domesticated dogs. This term includes fish, birds, and mammals customarily kept as domestic pets within a dwelling unit. 
    Antenna means a transmitting and/or receiving device mounted on a tower, building or structure and used in telecommunications (personal wireless) services that radiates or captures electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies, wireless communications signals and other communications signals, including directional antennas such as panel and microwave dish antennas, and omni-directional antennas such as whips, but excluding radar antennas, amateur radio antennas and satellite earth signals. 
    Antenna dish (dish antenna, satellite dish) means an antenna with a concave shape used for the reception and/or transmission of radio signals to and from satellites. 
    Antenna tower means a structure used to support an antenna at some height above the ground. 
    Application for development approval means mean a written request for approval of a proposed use and for issuance of a development order, including but not limited to applications for approval of permitted uses, plats, conditional uses, rezonings, site plans and variances, etc. 
    Array means a group of antennas that are either (i) mounted or side mounted on the rooftop of a building or rooftop structure(s); or (ii) directly or indirectly mounted on a telecommunications tower. 
    Arterial road means a route providing service which is relatively continuous and of relatively high traffic volume, long average trip length, high operating speed, and high mobility importance. Arterial roads shall generally be those roads which provide access from collector roads, non-residential driveways or limited access highways. A street having that meaning given in F.S. § 334.03(15) as may be amended from time to time. Arterial roads within Broward County are identified on the Broward County Trafficways Plan. 
    Attached commercial means a building with a common roof that houses more than one tenant. 
    Attached residential means a building with a common roof that houses more than one dwelling unit. 
    Attached residential lot means a fee simple ownership lot for the purpose of an attached dwelling unit. These housing unit product types may include, but are not limited to, fee simple duplex and townhouse units. 
    Attached residential - minimum lot area per unit means the minimum required lot area of any attached residential lot within a development parcel. 
    Attached residential - multifamily means a group of two or more dwelling units which are attached by one or more bearing walls. These housing unit product types include garden apartments, townhouse units and may include other attached units. 
    Attached telecommunications facility means any telecommunications facility that is attached to an existing building or structure that is not itself a telecommunications tower or an antenna. 
    Backhaul network means the lines that connect a telecommunication service provider's towers/cell sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or long distance providers, or the public switched telephone network. 
    Bars, lounges or nightclubs means a commercial establishment whose primary business is the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises and where under fifty percent (50%) of gross receipts are related to food service. Bottle clubs as defined by Florida Statutes shall also be included. Unless a use otherwise meeting the definition of a bar, lounge, or nightclub can prove that fifty percent (50%) or more of its gross revenues are from food service by opening its books and accounts to the City, it shall be presumed that the facility is a bar, lounge, or nightclub. 
    Beer Garden means a garden, typically one attached to a bar or tavern, where beer is served; is an outdoor area in which beer and local food are served, typically at shared tables. 
    Block face means all development on the same side of the block as the subject development from cross-street to cross-street, but does not include development across any street from the subject development. 
    Body Art Studio means any establishment where tattooing, permanent make-up and/or body piercing (other than ear piercing) takes place. 
    Breast height means a height of four and one-half feet above the natural grade. 
    Brewery means a building or establishment where malt beverages or beer, as described in chapter 563, Florida Statutes, are produced. 
    Brewpub means a combination brewery and restaurant; beer is brewed for consumption on the premises and served along with food. 
    Broadcasting facility means any telecommunication tower built primarily for the purpose of broadcasting AM, FM, satellite or television signals. 
    Bufferyard means an area of landscaping and open space around the perimeter of a development parcel, or an area adjacent to a parking lot which is used to screen differing land uses from each other. In some instances bufferyards may also be used to satisfy minimum yard requirements. 
    Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof, and used or built for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. This definition shall include tents, awnings or vehicles situated on private property and serving in any way the function of a building. 
    Building Code means the Florida Building Code, Broward County Edition. 
    Bulk regulations means those regulations set forth in Table 801-1 of this Code, including provisions regarding building height, minimum yards and parcel size. 
    Canal means a body of water having a width of 100 feet or less for linear areas in excess of 200 feet in length and used principally for the conveyance of water. 
    Canopy coverage means the areal extent of ground within the drip line of the tree. 
    Capacity means the capability of a facility to serve the needs of a user such as the number of vehicles a road can safely and sufficiently carry. 
    Capital improvements means the planning of, engineering for, acquisition of land or equipment, and the construction of improvements and facilities with a useful life of at least three years, but does not include routine maintenance. 
    Carport means a structure intended for vehicle storage not completely enclosed by walls. 
    Cat means an animal of the felidae family of the order carnivorz. 
    Certificate of completion means a certificate of completion is issued by the city's building official and is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
    Certificate of occupancy means a certification issued by the city's building official that the building or structure may be used or occupied for habitable and other purposes and that the building or structure meets the requirements of the Florida Building Code, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made, until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. 
    Child care center means an enterprise involving the care of five or more children at one and the same time, either by day or night, which children are not foster children or related by blood or marriage to the operator. 
    Church means any church, denominational or ecclesiastical organization having an established place for worship in the city at which nonprofit religious services and activities are regularly conducted. 
    Citizen with standing means anyone having a legally recognizable interest in the comprehensive plan or LDC amendment, which interest is directly affected by the comprehensive plan or LDC amendment, and which interest is different than the interest of the community as a whole; or any person having a definite interest exceeding the general interest in the community good shared in common with all citizens. Factors to be considered in determining the sufficiency of a person's interest include, but shall not be limited to: (i) proximity of the person's property to the property subject to a comprehensive plan or LDC amendment; (ii) character of the neighborhood including the existence of common restrictive covenants and set-back requirements that directly relate to the interpretative opinion; and (iii) the fact that the person is among those entitled to receive written notice (other than by newspaper or other legal advertisement) of a comprehensive plan or LDC amendment. 
    City means the City of Miramar. 
    City-licensed businesses means those businesses that were granted both a valid Zoning Certificate of Use (ZCU) and Business Tax Receipt (BTR) issued by the city. 
    City manager means the chief executive officer of the city as defined by the city code who shall have such duties as are legally prescribed. 
    CO means a certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy includes a certificate of occupancy or a certificate of completion, all as defined or described in the Florida Building code, or a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
    Code means this LDC as may be amended from time to time. 
    Collector road means a route providing service which is of relatively moderate average traffic volume, moderately average trip length and moderately average operating speed. Such a route also collects and distributes traffic between local roads or arterial roads and serves as a linkage between land access and mobility needs. 
    Co-location means use of a common telecommunications tower or site by two or more service providers. An application is for co-location if the service provider intends to install an array on an existing telecommunications tower or at the same site as an existing attached telecommunications facility. 
    Commercial center means a cohesive commercial development, designed for multiple occupancies. 
    Commercial recreation means a business use, or zoning district whose primary purpose is recreational activities of a spectator or participant type. Commercial recreation provides for major public or private commercial recreational, civic and cultural facilities which offer recreational opportunities to the residents and tourists. Commercial recreation uses include sports arenas, racetracks, theme parks, amusement parks, golf courses, movie theaters, bowling centers, health clubs, skating and roller rinks, pool and billiard halls, penny arcades, indoor batting cages, rock climbing, indoor play areas, sports fields, recreation centers, indoor swimming pools, tennis courts, arcades, paintball and laser tag. 
    Commercial use means any use whose primary purpose is retail sales or professional offices and services and that is not considered a heavy commercial use. Commercial uses may include office but not be limited to: financial institutions; medical facilities; personal services; restaurants; entertainment uses; small appliance repair; printing; studios and galleries; instructional businesses; and recreational uses such as movie theaters, bowling centers, health clubs, pool halls, or video arcades. Uses permitted in this category shall be consistent with the City of Miramar Comprehensive Plan, Land Use Element, Commercial Policies. 
    Commission means the City Commission of the City of Miramar. 
    Common area means a room or designated area within a building or complex of buildings zoned for residential use served by shared or public parking areas, which is reserved for the exclusive use of the residents of the building or complex and their invited guests, and is an accessory use to the primarily residential use of such buildings. 
    Community and economic development director means the director of the community and economic development department as appointed by the city manager. 
    Compatible means a condition in which land uses or conditions can coexist in relative proximity to each other in a stable fashion over time such that no use or condition is unduly negatively impacted directly or indirectly by another use or condition. 
    Compatibility See "Compatible." 
    Comprehensive plan or plan means the city's comprehensive plan as adopted by Ordinance No. 89-31 and as may be amended from time to time. Conditional use means which may be allowed under certain circumstances in a particular zoning district after review and approval by the city commission. 
    Condominium means the form of real estate ownership defined by the Florida Condominium Act, Chapter 718, Florida Statutes, as amended from time to time. 
    Consistent means a development order or land development regulation is consistent with the comprehensive plan, if the land uses, densities or intensities, and other aspects of development permitted by such order or regulation are compatible with and further the objectives, policies, land uses, and densities or intensities in the comprehensive plan, and if it meets all other criteria enumerated by the city. A development approved or undertaken by the city shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan if the land uses, densities or intensities, capacity or size, timing, and other aspects of the development are compatible with and further the objectives, policies, land uses, and densities or intensities in the comprehensive plan and if it meets all other criteria enumerated by the local government. 
    Constrained facility means a road segment which is not planned for a capacity improvement in the Broward County Metropolitan Planning Organization's (MPO) adopted long range transportation plan. 
    Covered patio means an area, usually paved and with a roof attached to a house that may be used as an area for outdoor recreation. 
    Cure means a variance granted pursuant to this ordinance, which authorizes the continued use and enjoyment of private property, as a lawful use, subsequent to the creation of a nonconformity by an acquiring authority. 
    Day care center means a child care center. 
    Decision height means the height at which a decision must be made, during an instrument landing system (ILS) instrument approach, to either continue the approach or to execute a missed approach. 
    Density or gross density means the number of dwelling units or rooms allocated to the project divided by the total project acreage. "Net density" means the number of residential dwelling units divided by the net parcel area. 
    Department means the city's community & economic development department. 
    Detached residential means an individual residential dwelling that is not attached to another dwelling unit. 
    Detached residential - minimum lot area per unit means the minimum required lot area of any detached residential lot within a development parcel. 
    Detoxification center means a place where people go to receive substance abuse treatment. 
    Developer means any person, corporation, partnership or a governmental agency, undertaking any development as defined in this Code. 
    Development means the carrying out of any building activity or mining operation, the making of any material change in the use or appearance of any structure or land, or the dividing of land into parcels. The following activities or uses shall be taken for the purposes of this Code to involve development: 
(a)  A reconstruction, alteration of or material change in the extent or appearance of a structure on land. 
(b)  A change in the intensity of use of land, such as an increase in the number of dwelling units in a structure or on land, or an increase in the number of businesses, manufacturing establishments, or offices. 
(c)  Alteration of a shore or bank of a lake, pond, or canal, including any "coastal construction" as defined in § 161.021, Fla. Stat. 
(d)  Commencement of drilling, mining, or excavation on a parcel of land, except to obtain soil samples. 
(e)  Demolition of a structure. 
(f)  Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction. 
(g)  Deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste, or fill on a parcel of land. 
The following operations or uses shall not be construed for the purpose of this Code to involve "development": 
(a)  Work by a highway or road agency or railroad company for the maintenance of a road or railroad track, if the work is carried out on land within the boundaries of the right-of-way. 
(b)  Work by any utility and other persons engaged in the distribution or transmission of gas or water, for the purpose of inspecting, repairing, renewing, or constructing on established rights-of-way any sewers, mains, pipes, cables, utility tunnels, powerlines, towers, poles, tracks, or the like. 
(c)  Work for the maintenance, renewal, or alteration of any structure, if the work affects only the interior or the color of the structure or the decoration of the exterior of the structure. 
(d)  The use of any structure or land devoted to dwelling uses for any purposes customarily incidental to enjoyment of the dwelling. 
(e)  A change in the ownership or form of ownership of any parcel or structure. 
(f)  The creation or termination of rights of access, riparian rights, easements, covenants concerning development of land, or other rights in land. 
(g)  The use of any land for the purpose of growing plants, crops, trees, and other agriculture or forestry products; raising livestock; or for other agricultural purposes. 
(h)  A change in use of a structure from a use within a zoning district to another use in the same zoning district. 
"Development" includes all other development customarily associated with it unless otherwise specified. When appropriate to the context, "development" refers to the act of development or to the result of development. Reference to any specific operation is not intended to mean that the operation or activity when part of other operations or activities, is not development. Reference to particular operations is not intended to limit the generality of this definition. 
    Development agreement means an agreement between a property owner and the city pursuant to the "Florida Local Government Development Agreement Act" pursuant to sections 163.3220-163.3243, Florida Statutes. A developer, if other than the property owner of the parcel of land subject to the agreement, may also be required by the city to execute the agreement, and the holders of all security interests in privately owner portion of the parcel of land subject to the development agreement must also join in and consent to the agreement. 
    Development approval means any building permit, site plan approval, conditional use approval, temporary use permit, subdivision approval, change of land use district boundary, plan amendment, or any other official action to deny or grant with conditions by any official, commission, or board of the city having the effect of permitting development. 
    Development order means any order granting, denying, or granting with conditions an application for a development permit. 
    Development parcel means a parcel of land and water used for residential or non-residential structures, accessory structures, utilities, rights-of-way, easements, agriculture, open space and other public or private uses. 
    Development permit means any building permit, zoning permit, subdivision approval, rezoning, certification, special exception, variance, or any other official action of the city or Broward County having the effect of permitting the development of land. 
    Diameter breast height (DBH) means the diameter of the trunk of a tree measured at breast height. The DBH of trees with multiple trunks shall be the sum of the individual trunk diameters at breast height. Trees with less than four and one-half feet of clear trunk shall be measured as the diameter of the largest vertical branch or leader at breast height. 
    Director . See "community and economic development director." 
    Dish antenna. See "antenna dish." 
    Dispense or dispensing means the transfer of possession of one or more doses of a controlled substance identified in schedule II, III, or IV in ss. 893.03, 893.035, or 893.0355, Florida Statutes, as may be amended from time to time, by a pharmacist, health care practitioner or any other person to the ultimate consumer thereof or to one who represents that it is his or her intention not to consume or use the same but to transfer the same to the ultimate consumer or user for consumption by the ultimate consumer or user. 
    Distributed antenna system, or DAS, is a network of spatially separated antenna nodes connected to a common source via a transport medium that provides wireless service within a geographic area or structure. DAS antenna elevations are generally at or below the clutter level and node installations are compact. 
    Divided roadway means a street where the opposing directional lanes of traffic are separated by a median or center turn lane. 
    Dog means an animal of the canidae family of the order carnivora. 
    Dog grooming means a hygienic care and cleaning of a dog; a process by which a dog's physical appearance is enhanced. 
    Drip line means the peripheral limits of the horizontal crown of a tree spread vertically to the ground, provided, however, that the same shall not be less than a circle with a five-foot radius measured from the center of the tree. 
    Drive-thru means a facility designed to accommodate pickup of food, merchandise or services by a motor vehicle momentarily at rest in a driveway expressly designed for that purpose. 
    Drugstore means a retail establishment which provides for the dispensing and sale of pharmaceutical drugs, and which may offer various retail items and accessory services such as photo processing, eyeglass care, etc., but in which no more than 30 percent of the gross floor area of the establishment is utilized for prescription drug storage, dispensing or prescription drug-related customer service area. 
    Duplex unit means two (2) dwelling units connected by a one-hour or greater fire-resistive wall. 
    Dwelling unit means a house, apartment, or condominium unit, trailer, group of rooms, or a single room intended for occupancy as separate living quarter with direct access from the outside of the building or through a common hall and with complete kitchen facilities for the exclusive use of the occupants, including rental units contained in a multi-unit structure or complex which are licensed by the state department of business regulation, division of hotels and restaurants, as "apartments", "rental condominiums" and "retirement housing." 
    Emergency means any occurrence or threat thereof whether accidental or natural, caused by man, in war or peace, which results or may result in substantial injury or harm to the population or substantial damage to or loss of property or public funds as declared by the chief administrator. 
    Employment center means a zoning district or land use district whose primary purpose is to permit non-residential development, compatible with residential and other less intensive land uses. Uses permitted in this category must be consistent with the comprehensive plan future land use element, employment center policies, or regional activity center policies. 
    Engineering construction permit means a permit issued by the public works/utilities department prior to the construction of any public improvements on public or private property. 
    Equipment facility means a room, cabinet, shelter, pedestal, build-out of an existing structure, building, or similar structure used to house ancillary equipment for a telecommunications tower or antenna. Each such cabinet, shelter, or building shall be considered a separate equipment facility. 
    Essential service means those services provided by the city and other governmental entities that directly relate to the health and safety of its residents, including fire, police and rescue. 
    Excavations with blasting means the taking of natural materials or deposits from their natural state and location aided by the use of explosive materials or other techniques designed to fracture rock by vibration or compression. Excavation with blasting shall not mean the taking of natural materials or deposits from their natural state and location by the use of digging or scraping machinery. 
    Exception means a grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance pursuant to the conditional uses of the Miramar Land Development Code, Section 503. 
    Exceptional hardship means a burden on a property owner that substantially differs in kind or magnitude from the burden imposed on other similarly-situated property owners in the same land use district as a result of adoption of these regulations. 
    Extraordinary conditions means subsequent to a hurricane, flood, or other natural hazard or subsequent to a defective finding on a previous inspection. 
    FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
    FBC means the Florida Building Code. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    FDOT means the Florida Department of Transportation or successor entity. 
    Fire Code means the Florida Building Code and other codes adopted by the City of Miramar. 
    Floor area means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of each story of the principal building, measured from the exterior walls or from the centerline of party walls, including the floor area of accessory uses and of accessory buildings and structures. 
    FP&L means Florida Power and Light Company, a Florida corporation. 
    FP&L main power transmission easement means any FP&L power line transmission easement exceeding 200 feet in width. 
    Freestanding commercial means a structure used for commercial uses which does not share common walls or a roof with another building. 
    Front facade area means the area of a structure's or business's front surface area for the purpose of calculating permitted wall and graphic sign area. It is shall be calculated by multiplying the height to roof deck, or first floor ceiling of multi-story structures, by the length of the structure's or business's front facade. The facade area shall include doors and windows. The facade area shall not include canopies, overhang areas or other architectural embellishments. 
    Front street means at street corners, or in other situations where a lot abuts more than one street, the front street shall be the street upon which the lot has the least frontage and upon which the lot address is based. 
    Functional integrity means the completeness and natural stability of an assemblage of native plants and animals as indicated by measures of continuity, species diversity, species interdependence and biomass. 
    Gas pipeline easement means the gas pipeline easement running parallel to the FP&L main power line transmission easement. 
    Golf course means a nine or eighteen hole golf course, and driving ranges. Club facilities such as locker rooms, restaurants and lounges, pro shops, and other complementary uses are considered part of a golf course. 
    Governmental agency means: 
(a)  The United States of America, or any department, commission, agency, or other instrumentality thereof; 
(b)  The State of Florida or any department, commission, agency, or other instrumentality thereof; 
(c)  Any local government, including but not limited to the city or Broward County, or any department, commission, agency, or other instrumentality thereof; or 
(d)  Any school board or other special district, authority, or governmental entity. 
    Grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, measured from the crown or curb of the nearest road, whichever is higher. 
    Gross acre or gross area means the total area of a parcel including land and water. 
    Group home. See "Special residential facility - Category 1." 
    Guest house means a small, separate house on the same parcel as the primary residence, used for accommodating guests; means an attached or detached building used to house guests of the occupants of the main building, which is not rented or leased independently from the main building. Guest quarters are defined as having space for a room or sleeping room, a separate kitchen, and a bathroom with shower/tub, toilet and sink, which does not provide ingress or egress internally through the main residence. 
    Guyed tower means telecommunication towers that are supported, in whole or in part, by guy wires and ground anchors. 
    Hazardous materials shall have the same meaning as that found in the Florida Building Code. 
    Heavy commercial use means commercial uses which tend to be nuisance generating based on noise, odor or other impacts to adjacent uses. Heavy commercial uses include but are not limited to automotive services, automotive sales, building materials yards and other businesses where the principle use takes place outside of an enclosed building or where equipment or materials used in the business are stored outside of an enclosed building. Heavy commercial use also includes the refinishing, repair and/or rebuilding of vehicles or boats. Heavy commercial uses do not include retail sales of nursery plants and supplies which are stored in a screened area and are an accessory use to the commercial use's main business. 
    Height means the height of a building with a gabled or hip roof which is the vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the finished building grade to the top of the roof of the uppermost story. The height of a building with a flat or nearly flat roof shall be measured from the footing as stated in this definition to the highest point of the roof (but the parapet or coping shall not be used). 
    Historical tree means a particular tree or group of trees which has historical value because of its unique relationship to the history of the city or region. 
    Home occupation means a business or occupation conducted for limited business activities. It is designed for and operated as a business location in a dwelling unit, and carried on by persons residing in the dwelling unit involving only use clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes. Home occupation shall preclude any business operation which requires or permits customers or patrons to visit the dwelling unit. 
    Hookah Bar/Lounge means a commercial establishment that has water pipes (also known as a hookah, shisha, boory, argileh, nargile, hubble-bubble, goza, meassel, sheesha) for people to share pipefuls of either tobacco or an herb or a dried fruit or a combination of those which is burnt using coal and becomes smoke, then passes through an ornate water vessel and is inhaled through a hose. 
    Hotel means a building or part thereof in which rental sleeping units are offered to the public and which maintains an inner lobby through which the occupants must pass to gain access and catering to transient occupancy. 
    Indoor Commercial Recreation means an establishment that provides amusement, entertainment, or physical fitness services that typically occur indoors for a fee or admission charge. 
    Industrial use means a use devoted to the manufacture, warehousing, assembly, packaging, processing, fabrication, storage or distribution of goods and materials whether new or used. Industrial uses may involve the outside storage of materials, equipment or work areas. 
    Institutional-residential use means a place of permanent or temporary residence where unrelated persons reside in a commercial setting with centralized eating, recreational and health care facilities, such as group homes, adult congregate living facilities, convents, foster care facilities, hospitals, nursing or convalescent homes and life care/elderly housing. 
    Institutional use means a use that serves the recreational, religious, educational, civic, cultural or health needs of the community. 
    Intensity means an objective measurement of the extent to which land may be developed or used, including the consumption or use of the space above, on, or below ground; the measurement of the use of or demand on natural resources; and the measurement of the use of or demand on facilities and services. 
    Interference means the impairment of transmission or reception of any desired communications or radio frequencies within the city. This term embraces electrical interference in all of its forms, including, without limitation, co-channel interference, interference from intermodulation products, and blanketing inference. 
    Land means the earth, at or below the surface, that lies above mean high water for freshwater bodies. 
    Land development regulations means ordinances enacted by the city commission for the regulation of any aspect of development and includes any city zoning, rezoning, subdivision, building construction, or sign regulations or any other regulations controlling the development of land. 
    Land use means: 
(a)  The development that has occurred on land; or 
(b)  The development that is proposed on land; or 
    a use that is permitted or permissible on the land under the plan, or element or portion thereof, or land development regulations. 
    Land use plan means the city's comprehensive plan. 
    Lattice tower means a telecommunications tower that is constructed to be self-supporting by lattice type supports and without the use of guy wire or other supports. 
    LDC means the city's adopted land development code. 
    Light industrial use means an industrial use for the manufacture, fabricating, processing, converting, warehousing, distribution, wholesaling, altering and assembling of products, repairing, packaging or treatment of goods, the nature of which is that it will not cause or result in; dissemination of dust, smoke, noxious gas, fumes, odor, noise, vibration, or excessive light beyond the boundaries of the lot on which the use is conducted; menace by reason of fire, explosion, or other physical hazards; harmful discharge of waste materials including hazardous wastes; or unusual traffic hazards or congestion due to type or amount of vehicles required by or attracted to the use. All permissible activities and storage areas shall be conducted in a completely enclosed structure. 
    Local planning agency means the city's planning and zoning board. 
    Local road means a road designated and maintained primarily to provide access to abutting residential property. A local road or street is of limited continuity and is not intended for through traffic. A local road or street is not considered as part of the major road network system. 
    Local street. See "local road." 
    Lot means a portion of a parcel of land which has been subdivided and recorded in the Public Records of Broward County for residential purposes and is occupied or intended for occupancy by an individual use including the main structures together with accessory structures, yards, open spaces, and parking spaces. A lot has an assigned number, letter or other name through which it may be identified. 
    Lot area means the area enclosed by the exterior boundary lines of the lot. No portion of a public or private vehicular right-of-way adjacent to a lot shall be calculated as part of a lot's area. Utility easements within a lot shall not be deducted from the lot area. Lot area shall exclude all water bodies below the control water elevation within the lot boundaries. 
    Lot of record means either a lot or contiguous lots which exist, under single ownership at time of adoption of this Code, and which are part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the Public Records of Broward County; or any parcel of land not part of a subdivision, that has been officially recorded by deed in the Public Records of Broward County; provided that the deed for the lot or parcel was recorded prior to the effective date of zoning in the area where the lot is located. 
    LPA means the city's Local Planning Agency as described in Section 107 of the LDC, which is the agency designated to prepare the comprehensive plan or plan amendments required by this act. 
    Major street means any street or road with a right-of-way greater than or equal to 60 feet. See also arterial road and collector road. 
    Manmade water body means a water body that was created by excavation under human control and shall include a canal, boat basin or channel where its edges or margins have subsequently been modified by natural forces. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. 
    Marijuana means any strain of cannabis or marijuana, in any form, that is authorized by state law to be dispensed or sold in the state of Florida. Also referred to as "Medical Marijuana." 
    Master zoning plan means a master zoning plan submitted and approved according to the requirements of this Code. 
    Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. The purposes of this Land Development Code, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
    Medical Marijuana Retail Center means a retail establishment, licensed by the Florida Department of Health as a "medical marijuana treatment facility," "medical marijuana treatment center," "dispensing organization," "dispensing organization facility" or similar use, that sells and dispenses medical marijuana. 
    Medical office or clinic means an establishment where patients, who are not lodged overnight except for observation or emergency treatment, are admitted for examination and treatment by a person or group of persons practicing any form of healing or health-building services to individuals, whether such persons be medical doctors, chiropractors, osteopaths, chiropodists, naturopaths, optometrists, dentists, surgeons, acupuncturists, podiatrist, psychiatrists, or any such profession, the practice of which is lawful in the State of Florida. Pharmacies, as defined in this section, are not medical offices or clinics. 
    Micro units or micro unit apartments means studio apartments that range between 350 and 500 square feet and include a fully functioning kitchen and accessible bathroom within the space. 
    Microwave dish antenna means a dish-like antenna used to link telecommunications sites together by wireless transmission and/or receipt of voice or data. 
    Minimum descent altitude means the lowest altitude expressed in feet above mean sea level, to which descent is authorized on final approach or during circling-to-land maneuvering in execution of a standard instrument approach procedure where no electronic glide slope is provided. 
    Minimum enroute altitude means the altitude in effect between radio fixes which assures acceptable navigational signal coverage and meets obstruction clearance requirements between those fixes. 
    Minimum obstruction clearance altitude means the specific altitude in effect between radio fixes on VOR (visual omni range navigational facility) airways, off-airway routes, or route segments which meets obstruction clearance requirements for the entire route segment and which assures acceptable navigational signal coverage only within 22 miles of a VOR. 
    Mining or quarrying means the taking, by any process, of natural materials or deposits from their natural state and location offsite. Mined or quarried materials may include rock, stone, minerals, shells, sand, marl, muck and soil, but shall not include horticultural or agricultural products. Mining and quarrying shall not include earth modification incidental to construction of city improvements or construction of water, sewer, paving, grading and drainage improvements associated with land development activities where title to such improvements is to be transferred to the city and shall not be construed to allow blasting. 
    Minor street means any street or road with a right-of-way less than sixty (60) feet. See also "local road." 
    Mobile home means a vehicular unit that is built on a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis, and is primarily designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use. 
    Monopole tower means a telecommunications tower consisting of a single freestanding pole or spire self-supported on a permanent foundation, constructed without guy wire, ground anchors, or other supports. 
    Municipal facilities means facilities provided by the city to serve the residents of the city. These facilities may include police and fire department stations; municipal utilities including but not limited to water and wastewater plants, pumping facilities, and disposal facilities; municipal offices; city parks; civic and cultural buildings or any other uses which the city commission finds serve the residents of the city. 
    Natural forest community means all native stands of trees equal to or greater than two acres in size, including their associated understory. 
    Neighborhood support business means uses permitted in the Neighborhood Business (B1) zoning district. Uses that require conditional use approval within a B1 zoning district will not be considered neighborhood support businesses. 
    Net parcel area means the total area of a development parcel less water bodies below the control water elevation (excluding wetlands), rights-of-way, land dedicated or reserved for public parks (excluding tot lots and private recreation areas), the FP&L main power transmission easement and the gas pipeline easement. 
    New construction means the commencement of construction on or after the effective date of this LDC. 
    Nightclubs means a place of entertainment open at night usually serving food and alcoholic beverages, as defined in s. 561.01(4)(a), Florida Statutes, and providing music and space for dancing and often having a floor show; an establishment for evening entertainment, generally open until the early morning, that serves liquor and usually food and offers patrons music, comedy acts, a floor show, or dancing; nightspot. 
    Nonconforming lot of record means a lot of record which does not meet the area or width requirements of this LDC Code for the zoning district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming structure means a structure lawfully established prior to and existing on the effective date of this Code, or any amendment hereto which renders the structure nonconforming, which no longer conforms to the requirements of this LDC for the zoning district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming use means a use lawfully established prior to and being conducted on the effective date of this LDC, or any amendment hereto which renders the use nonconforming, which no longer conforms to the requirements of this LDC for the zoning district in which it is located. 
    Nonconformity means the failure of a lot, parcel, structure or use to comply with the requirements of the LDC including, but not limited to, motor vehicle parking, landscaping, setbacks, lot size or other criteria, which failure is caused or increased by acquisition of private property by an acquiring authority. 
    Non-precision instrument runway means a runway having a non-precision instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation equipment, for which a straight-in non-precision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned, and for which no precision approach facilities are planned or indicated on an FAA planning document or military service's military airport planning document. 
    Nursery means a use in which plants are grown for sale or for the harvest of their products. 
    Nursery school means any structure, lot or premise maintained or operated for the training and/or care (other than medical care) of pre-school age children. 
    Office means a use where the clerical, administrative, financial or consulting aspects of business, professional, or governmental services are conducted. Office uses shall include, but not be limited to: financial institutions, insurance offices, medical offices, or business consulting services. Office shall not include the retail sale of merchandise, industrial uses or recreational uses. 
    Office park means a zoning district and land use district whose primary purpose is to permit planned office complexes in a campus-like atmosphere with substantial buildings and ample open space. 
    Officer or official means an officer or official of the City of Miramar. 
    Open space means any area of land, which is open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky including wetland mitigation areas and areas maintained in a natural and undisturbed character. Open space includes private parks, bufferyards, common landscaped areas, and bicycle and pedestrian paths external to a development parcel. Open space shall not include submerged areas below the control water elevation (exclusive of wetland areas), or areas covered with buildings, parking areas, driveways and other paved areas, or the FPL main transmission easement. 
    Open space ratio means the percentage of a lot or parcel that is required to remain open space. 
    Outdoor lighting means any light source that is installed or mounted outside of an enclosed building, excluding street lights within a right-of-way. 
    Owner means any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety with legal or beneficial title in whole or in part of a building or land. 
    Pain management clinic means any publicly or privately owned medical office or clinic: (a) That advertises in any medium for any type of pain management services; or (b) Where in any month a majority of patients are prescribed opioids, benzodiazepines, barbiturates, or carisoprodol for the treatment of chronic nonmalignant pain. 
    Panel antenna means a flat, rectangular antenna or array of antennas designed to concentrate a radio signal in a particular area. 
    Parcel of land or site means any quantity of land or water capable of being described with such definiteness that its location and boundaries may be established; or which is designated by its owner or developer as land to be used or developed as a unit, or which has been used or developed as a unit. 
    Permeable area, pervious area means any portion of the ground unobstructed by a surface which prevents the natural seepage of water into the ground. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, governmental agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, two or more persons having a joint or common interest, or any other legal entity. 
    Personal services means the provision of personal services directly to the consumer which shall include, but not be limited to, barber shops, beauty parlors, nail salons, tanning salons, or day spas. Personal service establishments shall not include body art studios or massage facilities, although a body art studio, if permitted under this LDC, is sometimes co-located on the same premises. 
    Personal wireless services means commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services, as defined under federal law, 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(C), or as this definition may be amended from time to time, and includes but is not limited to, cellular, personal communication services, specialized mobile radio, enhanced specialized mobile radio, and paging service. Personal wireless services shall not be considered as essential services, public safety telecommunications, public utilities or private utilities. 
    Pet daycare/hotel means a short-term boarding kennel service for domestic animals. 
    Pharmacy means any retail establishment, which is not accessory to or a component of another retail use such as a grocery store or department store, and where pharmaceutical drugs are compounded, dispensed, stored, or sold or where prescriptions are filled or dispensed on an outpatient basis, and in which more than 30 percent of the gross floor area of the establishment is utilized for prescription drug storage, dispensing or prescription drug-related customer service area. 
    Place of public assembly means any area where individuals assemble, whether publicly or privately owned and maintained. Includes, but is not limited to, public assembly buildings such as auditoriums, fraternal lodges, community centers, clubhouses, and theaters; and places of worship or other facilities that are used for prayer and assembly by persons of similar beliefs, as follows: 
(1)  Freestanding place of public assembly means a structure used for public assembly which does not share common walls or a roof with another building or establishment. 
(2)  Attached place of public assembly means a structure used for public assembly which shares common walls or a roof with another building. 
    Plan. See "Comprehensive plan." 
    Plat means a map or delineated representation of the subdivision of a tract or parcel of land being a complete exact representation of the subdivision and showing the designation of such land as lot(s), block(s), parcel(s), or other portions thereof, however the same may be designated. 
    Platted lot means a lot which is identified on a recorded plat. 
    Plot means the land occupied or to be occupied by a building or use, and its accessory buildings and accessory uses, together with such yards and open spaces as are required by this Code. A plot may consist of one, or more and/or portions of a platted lot or lots and/or unplatted land. 
    Practical Difficulty means a standard that is less rigorous than the unnecessary hardship standard. The practical difficulty must affect the lot or parcel of land in question. The practical difficulty does not affect the applicant. 
    Precision instrument runway means a runway having an instrument approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system (ILS) or a precision approach radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an FAA approved airport layout plan, a military service's approved military airport layout plan, any other FAA planning document, or military service's military airport planning document. 
    Pre-existing towers and pre-existing antennas means a telecommunications tower or antenna for which a building permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, including permitted telecommunications towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed so long as such approval has not expired. 
    Principal building means a building which is occupied by, devoted to, a principal use or an addition to an existing principal building which is larger than the original existing building. In determining whether a building is of primary importance, the use of the entire parcel shall be considered. There may be more than one principal building on a parcel. 
    Public buildings and uses means office and service buildings, uses, or facilities owned or operated by a governmental agency. 
    Public safety telecommunications means any and all wireless communications to and from police, fire, and other emergency services operating within the city. 
    Public utility means any publicly owned, franchised or regulated facility for rendering electrical, gas, communications, transportation, water supply, sewage disposal, drainage, garbage or refuse disposal and fire protection to the general public. 
    Quarrying. See "Mining." 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle or portable structure built on a chassis, without permanent foundation, which can be towed, hauled or driven and primarily designed as temporary living accommodation for travel, recreation, or vacation use, including but not limited to, travel trailers, truck campers, camping trailers, and motor homes. 
    Rehabilitation centers means any facility for the treatment and rehabilitation of drug dependents as defined in F.S. Ch. 397. 
    Rendered see "Rendition." 
    Rendition means the issuance of a written order, including approval, approval with conditions, or denial of a determination by the director, CAB, DRC, planning and zoning board, or other administrative official, effective upon the date of signing as set forth on such order or final letter of determination and filed in the records of the secretary or clerk to the director or other administrative official, the CAB the DRC, the planning and zoning board. 
    Replat see "Plat." 
    Residence or residential use means used or intended for use exclusively for dwelling purposes, as applied to any lot, plat, parcel, tract, area or building, but not including hotel rooms. 
    Resource extraction means the dredging, digging, extraction, mining and quarrying of limerock, sand, gravel or minerals, but shall not be construed to allow blasting. 
    Right-of-way means a public right-of-way, public utility easement, highway, street, bridge, tunnel, pier, waterway, dock, wharf, court, lane, path, or alley or any other property for which the city is the authority that has jurisdiction and control and may lawfully grant access to such property pursuant to applicable law, and includes the surface, the air space over the surface and the area below the surface to the extent the city holds a property interest therein. "Public rights-of-way" shall not include private property. "Public rights-of-way" shall not include any real or personal city property except as described above and shall not include city buildings, fixtures, poles, conduits, facilities or other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the public rights-of-way. Poles for wireless communications facilities placed within a city right-of-way shall be of a size and configuration that is comparable to other utility poles that are traditionally and customarily located within the same or similarly sized rights-of-way. Regulations for the siting, placement, maintenance, use and removal of wireless telecommunications facilities are located at article VI chapter 23 of the city code of ordinances. Wireless communications facilities placed in a right-of-way may be comprised of "distributed antenna systems." 
    Road capacity means the maximum number of vehicles which can pass over a given section of a roadway, during a given time period under prevailing traffic conditions. 
    Rooftop means the exterior surface on the top of a building or structure. 
    Runway means a defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length. 
    Sale means the exchange of a good, service, product or other item for consideration, regardless of the form that consideration takes. 
    Satellite dish. See "Antenna Dish." 
    Schools means an institution for instruction and learning whether public or private; including grade schools, middle schools, high school, colleges and universities, however not including private schools of professional training or day care centers. 
    Service provider means any person or business entity providing wireless telecommunication services by utilizing a telecommunications tower or antenna within the city limits. 
    Setback shall have the same meaning as "yard." 
    Short term rentals means a property that is rented more than three times a year for less than thirty (30) days at a time. 
    Sidewalk means a concrete pedestrian path four to five feet in width which runs parallel to and within a right-of-way; or connects two or more non-residential parcels; or connects a parking area to the entrance of a building. 
    Sign means any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof, visible from a right-of-way, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, or projected images. Signs do not include merchandise, pictures or models of products or services incorporated in a window display; works of art which in no way identify a product; or scoreboards located on athletic fields. 
    Single-family means a one family detached dwelling utilized for individually owned one family homes. 
    Site. See "Parcel of land." 
    Site Plan means an illustrated proposal for the development or use of a particular piece of real property. The illustration consists of a map or sketch of how the property will appear if the proposal is accepted. The requirements for the contents of a site plan are set forth in "City of Miramar Land Development Process and Procedures Manual" (Rev. 2016), as amended from time to time. 
    Small scale development shall have the same meaning given in F.S. § 163.3187(1)(c)1 et seq. 
    Special residential facility, category 1 means a housing facility which is licensed by the State of Florida for no more than six individuals who require treatment, care, rehabilitation or education. The facility is usually referred to as a group home. This includes individuals not overtly of harm to themselves or others. The facility provides a family living environment including supervision and care necessary to meet the physical, emotional and social needs of the individuals. It may or may not provide education or training. There may be more than one kitchen within the housing facility. There may be more than one special residential facility category 1 development on a parcel. This definition includes halfway homes. 
    Special residential facility, category 2 means a housing facility which is licensed by the State of Florida for nine to 16 non-elderly individuals who require treatment, care, rehabilitation or education. This includes individuals who are dependent children, physically disabled, developmentally disabled or individuals not overtly of harm to others or themselves. The facility provides a family living environment including supervision and care necessary to meet the physical, emotional, and social needs of the individuals. It may or may not provide education or training. There may be more than one kitchen within the housing facility. There may be more than one special residential facility category 2 development on a parcel. (See also "adult congregate living facility" and "group home.") 
    Special residential facility, category 3 means any housing facility as follows: 
(A)  Any housing facility licensed by the State of Florida for more than 16 non-elderly individuals who require treatment, care, rehabilitation or education. This includes individuals who are dependent children, physically disabled, developmentally disabled or individuals not overtly of harm to others or themselves; or 
(B)  Any housing facility licensed by the State of Florida for more than eight unrelated elderly individuals; or 
(C)  Governmentally subsidized housing facilities entirely devoted to care of the elderly, dependent children, the physically handicapped, developmentally disabled, or not overtly of harm to themselves or others; or 
(D)  Any not-for-profit housing facility for unrelated elderly individuals; or 
(E)  Any housing facility which provides a life-care environment. A life-care environment shall include, but is not limited to, creation of a life estate in the facility itself and provision of on-site or off-site medical care. 
    Special status category tree means any tree or group of trees that occur in any of the following areas: 
(1)  Natural forest community, 
(2)  Local area of particular concern (Broward County Code s. 5-182(j)), 
(3)  Natural resource area (Broward County Code s. 5-192(a)(13)), 
(4)  Urban wilderness area (Broward County Code s. 5-182(j)), 
(5)  Specimen trees are also included within this designation. 
    Specimen tree means any tree with any individual trunk which has a DBH of 18 inches or greater for conifers and 24 inches or greater for hardwoods which is well shaped and in good health provided, however, that the following trees are not specimen trees: 
(1)  Non-native fruit trees that are cultivated or grown for the specific purpose of producing edible fruit, including, but not limited to: mangos, avocados, or species of citrus, 
(2)  Species of the genus ficus except F. aurau (strangler fig), F. laevigata (short leaf fig), F. rubiginosa (rusty fig or rusty leaf fig), F. jacquinifolia, and 
(3)  All multi-trunk trees in the palm family except the following palms which have a minimum overall height of 15 feet: Paurotis palm, Acoelorraphe wrightii, and the Phoenix palm, Phoenix reclinata. 
    State of the art means existing technology where the level of facilities, technical performance, capacity, equipment, components and service are equal to that developed and demonstrated to be more technologically advanced that generally available for comparable service areas in South Florida. 
    Stealth facility or tower means any telecommunications facility or tower that is designed to blend into the surrounding environment. Examples of such facilities would include, but are not limited to, architecturally screened roof mounted antenna, building-mounted antenna painted to match the existing structure, antenna integrated into architectural elements, telecommunications towers designed to look like light poles, power poles, utility poles, flag poles, manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, and similar alternative designs. 
    Street includes any public or private access way such as a street, road, lane, highway, avenue, boulevard, alley, parkway, viaduct, circle, a court, terrace, place, or cul-de-sac, and also includes all of the land lying between the right-of-way lines as delineated on a plat showing such streets, whether improved or unimproved, but shall not include those access ways such as easements and rights-of-way intended solely for limited utility purposes, such as for electric power lines, gas lines, telephone lines, water lines, drainage and sanitary sewers, and easements of ingress and egress. 
    Street, front has the same meaning as front street. 
    Structure means anything constructed, installed, or portable, the use of which requires a location on a parcel of land. It includes fixed or movable buildings which can be used for housing, business, commercial, storage, agricultural, or office purposes, either temporarily or permanently. Structure also includes roads, driveways, walkways, paths, fences, patios, decks, swimming pools, tennis courts, poles, pipelines, transmission lines, tracks, signs, cisterns, sheds, docks, and other accessory construction. 
    Subdivision means the division of land into two or more lots, parcels, tracts, tiers, blocks, sites, units, or any other division of land for the purpose of a transfer of ownership and building development; and includes establishment of new streets and alleys, additions, and resubdivisions; and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the lands or area subdivided. The term includes resubdivision, replat, revised plat, or amended plat and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided. A group development which is developed so that it might be broken into smaller parcels at some future time shall also be considered a subdivision and shall meet the requirements of this code. Creation of a single condominium, other than a land condominium, shall not be construed to be a subdivision. Condominiums including three or more separate parcels of land owned by an incorporated association or other legal entity, excluding condominium units, and the condominium itself shall not be construed to be a single condominium. 
    Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the predestruction market value of the structure, as determined by the of Broward County property appraiser, either (1) before the improvement or repair is started, or (2), if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimension of the structure. The term does not, however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are necessary solely to assure safe living conditions, or (2) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places, the State Inventory of Historic Places, or any inventory of local historic places. 
    TCO means a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
    Telecommunications means the transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received. 
    Telecommunications Act means the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub. L No. 104-104, codified at 47 U.S.C., and as may be amended from time to time. 
    Telecommunications equipment means equipment, other than customer premises equipment, used by a carrier to provide telecommunications services, and includes software integral to such equipment (including upgrades). 
    Telecommunications facilities means real estate, easements, apparatus, property, routes, and telecommunications equipment, used and operated to provide two-way telecommunications service. 
    Telecommunications facility means personal wireless services facilities, as defined under federal law, 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(C), as this definition may be amended from time to time, and includes, but is not limited to, antennas and radio-transmitting telecommunications towers, and associated facilities used to transmit telecommunications signals. Light, electric and utility poles are only a support structure and are not a telecommunications facility. An open video system is not a telecommunications facility to the extent that it provides only video services; a cable system is not a telecommunications facility to the extent that it provides only cable service. 
    Telecommunication facility height means the distance measured from the ground level to the highest point of a telecommunications tower or other structure. For the purposes of measuring height, the base pad and all antennas or other attachments mounted on a structure shall be included in the measurements to determine overall height. 
    Telecommunications services means the offering of telecommunications (or the transmission, between or among points, specified by the user of information of the user's choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received), for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used. Personal wireless telecommunications services shall not be considered as essential services, public utilities or private utilities 
    Telecommunications stealth facility means a facility that is disguised, hidden, part of an existing or proposed structure, or placed within an existing or proposed structure in a manner that make it not readily identifiable as a telecommunication facility. An existing or proposed structure may or may not have a secondary function ( e.g., bell tower, spire, flag pole, etc.). This term shall be synonymous with "camouflaged facility." 
    Telecommunications tower means any structure, and support thereto, designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas intended for transmitting or receiving personal wireless services, telephone, radio and similar communication purposes, including alternative tower structure, lattice, stealth, monopole, and guyed towers. The term includes microwave telecommunications towers, common-carrier telecommunications towers, and cellular telephone telecommunications towers, among others. Light, electric and utility poles are only a support structure and are not a telecommunications tower. 
    Temporary political sign means any sign which advocates or suggests to the reader that they vote for or against, endorse or not endorse, contribute of not contribute to, or otherwise support or refrain from supporting in any way an individual seeking election or appointment to a particular position or office, or any proposition to be voted upon by the public. 
    Temporary sign means a sign designed, constructed, and intended to be used on a short-term basis. 
    Temporary uses means uses that are required in the construction phase of development or are uniquely seasonal in nature, including: Christmas tree sales, contractors' model homes, contractors' project offices, project sales offices, seasonal sales of farm produce, carnivals and tent meetings. 
    Tiny home/house means a residential structure under 600 square feet. 
    Townhouse means a building divided into three or more adjacent dwelling units within a unified envelope. Each unit shall be connected to the side of an adjacent unit by one party wall per side as described herein. The party wall(s) shall be constructed from the foundation to the building roof and shall attach the townhouse unit(s) along their length perpendicular to the building's front and rear elevations. The length of the shortest attachment along any unit's party wall shall be no less that 50 percent of the length of the building's maximum overall length, measured from rear. Townhouse units shall not be situated one on top of another; no portion of one townhouse shall be in front of or in the rear of another townhouse unit. The main entrance of each townhouse shall be situated in the front of the unit; additional entrances for each townhouse shall be permitted for a garage and/or rear door access. 
    Trafficways plan means the Broward County Trafficways Plan or any subsequently adopted major and collector street plan of the city. 
    Tree survey means a document meeting the requirements of 21-HH F.A.C., which can be overlaid directly upon a site plan and must provide, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  The location plotted by accurate techniques, in relation to all proposed development, of all existing non-nuisance trees which are proposed to be destroyed, relocated, impacted, or preserved; 
(2)  The common and scientific names of each tree; and 
(3)  The DBH of each tree, or if a multiple trunk tree, the sum DBH for all trunks. 
    Trip means a one-way movement of vehicular travel from an origin (one trip end) to a destination (the other trip end). For the purposes of these provisions, trip shall have the meaning which it has in commonly accepted traffic engineering practice and which is substantially the same as that definition in the ITE Trip Generation Manual, most current edition. 
    Trip generation means the attraction or production of trips caused by a given type of land development. 
    TUP means a temporary use permit. 
    Unlicensed wireless service means the offering of telecommunications service using duly authorized devices which do not require individual licenses, but does not mean the provision of direct-to-home satellite services. 
    Unnecessary hardship is a non-self-created characteristic of the property in question which renders it virtually impossible to use the land for the purpose or in the manner for which it is zoned. A hardship may not be found unless no reasonable use can be made of the property. 
    Useable open space means common land areas, either landscaped or developed in active recreational, but not located within a residential structure, that have a minimum dimension of 20 feet in length and width and that comprise a contiguous area of not less than 2,000 square feet. Land areas with a slope of greater than eight to one shall not be counted as usable open space. Spaces located between the ends of buildings which are individually less than 2,000 square feet in area shall not be counted as usable open space. 
    Utility includes electric, cable television, telephone, gas, water, reclaimed water, wastewater, solid waste, stormwater, telecommunication, or other public or private utility. 
    Utility runway means a runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and less. 
    Vacation rentals. See short term rentals. 
    Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this LDC which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this LDC where specific enforcement would result in an unnecessary hardship or a practical difficulty, or when a nonconformity in structure, area, or use is created by governmental acquisition. A variance may be made to a requirement, area, definition, or word but no variance as to use of property shall be included within the definition of the term "variance." 
    Vehicular use area means areas on a parcel of land used for traffic circulation and parking which include, but are not limited to, driveways, parking spaces and access aisles, stacking areas and by-pass lanes for drive-thru windows, or outdoor retail sales and display areas for new or used cars, trucks, boats or recreational vehicles. 
    Visual runway means a runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures with no straight-in instrument approach procedure and no instrument designation indicated on an FAA approved airport layout plan, a military services approved military airport layout plan, or by any planning document submitted to the FAA by competent authority. 
    Warehouse means a business or building used primarily for storage and distribution of goods and materials by manufacturers, wholesalers, and distributors. A warehouse building may be occupied by an individual business or contain multiple bays which are leased or sold to businesses which require occupational licenses pursuant to the city code. 
    Warehouse-Self storage means a business or building used primarily for storage of materials and personal goods by businesses and persons. A warehouse-self storage building is leased in small increments to businesses and persons which do not conduct any business activity from the leased area and do not require an occupational license pursuant to the city code. 
    Waste means and includes sludge garbage, rubbish, refuse, special waste, yard trash, or other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from domestic, industrial, commercial, mining, agricultural, or governmental operations. As used herein, "special waste" means solid wastes that can require special handling and management, including, but not limited to, white goods, waste tires, used oil, lead-acid batteries, construction and demolition debris, ash residue, yard trash, and biological wastes. As used herein, "yard trash" means vegetative matter resulting from landscaping maintenance and land clearing operations and includes associated rocks and soils. See F.S. §403.703. 
    Wetland means that land which is subject to F.S. § 403.91. 
    Wetland mitigation means compensation for, or replacement of, lost or impacted wetland areas and functional values by the creation of new wetland areas or by the enhancement of existing wetland areas. 
    Wetland mitigation bank means an area designated and licensed for the purpose of providing compensation for wetland impacts, and includes a resource analysis, credit assignment system and long term maintenance plan that assures persistence of the mitigation bank and the wetland functional values. 
    Whip antenna means a cylindrical antenna that transmits signals in 360 degrees. 
    Yard means mean an open area between a structure and a parcel, lot or street easement/right-of-way line which is within a parcel boundary; or that area within a parcel between a building and another building. This area shall be unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except for structures 30 inches in height or less and permitted encroachments otherwise allowed in these regulations. In measuring a required yard, the horizontal distance from the further-most projection of the main building shall be used. 
    Yard, front means a yard extending across the full width of the plot between the front plot line and the required set back line. Every required front yard shall be measured at the closest point between the lot or parcel line and the structure. 
    Yard, rear means a yard extending across the full width of the plot between the rear plot line and the required set back line. Every required rear yard shall be measured at the closest point between the lot or parcel line and the structure. 
    Yard, required means a front, side or rear yard, in which no structure shall be erected except as permitted by these regulations. Required yards for a building shall not overlap the required yards of another building. Required yards for residential uses shall not be permitted to overlap required bufferyards. Required yards for non-residential uses are permitted to overlap required bufferyards. 
    Yard, side means a yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard, between the side plot line and the required set back line. Every required side yard shall be measured at the closest point between the lot or parcel line and the structure. 
    ZCU See "Zoning Certificate of Use." 
    Zoning Certificate of Use means a document ensuring that new business occupancies and uses, and changes of existing business occupancies and uses, comply with the city's LDC, code of ordinances, building code and life safety requirements, and other applicable codes and regulations. 
    Zoning parcel means a parcel of land zoned for a specific zoning district by adoption of the official zoning map or a parcel of land rezoned by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 2(Exh. A), 11-1-17; Ord. No. 18-05, § 2, 11-27-17; Ord. No. 18-07, § 2, 3-7-18) 
Sec. 202. - Specific terms. 
    The following terms apply to specific sections of the LDC, but may apply to more than one section as well. 
    202.1. Terms Applicable to the Overlay District Standards 
    Arcade means a series of arches supported on columns along the primary building facades, creating cover for pedestrians. 

    Awning means a roof-like cover of canvas extending over a window, doorway or deck, providing protection from the elements. 

    Balcony means an elevated platform projecting from the wall of a building and enclosed by a railing or parapet. 
    Building articulation means traditional architectural details that provide interest and human scale. 
    Building placement means the relationship of a building to the block and build-to/setback lines. 

    Building projections means any element of a building such as awnings, roofs, signs or ornamental details that project out from the walls of the building, particularly into the right-of-way. 
    Build-to line means a line parallel to the street right-of-way line at any story level of a building representing the minimum distance which all or any part of a building is constructed from said right-of-way line. 

Build-to line 
    Bump out means curb projection at end or mid-block that defines the on-street parking lane. 
    Canopy means a projecting cover for pedestrians in the form of a roof-like structure, which may or may not be supported by columns, providing protection form the elements, usually in a continuous fashion. 
    Centerline means line defining the center of the street right-of-way. 
    Charrette means a public consensus event where design principles and project concepts are expressed. 
    Civic building means a city hall, library, community center or other such building, preferably prominently located in the community, with appropriately significant, formal architecture. 
    Clerestory window means windows that are placed above the pedestrian's eye level and contribute little to the building's transparency level. 
    Colonnade means the same as arcade, but not necessarily having arches. 
    Corner treatment means architectural detailing or significant floor plan configuration where a building occurs on the corner of an intersection of two primary, or a primary and secondary street. 

Corner treatment 
    Cornice means a continuous projection at the uppermost portion of a building which defines its top. 
    Crosswalk means a government, or properties owners association, owned or operated walkway city-owned right-of-way that crosses a right-of-way or street and furnishes access to adjacent sidewalks or properties. 
    Entry means the portion of a building that provides public access, preferably with notable form for easy identification. 
    Facade means the front of a building or any of its sides facing a public way or space, especially one distinguished by its architectural treatment. 
    Fascia means a broad flat surface which is the outer edge of a cornice or roof. 
    Fenestration means the design, proportioning, and disposition of windows and other exterior openings of a building. 
    Flat roof means a slightly pitched roof that is hidden by parapets on the front and sides, and possibly on the back of the building. 
    Floor area ratio (FAR) means the total floor area of all buildings on a zoning lot divided by the area of said lot. 
    Gable roof means a roof sloping downward in two parts, so as to from a gable at both ends. 
    Hip roof means a roof having sloping ends and sides at an inclined projecting angle. 
    Infill means development or redevelopment of land that has been bypassed, remained vacant, and/or is underused as a result of the continuing urban development process, and provides an opportunity to strengthen older neighborhoods and save on infrastructure and other resources. 
    Landscaped parking means parking areas made more pleasant to see and use by the addition of trees and other landscaping within, and on the perimeter of the parking area. 
    Landscape surface ratio (LSR) means a ratio derived by dividing the total amount of the site that is covered by planting materials, including by not limited to trees, shrubs, ground covers, grass, flowers, bark, mulch and other similar materials, by the gross area of the site. 
    Liner building means a building that is next to or connected to a parking garage or other less desirable building, that provides traditional scale, activity and interest on at least the street level, often storefronts or even apartments. 
    Loggia means a colonnaded or arcaded space within the body of a building but open to the air on one side, often at an upper story overlooking an open court. 
    Median means an area in the center of a street or highway used to separate the directional flow of traffic, which may contain left-turn lanes or landscaping, and is demarcated by curb and guttering, having stripes to distinguish it from the portion of road used for through traffic. 
    Mullion means vertical and horizontal dividers between the lights of a window. 
    Parapet means a low protective wall that rises above the edge of a flat or gable roof, often are unimportant part of the facade. 
    Portico means a porch having a roof supported by columns, often leading to the entrance of a building. 
    Primary frontage means the main facade of a building which faces the primary street. 
    Redevelop means to demolish existing buildings or structures, or to increase overall floor area, existing on a property; or both, irrespective of whether a change occurs in land use. 
    Retention means the permanent on-site maintenance of stormwater. 
    Right-of-way means a strip of land acquired by reservation, conveyance by deed, dedication, prescription, or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a street, trail, water line, sanitary sewer, rail transportation system, and/or other public utilities or facilities. 
    Round-a-bout/traffic circle means a raised island that is usually landscaped and located at the intersection of two or more streets used to reduce traffic speeds and accidents without diverting traffic onto adjacent residential streets. 
    Setback means the minimum distance by which any building or structure must be separated from a street right-of-way or lot line. 
    Street frontage means the distance along which a property line of a lot adjoins a public or private street. 
    Street furniture means those features associated with a street or right-of-way that are intended to enhance that street's or right-of-way's physical character and use by pedestrians, such as benches, trash receptacles, kiosks, lights, newspaper racks, etc. 
    Swale means a shallow ditch used to temporarily store, route or filter stormwater run-off. 
    Traffic calming means reducing the adverse impact of motor vehicles by reducing speeds, providing more space for pedestrians and cyclists, and improving the local environment. 
    Transparency means the amount of clear glass windows on a building wall, particularly on the front facade of a store or other building on an urban sidewalk. 
    Tree lawn means a landscaped area of grass and trees between the sidewalk of a street and a walkway close to a building. 
    202.2. Terms Applicable to the TND District Standards 
    202.2.1. Definitions. The following definitions shall be applicable to this section. Terms used throughout this section shall take their commonly accepted meaning unless otherwise defined herein. Terms requiring interpretation specific to this subchapter are as follows: 
    Block means a combination of lots surrounded by right-of-way or streets, other accessways, or open space areas. 
    Block face means the line where a block meets a right-of-way or street, other accessway, or open space area. 
    Boulevard means a street or street segment that serves as either a link from the center of a TND Neighborhood to its edge, a link between TND Neighborhoods, or describes the edge of the TND or TND Neighborhood and is customarily comprised of sidewalks, street trees/planting area/optional utility allocation, curb and gutter, on-street parking, bicycle lanes, travel lanes, and a median. 
    Bulb-out means a curbed landscaped area that projects at a 90 degree or lesser angle into an on-street parking area. 
    Category of use - Civic use means property designated for governmental uses or any use allowed, except for parks, within the Community Facilities (CF) zoning district. 
    Category of use - House use means property designated for detached single-family residential uses. 
    Category of use - Public use means property designated for civic use structures, streets, public accessways, open space areas and recreation property. 
    Category of use - Rowhouse use means property designated for either multi-family residential or mixed multi-family residential and commercial uses where commercial uses, except for live/work units, are only permitted on the ground floor of the structure. 
    Category of use - Shopfront use means property designated for either non-residential or mixed multi-family residential and non-residential uses where residential uses are not permitted on the ground floor of the structure. 
    Clear area means the area that may include roadway surface, curb and gutter, sidewalk, and planting area that is established free of all vertical obstructions including but not limited to trees, sign poles, fire hydrants, electrical boxes, or newspaper boxes. 
    Close means a street design which consists of either a courtyard of space at the end of a street which splits vehicular traffic, or a deep courtyard space alongside a street which does not split the traffic. 
    Colonnade means a roof or building structure, extending over the sidewalk, open to the street and sidewalk, except for supporting columns or piers. 
    Commercial street means a street or street segment located in a mostly built-up, non-residential area of a TND Neighborhood and which is customarily comprised of sidewalks, street trees/planting area/optional utility allocation, curb and gutter, on-street parking, bicycle lanes, and travel lanes. 
    Curb return means the curved edge of the street at corners of intersections. Curb return radius is measured at the edge of the travel lanes, or along the face of the curb where concrete curb is present. 
    Eyebrow means a street design which is a shallow space within the street that splits vehicular traffic. 
    Frontage line means the line between a building or parcel of land and a street (excluding lanes) that is parallel and adjacent to the edge of a street right-of-way (excluding lanes), plaza, or square. In the case of a building or lot having more than one possible frontage line, the street, plaza, or square or which the building or lot address is based shall be considered the frontage line. In the absence of an address, the part of the building or lot having the narrowest frontage on any street, plaza, or square, shall be considered the frontage line. In all cases of a building or lot having more than one possible frontage line, the street(s), plaza(s), or square(s) that are not considered the frontage line shall be considered the secondary frontage line. 
    Green belt means an optional open space or mitigation area adjoining the TND or TND Neighborhood. 
    Guest house means a building used for lodging of transients. Includes what is commonly known as a bed and breakfast. 
    Lane means a street or street segment that facilitates vehicular ingress and egress for residential uses, provides service access for non-residential uses, and usually contains utilities; and which is customarily comprised of street trees/planting area, utilities, and vehicular travel lanes. 
    Live/work unit means a dwelling unit that is also used as the primary place of work by the occupant of that dwelling unit. 
    Outbuilding means a secondary structure used for residential, guesthouse, parking, storage use, and the like. 
    Pedestrian accessways means interconnecting paved, gravel, or other type of improved walkways that provide pedestrian passage through blocks running from street to street. 
    Play lot means an open space recreational area generally designed for children ages two through six. 
    Plaza means an outdoor, pedestrian oriented open space area that contains less than fifty (50%) percent pervious area. 
    Production support activity means a nonpolluting, light industrial activity that manufactures or repairs items for use by a business or residence within the TND. 
    Residential street means a street or street segment located in a mostly residential area of a TND Neighborhood and customarily comprised of sidewalks, street trees/planting area/optional utility allocation, curb and gutter, on-street parking, bicycle lanes, and travel lanes. 
    Shared parking means a parking space that is utilized for multiple uses occurring at different times, where persons utilizing the spaces are unlikely to need the spaces at the same time of the day ( e.g., offices and taverns). 
    Square means an outdoor, pedestrian oriented open space area that contains at least fifty (50%) percent pervious area. 
    Street means any public or private accessway of the following four types: boulevard, commercial street, residential street, and lane. 
    Street edge means a partition built along the frontage line meant to define the space of the street or right-of-way. 
    Street vista means a view along a street centerline which is not less than 600 feet in length. 
    Streetwall means a partition built along the frontage line meant to define the space of the street and screen views into a lot. 
    TND means a development within the TNDD that consists of one or more TND Neighborhoods and also may contain mitigation areas, green belts, or other open areas. 
    TND Neighborhood means an area within a TND that consists of lots, blocks, buildings, streets, open space areas, and contents having similar attributes, but excluding mitigation areas, green belts and other open periphery areas. A TND may contain more than one TND Neighborhood. 
    Tree grate means a permeable metal grating that may be walked upon and that fits around the base of a tree. 
    202.2. Terms Applicable to the Transit Oriented Corridor District Code (TOC) District Standards 
    202.2.1. Definitions. This section provides definitions for terms in this TOC district code that are technical in nature or that otherwise may not reflect a common usage of the term. If a term is not defined in this section, then the director shall determine the correct definition: 
    Administrative approval: A ruling that would permit a practice that is not consistent with a specific provision of this TOC district code, but that is justified by its intent. Administrative approval is granted administratively by the DRC. 
    Affordable housing: Dwellings consisting of rental or for-sale units that have a rent (including utilities) or mortgage payment typically no more than thirty (30%) percent of the income of families earning no more than eighty (80%) percent of median incomes by family size for Broward County. 
    Arcade: A series of arches supported on columns along the primary building Facades, creating a covered space that overlaps the sidewalk for pedestrians. 
    Attic: The interior part of a building contained within a pitched roof structure. 
    Avenue (AV): A thoroughfare of high vehicular capacity and low to moderate speed, acting as a short distance connector between urban centers, and usually equipped with a landscaped median. 
    Awning: A roof-like cover of canvas extending over a window, doorway or deck, providing protection from the elements. 
    Balcony: An elevated platform projecting from the wall of a building and enclosed by a railing or parapet. 
    Bed and breakfast: An owner-occupied lodging type offering 1 to 6 bedrooms, permitted to serve breakfast in the mornings to guests. 
    Bicycle lane (BL): A dedicated lane for cycling within a moderate-speed vehicular thoroughfare, demarcated by striping. 
    Block: The aggregate of private lots, passages, rear alleys and rear lanes, circumscribed by thoroughfares. 
    Building placement: The relationship of a building to the block and build-to/setback lines. 
    Build-to line: A line parallel to the street right-of-way line at any story story level of a building representing the minimum distances which all or any part of a building is constructed from said right-of-way line. 
    Charrette: A public consensus event where building and development design and use principles and project concepts are expressed. 
    Civic: The term defining not-for-profit organizations dedicated to arts, culture, education, recreation, government, transit, and government operated parking. 
    Civic building: A building operated by not-for-profit organizations dedicated to arts, culture, education, recreation, government, transit, and government operated parking, or for use approved by the legislative body preferably prominently located in the community, with appropriately significant, formal architecture. 
    Civic space: An outdoor area dedicated for public use. Civic Space types are defined by the combination of certain physical constants including the relationships among their intended use, size, and landscaping. 
    Civic zone: A designation given for public sites dedicated for civic buildings and civic space. 
    Colonnade: A roof or building structure, extending over the sidewalk, open to the street and sidewalk except for supporting columns or piers. It is the same as an arcade, but not necessarily having arches. 
    Commercial: The term collectively defining workplace, office, retail, and lodging functions. 
    Commercial street: A street or street segment located in a mostly built-up, non-residential area which is customarily comprised of sidewalks, street trees/planting area/optional utility allocation, curb and gutter, on-street parking, bicycle lanes, and travel lanes. 
    Common yard: A planted private frontage wherein the façade is set back from the frontage line. It is visually continuous with adjacent yards. 
    Configuration: The form of a building, based on its massing, private frontage, and height. 
    Corner treatment: Architectural detailing or significant floor plan configuration where a building occurs on the corner of an intersection of two Primary Streets, or intersection of a Primary and secondary street. 
    Corridor: A lineal geographic system incorporating transportation and/or greenway trajectories. A transportation corridor may be a lineal transect zone. 
    Courtyard building: A building that occupies the boundaries of its lot while internally defining one or more private patios. 
    Curb: The edge of the vehicular pavement that may be raised or flush to a Swale. It usually incorporates the drainage system. 
    DRC: Development Review Committee 
    Density: The number of dwelling units within a standard measure of land area. 
    Design speed: Is the velocity at which a thoroughfare tends to be driven without the constraints of signage or enforcement. There are four (4) ranges of speed: Very Low: (below 20 MPH); Low: (20-25 MPH); Moderate: (25-35 MPH); High: (above 35 MPH). Lane width is determined by desired design speed. 
    Disposition: The placement of a building on its lot. 
    Driveway: A vehicular lane within a lot, often leading to a garage. 
    Edgeyard building: A building that occupies the center of its lot with setbacks on all sides. 
    Elevation: An exterior wall of a building not along a frontage line. 
    Encroach: To break the plane of a vertical or horizontal regulatory limit with a structural element, so that it extends into a setback, into the public frontage, or above a height limit. 
    Encroachment: Any structural element that breaks the plane of a vertical or horizontal regulatory limit, extending into a setback, into the public frontage, or above a height limit. 
    Entry: The portion of a building that provides public access, preferably with notable form for easy identification. 
    Facade: The exterior wall of a building that is set along a frontage line. 
    Fascia: A broad flat surface which is the outer edge of a cornice or roof. 
    Forecourt: A private frontage wherein a portion of the façade is close to the frontage line and the central portion is set back. 
    Form-Based code: Form-Based codes foster predictable built results and a high-quality public realm by using physical form (rather than separation of uses) as the organizing principle for the code. Form-Based codes address the relationship between building facades and the public realm, the form and mass of buildings in relation to one another, and the scale and types of streets and blocks. The regulations and standards in Form-Based codes are presented in both words and clearly drawn diagrams and other visuals. They are keyed to a regulating plan that designates the appropriate form and scale (and therefore, character) of development, rather than only distinctions in land-use types. 
    Frontage: A public frontage or private frontage as defined by this Code. 
    Frontage line: A lot line bordering a public frontage or the pedestrian zone. Facades facing frontage line define the public realm and are therefore more regulated than the Elevations facing other lot lines. 
    Funeral home: An establishment with facilities for the preparation of dead bodies for burial, for the viewing of the body, and for funerals. 
    Function: The use or uses accommodated by a building and its lot, categorized according to the intensity of the use. 
    Gable roof: A roof sloping downward in two parts, so as to form a gable at both ends. 
    Gallery: A private frontage conventional for retail use wherein the façade is aligned close to the frontage line with an attached cantilevered shed or lightweight colonnade overlapping the sidewalk. 
    GIS (Geographic Information System): A computerized program in widespread municipal use that organizes data on maps. 
    Highway: A rural and suburban thoroughfare of high vehicular speed and capacity. 
    Hip roof: A roof having sloping ends and sides at an inclined projecting angle. 
    House: An Edgeyard building type, usually a single-family dwelling on a large lot, often shared with an Accessory Building in the back yard. 
    Infill: New development on land that had been previously developed and cleared land within urbanized areas. 
    In-Lieu of parking fee agreement: An agreement between a property owner and the City addressing the terms of payment of fees in-lieu of provision of required parking on or off-site in accordance with this TOC district code. 
    Inn: A Lodging type, owner-occupied, offering six (6) to twelve (12) bedrooms, permitted to serve breakfast in the mornings to guests. 
    Landscaped parking: Parking areas made more pleasant to see and use by the addition of trees and other landscaping within, and on the perimeter of the parking area. 
    Layer: A range of depth of a lot within which certain elements are permitted. 
    Lightwell: A private frontage type that is a below-grade entrance or recess designed to allow light into basements. 
    Liner building: A building specifically designed to mask a parking lot, a parking structure or other less desirable building from a frontage. 
    Live/work unit: A dwelling unit that is also used as the primary place of work by the occupant of that dwelling unit. 
    Lodging: Premises available for daily and weekly renting of bedrooms. 
    Loggia: A colonnaded or arcaded space within the body of a building but open to the air on one side, often at an upper story overlooking an open court. 
    Lot: A parcel of land accommodating a building or buildings of unified design. The size of a lot is controlled by its width in order to determine the grain ( i.e., fine grain or coarse grain) of the urban fabric. 
    Lot line: The boundary that legally and geometrically demarcates a lot. 
    Lot width: The length of the principal frontage line of a lot. 
    Manufacturing: Premises available for the creation, assemblage and/or repair of artifacts, using table-mounted electrical machinery or artisanal equipment, and including their retail sale. 
    Median: An area in the center of a street or highway used to separate the directional flow of traffic, which may contain left-turn lanes or landscaping, and is demarcated by curb and guttering, having stripes to distinguish it from the portion of road used for through traffic. 
    Mixed use: Multiple functions within the same building through superimposition or adjacency, or in multiple buildings by adjacency, or at a proximity determined by administrative approval. 
    Mortuary: An establishment with facilities where dead bodies are kept before burial or cremation. 
    Nonconforming structure: A structure lawfully established prior to and existing on the effective date of this TOC district code, or any amendment hereto which renders the structure nonconforming, which no longer conforms to the requirements of this TOC district code for the zoning district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming use: A use lawfully established prior to and being conducted on the effective date of this TOC district code, or any amendment hereto which renders the use nonconforming, which no longer conforms to the requirements of this TOC district code for the district in which it is located. 
    Office: Premises available for the transaction of general business, but excluding retail, artisanal and manufacturing uses. 
    Open space: Land intended to remain undeveloped; it may be for civic space. 
    Outbuilding: A secondary structure used for residential, guesthouse, parking, storage use, and the like, usually located toward the rear of the same lot as a principal building. 
    Parapet: A low protective wall that rises above the edge of a flat or gable roof. 
    Park: A civic space type that is a natural preserve available for unstructured recreation. 
    Parking area: Any area designed and used for parking motor vehicles including parking lots and garages, driveways, garages serving residential functions, and thoroughfares. 
    Parking garage or parking structure : A structure containing vehicular parking, including mechanical parking systems. 
    Parking (Off-site): Spaces provided for vehicles and located outside of the boundaries of the lot to be served. 
    Parking (Off-street): Any land area designed and used for parking motor vehicles including parking lots and garages, driveways and garages serving residential uses, but excluding areas of thoroughfares. 
    Passage (PS): A pedestrian connector, open or roofed, that passes between buildings to provide shortcuts through long blocks and connect rear parking areas to frontages. 
    Path (PT): A pedestrian way traversing a park or rural area, with landscape matching the contiguous open space, ideally connecting directly with the urban sidewalk network. 
    Pedestrian accessways: Interconnecting paved or other type of improved walkways that provide pedestrian passage through blocks running from street to street. 
    Pedestrian shed: An area that is centered on a common destination. Its size is related to average walking distances for the applicable community unit type. Pedestrian sheds are applied to structure communities. 
    Pedestrian zone: The area between a building façade and the vehicular lanes, inclusive of its built and planted components. The pedestrian zone is divided into private frontage and public frontage. 
    Planter: The element of the public frontage which accommodates street trees, whether continuous or individual. 
    Play lot means an open space recreational area generally designed for children ages two through six. 
    Plaza: A civic space type designed for civic purposes and commercial activities generally paved and spatially defined by building frontages. 
    Primary frontage: The main façade of a building which faces a Primary Street. 
    Primary street: A thoroughfare intended for highest significance of intensity of use and development under this TOC district code, as specified in Table 2A. public frontage. 
    Principal building: The main building on a lot, usually located toward the frontage. 
    Principal entrance: The main point of access for pedestrians into a building. 
    Principal frontage: On corner lot, the private frontage designated to bear the address and principal entrance to the building, and the measure of minimum lot width. Prescriptions for the parking layers pertain only to the principal frontage. Prescriptions for the first layer pertain to both frontages of a corner lot. 
    Private frontage: The privately held layers between the frontage line and the principal building façade. 
    Public frontage: The area between the curb of the vehicular lanes and the frontage line. 
    Public parking: A parking facility available to the general public for parking motor vehicles, including parking lots or garages. 
    Rearyard building: A building that occupies the full frontage line, leaving the rear of the lot as the sole yard. 
    Redevelop means to demolish existing buildings or structures, or to increase overall floor area, existing on a property; or both, irrespective of whether a change occurs in land use. 
    Regulating plan: The TOCD zoning map that shows the classification of areas within the TOCD subject to regulation. 
    Residential: Characterizing premises available for long-term human dwelling. 
    Residential Street: A street or street segment located in a mostly residential area of a TND Neighborhood and customarily comprised of sidewalks, street trees/planting area/optional utility allocation, curb and gutter, on-street parking, bicycle lanes, and travel lanes. 
    Retail: Characterizing premises available for the sale of merchandise and food service. 
    Retail Frontage: Frontage designated on a regulating plan that requires or recommends the provision of a shopfront, encouraging the ground level to be available for retail use. 
    Right-of-way: A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription, or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a street, trail, water line, sanitary sewer, and/or other public utilities or facilities. 
    Road (RD): A local, rural and suburban thoroughfare of low-to-moderate vehicular speed and capacity. 
    Rowhouse: A single-family dwelling that shares a party wall with another of the same type and occupies the full frontage line. 
    Secondary frontage: On corner lots, the secondary frontage that is not the principal frontage. As it affects the public realm, its first layer is regulated. 
    Secondary street: A thoroughfare of lesser intensity and significance than a Primary Street for use and development under this TOC district code, as specified in Table 2A. public frontage. 
    Setback: The minimum distance by which any building or structure must be separated from a street right-of-way or lot line. 
    Shared parking: Parking spaces that are utilized for multiple uses occurring at different times, where persons utilizing the spaces are unlikely to need the spaces at the same time of the day ( e.g., offices and taverns). 
    Shopfront: A private frontage conventional for retail use, with substantial glazing and an awning, wherein the façade is aligned close to the frontage line with the building entrance at sidewalk grade. 
    Sidewalk: The paved section of the public frontage dedicated exclusively to pedestrian activity. 
    Sideyard Building: A building that occupies one side of the lot with a setback on the other side. This type can be a single or twin depending on whether it abuts the neighboring house. 
    Smart Code: A form-based code that addresses the physical form of buildings and community. The open-source Smart Code is a transect-based model code intended to be used as a template for local calibration. 
    Special District (SD): An area that, by its intrinsic function, placement, or character, cannot or should not conform to one or more of the normative districts specified by the TOCD Code. 
    Square: An outdoor, pedestrian oriented open space area that contains at least 50 percent pervious area. 
    Stoop: A private frontage wherein the façade is aligned close to the frontage line with the first story elevated from the sidewalk for privacy, with an exterior stair and landing at the entrance. 
    Story: A habitable level within a building, excluding an Attic or raised basement. 
    Street (ST): A local urban thoroughfare of low speed and capacity. 
    Street frontage: The distance along which a property line of a lot adjoins a public or private street. 
    Street furniture: Those features associated with a street that are intended to enhance that street's physical character and use by pedestrians, such as benches, trash receptacles, kiosks, lights, newspaper racks, etc. 
    Streetscreen: A freestanding wall built along the frontage line or coplanar with the façade. It may mask a parking lot from the thoroughfare, provide privacy to a side yard, and/or strengthen the spatial definition of the public realm. 
    Substantial modification: Alteration to a building that is valued at more than fifty (50%) percent of the replacement cost of the entire building, if new. 
    Surface parking lots: Area designed and used for parking motor vehicles. 
    Surface parking lots (Large): Area designed and used for parking more than thirty (30) motor vehicles. 
    Swale: A low or slightly depressed natural area for drainage. 
    Thoroughfare: A way for use by vehicular and pedestrian traffic and to provide access to lots and open spaces, consisting of vehicular lanes and the public frontage. 
    Tree grate: A permeable metal grating that may be walked upon and that fits around the base of a tree. 
    Work-Live: A mixed use unit consisting of a commercial and residential function. It typically has a substantial commercial component that may accommodate employees and walk-in trade. The unit is intended to function predominantly as work space with incidental residential accommodations that meet basic habitability requirements. 
    Zoning map: The official map or maps that are part of the city's LDC in section 104 and delineate the boundaries of individual zones and districts. 
    202.3. Terms Applicable to the Food Systems Standards 
    Aquaculture means the cultivation of aquatic animals and plants, especially fish, shellfish, and seaweed, in natural or controlled marine or freshwater environments. 
    Aquaponics, means a system that combines conventional aquaculture (raising aquatic animals such as fish, crayfish or prawns in tanks) with hydroponics (cultivating plants in water) in a symbiotic environment. 
    Commercial kitchen, means a licensed and regulated kitchen which may be used to create products for sale in wholesale or retail markets. These can be used as community kitchens within venues, such as churches or warehouse facilities. 
    Community garden, means a use in which land managed by a group of individual is used to grow food or ornamental crops for donation or for use by those cultivating the land and their households. Community gardens may include separate plots for cultivation by one (1) or more individuals or may be farmed collectively by members of the group and may include common areas maintained and used by group members. 
    Farmers' markets, means an open-air establishment that allows the selling of agricultural products, such as fruits, vegetables, herbs, nuts, flowers, or animal food products, such as eggs, honey, meat, milk, cheese and fish. The predominant sales area is for food products. 
    Greenhouse, means a free standing structure, with glass, plastic or film membrane, in which the temperature is maintained within a desired range, used for cultivating tender plants or growing plants in a controlled environment. 
    Hydroponics, means the cultivation of plants by placing the roots in liquid nutrient solutions rather than in soil; soilless growth of plants. 
    Mobile produce vending, means a mobile produce vendor is a self-contained produce service operation ( e.g., trucks, carts, trailers and kiosks), located in a readily movable motorized wheeled or towed vehicle, used to store, prepare, display and sell produce. 
    Rooftop farms, means the practice of cultivating food on the rooftop of buildings. Rooftop farming is usually done using a green roof or container gardens (container cultivation). 
    Urban farm, means an establishment where edible or ornamental crops are grown or processed to be sold or donated that includes, but is not limited to, outdoor growing operations, indoor growing operations, vertical farms, aquaponics, aquaculture, hydroponics and rooftop farms. 
    Urban garden, means an establishment where edible or ornamental crops are grown as an accessory use on the ground, or a rooftop or inside a building, to be sold or donated. 
    Vertical farm, means the practice of producing food in vertically stacked layers, which can be on the exterior or interior of a building. The modern vertical farming utilizes controlled-environment agriculture technology, where all environmental factors can be controlled. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 2(Exh. A), 11-1-17) 
Sec. 203. - Rules of construction. 
    In the interpretation of the language of this LDC, the rules set out in this section shall be observed unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city commission. 
    203.1. Generally. Terms used in these regulations, unless otherwise specifically provided, shall have the commonly understood meanings, per definition contained within the plan, or the meaning reasonably ascribed to them by the city commission. 
    In the interpretation and application of any provision of these regulations, the provision shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, aesthetics, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this LDC imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than a general provision imposed by another provision of these regulations or other city ordinance, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
    203.2. Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be performed and completed shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; if the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday recognized by the city, that day shall be excluded. 
    203.3. Administrative delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this code requires any city officer or employee to do some act or perform some duty, this code shall be construed to authorize delegation to professional-level subordinates to perform the required act or duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. Following any reorganization of the structure or duties of existing departments, authority shall be delegated to the appropriate successor department or division. 
    203.4. Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall be construed to include the feminine and neuter. Words importing the neuter shall be considered to include the masculine and the feminine. 
    203.5. Non-technical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language. Technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a particular and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
    203.6. Number. A word importing the singular number may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. The use of the plural number shall be deemed to include any single person or thing. 
    203.7. Shall, may. The word "shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
    203.8. Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past or present. 
    203.9. Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    203.10. Year. The word "year" means a calendar year, unless otherwise indicated. 
    203.11. Day. The word "day" means a calendar day, unless otherwise indicated. 
    203.12. Boundaries. Interpretations regarding boundaries of zoning districts shown on the official zoning map shall be made in accordance with the following: 
(a)  Centerlines as boundaries. Where district boundaries appear to follow centerlines of streets, alleys, easements, railroads and the like, they shall be construed as following such centerlines. 
(b)  Property lines and the like as boundaries. Where district boundaries appear to follow street, lot, property or similar lines, they shall be construed as following such lines. 
(c)  Boundaries in or adjacent to bodies of water. 
(1)  Where district boundaries appear to follow shorelines or centerlines of bodies of water, they shall be construed as following such shorelines or centerlines. In case of change in shorelines or course or extent of water, the boundaries shall be construed as moving with the change. 
(2)  Boundaries indicated as entering any body of water, but not continuing to intersection with other zoning boundaries or with the limits of jurisdiction of the city shall be construed as extending in the direction in which they enter the body of water to intersect with other zoning boundaries or with the limits of jurisdiction. 
(d)  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features listed. Where district boundaries are indicated as parallel to or extension of features listed above, they shall be so construed. 
(e)  Dimensions. Where dimensions are not otherwise indicated on or by the official zoning map, the scale of the map shall govern. 
(f)  Variation of actual location from mapped location. Where physical or cultural feature existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on or by the official zoning map, the actual location shall govern. 
(g)  Split-zoned properties. Where zoning district boundaries divide a property, the property may be developed under the terms of the less restrictive district subject to conditional use approval (section 305). 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 2(Exh. A), 11-1-17) 
Chapter 3 - PROCESSES 

Sec. 301. - General Procedures. 
    The following procedures and requirements are generally applicable to the development application types included in this chapter, unless otherwise specified in the subsections for each type. 
    301.1. Filing. An application for approval of a development permit may be filed only by the owner of the land affected by the development permit, or an agent of the owner specifically authorized by the owner to file such an application. In the case of an amendment to the comprehensive plan or official zoning map or LDC, as well as development permits subject to development review committee (DRC) and community appearance board (CAB) review, an application may be filed by either the property owner or the city. Lessees may initiate or submit an application with valid notice to and/or acknowledgment from the property owner, or lease-holder with a long-term lease of over 25 years, or a citizen with standing. 
    301.2. Application Requirements. Every application for a development permit shall be in a form specified by the department and shall be accompanied by a fee, and, if applicable, a commitment for cost recovery as established from time to time by the city, to defray the costs of processing and reviewing the application and the required notice. The application shall be completed and accompanied by all required documents specified by the application form(s) or such additional information that may be requested by the director. 
    301.3. Pre-application Conference. The director shall, upon request of the applicant, schedule and hold pre-application conferences for the purpose of reviewing the proposed development prior to the formal submission of an application for development approval. Formal application or filing of an application and plans with the department is not required for the pre-application conference. Failure of staff to identify any requirements at a pre-application conference shall not constitute waiver of the permit requirement by the decision-making body. 
    301.4. Filing of Applications. The director shall establish application filing deadlines and a review schedule for all applications. All applications for a development permit filed with the department shall be reviewed to determine whether the application is complete. If an application is deemed incomplete, the department shall notify the applicant in writing of the deficiencies. An application for development approval may not be scheduled for public hearing until all required information has been submitted and the required review agencies have completed their review. The DRC chair shall advise the applicant of the scheduled meeting dates and public hearings, requirements and submittal deadlines. 
    Generally, the planning and zoning board, DRC and/or CAB serve as recommending bodies for the ultimate city commission consideration of an application or set of related applications. In some cases, applications may be approved by the boards, and/or DRC, as specified later in this chapter. The city commission, planning and zoning board, DRC and CAB may take the following actions on each application for development approval: 
(1)  Approval; 
(2)  Approval with conditions; 
(3)  Continuance or deferral; or 
(4)  Denial. 
    As required by F.S. §166.033, in the event of a denial, the applicant shall be given the reason for the denial in writing. 
    301.5. Public Hearing and Notice Procedures. 
(a)  All public hearing and notice requirements shall be as follows: 
(1)  For a textual change to the city's adopted land use plan or a land use plan map amendment, shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 163.3184(11), or in the case of a small scale amendment as defined by F.S. §163.3187(1), notice shall be given in accordance with the provisions of F.S. §163.3187(2); and 
(2)  For the adoption of ordinances and resolutions, shall be provided in accordance with F.S. § 166.041; and 
(3)  For the city's quasi-judicial development permits (the procedures outlined within sections 2-96 through 2-105.3 of the City Code), shall be provided in conformance with Sec. 301.11 of this LDC set forth below; and 
(4)  For adoption of resolutions to vacate city-operated and maintained easements or rights-of-way or easements, shall be provided in accordance with F.S. § 166.041; and 
(5)  For notice of the intent to consider a development agreement shall be advertised in accordance with F.S. § 163.3225(2). 
b.  The following types of applications must be reviewed by the following commissions and board as set out in table 1 below: 
Table 1 
APPROVAL PROCESS FOR DEVELOPMENT APPLICATIONS 1 
Application type Administrative Cab DRC Community meeting Planning and zoning board Commission (consent) Commission 
(Quasi-judicial 
hearing) Commission 
(first reading) Commission 
(second reading) Abandonment of Right-of-Way ? ? Appeal ? Archaeological or Historic Landmark Designation ? ? Community Appearance - new construction ? ? Community Appearance - renovation 1 ? Community Appearance - telecommunication 1 ? ? Community Appearance - TOC 1 ? Comprehensive (Land Use) Plan Map Amendment ? ? ? ? ? Comprehensive Plan Text Amendment ? ? ? ? Compliance Plan 2 ? ? Conditional Use ? ? ? ? Conditional Use Extension ? Cure Plan ? ? Development Agreement ? ? ? Development of Regional Impact ? ? ? ? ? Engineering Roadway Plans ? Flexibility / Reserve Unit Allocation 3 Homeowner Variance ? Lake Excavation and Resource Extraction 4 ? ? Land Development Code Text Amendment ? ? ? ? Plat ? ? Plat Exemption 1 ? Plat Waiver ? ? Re-approval of Expired Conditional Use ? ? ? ? Re-approval of Expired Site Plan or Variance ? ? Resolution Modification ? ? Rezoning ? ? ? ? ? Site Plan - New construction ? ? Site Plan - TOC (new construction and renovation) ? Site Plan Amendment 1 ? Site Plan Amendment - Telecommunication 1 ? ? Site Plan Extension ? ? Trafficways Amendment ? ? ? Temporary Use Permit 1 - (major special event ) ? ? Temporary Use Permit 1 - (minor special event) ? Temporary Use Permit 1 - (portable storage units) ? Temporary Use Permit 1 - (charitable clothing donation bins) ? Temporary Use Permit 1 - (seasonal sales) ? Temporary Use Permit 1 - (sidewalk sales) ? Temporary Use Permit 1 - (residential model sales trailers) ? Temporary Use Permit 1 - (construction trailers) ? Temporary Use Permit 1 - (miscellaneous) ? Tree Removal/Relocation Permits ? Vacation of Easements ? ? Variance ? ? Variance Extension ? ? Extended Hours License (alcoholic beverages) ? Zoning Permits ? Zoning Relief Procedure ? ? 1 in certain cases, public hearing may be required after DRC/CAB review, per adopted procedures, refer to text for clarification 
2 for approval of funding only 
3 coinciding with a conditional use or rezoning 
4 as a conditional use  
    301.6. Rescheduled meeting dates. Meetings may be continued by the city commission, board, DRC chair or CAB chair to a date certain without further notice except as provided for by F.S. §286.011 or other applicable law. 
    301.7. Examination and copying of application and other documents. At any time during normal business hours of the city, upon reasonable request, any person may examine an application for development approval and materials submitted in support of or in opposition thereto. Copies of such materials, unless said application or other material is confidential or exempt from disclosure, as provided by federal or Florida law, shall be made available to the public upon payment of the appropriate fee. 
    301.8. Resubmission of applications after denial. The same application for development approval may not be resubmitted for reconsideration to the city commission or planning and zoning board for a period of 365 consecutive days after the date on which an application for the same proposed development has been denied by the commission or board. An application that is significantly different from the previously denied submittal as determined by the director may be submitted at an earlier date. 
    301.9. Reliance on information presented by applicant. The city and its departments, boards and agencies shall have the right to rely on the accuracy of statements, documents and all other information presented to them by the applicant or the applicant's agent or consultants, in review of an application for development approval issued under this Code. The applicant shall execute an application form which includes the following statement: Under penalties of perjury, I declare that I have read the foregoing application and all attachment thereto, and that the facts stated in it are true," followed by the signature of the applicant making the declaration. The written declaration shall be printed or typed at the end of or immediately below the document being verified and above the signature of the person making the declaration. As provided in F.S. s. 92.525(3), a person who knowingly makes a false declaration is guilty of the crime of perjury by false written declaration, a felony of the third degree, punishable as provided in F.S. s. 775.082, s. 775.083, or s. 775.084. 
    301.10. Application annulment. If an applicant fails to act upon a submitted application within a 90-day period after receiving written comments from the department, the application will be deemed withdrawn by the applicant. The director may extend the 90-day requirement if reasonable progress is being made in revising the application. For good cause shown or excusable delay, if a request is made in writing during the 90-day period, the director may extend the 90-day period until a reasonable time that the circumstances dictate. 
    301.11. Courtesy notices. The following public notices shall be provided in addition to any legally required notice by state law. These notices are provided as a courtesy to any party which may be affected, as defined by code, by a development application for the purpose of notifying those parties of the application and their ability to review submitted information and participate in public hearings. The failure of a property owner to be furnished with or to receive a courtesy notice shall not be deemed as a failure to furnish or receive legally required written notice pursuant to this Code subsection. 
    The cost and responsibility of providing the notice as required by this Code shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner or said property owner's designated agent. The department shall approve the text and format for all required posted and mailed notice prior to its completion. Prior to the scheduled hearing, the property owner or agent shall submit a copy of the actual mailed notice and sign text, the list of all property owners notified by mail, and a written affidavit on a form provided by the city which certifies that the requirements of this section have been complied with. Failure to comply with the provisions of this section in a timely manner may result in a postponement of the scheduled hearing until the notice is complete, or imposition by the department that a re-notice by the applicant as required in this Code must be accomplished at the applicant's sole expense. 
    301.11.1. Affected Development Applications. The following development applications as defined by this Code shall be subject to the notice provisions of these regulations as set forth in table 2 below: 
Table 2 
REQUIRED NOTIFICATION PROCESS FOR DEVELOPMENT APPLICATIONS 1 
Application type Mailed notice Posted sign(s) Radius in feet Newspaper advertisement Other 2 Not required Abandonment of Right-of-Way/Vacation of Easement ? 500 ? ? Appeal 3 ? ? Community Appearance - new construction 4 ? ? 1000 ? Community Appearance - TOC 4,5 ? ? 500 ? ? Compliance Plan 6 ? Comprehensive/Land Use Plan Map Amendment (LUPA) ? ? 1000 ? ? Comprehensive Plan Text Amendment 7 ? ? Conditional Use ? ? 1000 ? Continuance of a noticed item ? ? Cure Plan ? ? 500 ? Development Agreement ? 1000 ? ? Development of Regional Impact / Substantial Deviations ? ? 1000 ? ? Extended Hours License (alcoholic beverages) ? ? 1000 ? Extension of Conditional Use, Site Plan, and/or Variance ? Flexibility / Reserve Unit Allocation 8 ? Homeowner Variance 9 ? 300 Lake Excavation and Resource Extraction ? ? 1000 ? Land Development Code Text Amendment ? ? Miscellaneous applications subject to Commission consent ? Plat, Plat Exemption, or Plat Waiver 10 ? ? 500 ? Re-approval of Expired Conditional Use, Site Plan or Variance ? ? 1000 ? ? Resolution modification by Commission ? Rezoning ? ? 1000 ? ? Site Plan/Site Plan Amendment/Telecommunication 11 ? ? 1000 ? Site Plan - TOC (new construction and renovation) 5 ? ? 500 ? Trafficways Amendment ? ? 1000 ? Temporary Use Permit subject to Commission approval ? Variance 12 ? ? 500 Zoning Relief Procedure ? 300 ? ? 1 in all cases, other than newspaper advertising which are governed by State Law, mailed and posted notices are required 14 days prior to all public hearings and any official community meetings; the community meetings shall always precede the public hearings 
2 other methods may include City's website and other marketing methods 
3 applicant receives written notice of hearing date and is responsible for a mailed notice dependent on the application type 
4 Community Appearance Board approvals subject to a public hearing are heard with the related site plan application 
5 if as a result of the initial notice, an interested party requests a public hearing, then the same notice requirements for a site plan shall be required for such hearing 
6 not subject to a hearing, consent approval of CDBG funding 
7 same as Land Use Map Amendment for site specific requirements only 
8 coincides with conditional use or rezoning 
9 mailed courtesy notices for homeowner variances are prepared and distributed by the city; a posted notice is not required in these cases 
10 Plat Exemptions that are subject to hearings only 
11 for those site plan amendments and telecommunications site plans/site plan amendments subject to a public hearing 
12 including variances other than those pertaining to homeowners  
    301.11.2. Posted Notice/Public Hearing Sign. 
(a)  A sign which clearly announces the pending application(s) shall be posted on the property in a prominent location from an adjoining roadway or property line, or at such other location as designated by the city to ensure maximum exposure of the sign(s) to the public. If the subject property abuts more than one roadway, then a sign shall be posted along each of those roadways. A designated outparcel of a larger property which does not abut a roadway, shall have the sign posted near the closest roadway to the larger parcel. The sign shall be a minimum of 12 square feet in area with approximate dimensions of at least three feet by four feet, the bottom of the sign shall be mounted approximately three feet above the adjacent road crown elevation or ground, whichever is higher. The following table 3 provides additional information with regard to signage: 
Table 3 
NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS 
ITEMS MAILED NOTICE POSTED SIGN(S) 2 Minimum size of sign: 4 square feet ? Minimum lettering size: 3 inches ? Height of posting: minimum 3 feet above ground or roadway ? Application number(s) indicated in text ? ? Brief Department contact information included in text ? Detailed Department contact information included in text ? Public hearing date(s) and time(s) ? ? Public hearing location(s) ? ? Community meeting date(s) and time(s) 2 ? ? Community meeting location(s) 2 ? ? Mailed (first class) 14 days prior to first meeting or hearing ? Posted 14 days prior to first meeting or hearing ? Removal 14 days after last hearing ? Condominium association and each individual owner 2 ? Use of city stamped envelopes ? Mailed to City Clerk of adjacent jurisdiction ? A detailed description of the application in layman's terms, including the type(s) of approval requested ? A brief notice of upcoming public hearing ? A statement that information regarding the application(s), including community meeting (if required) and hearing dates and times and that a written report may be obtained from the Community and Economic Development Department, with the department's contact information ? A graphic representation (i.e., map) of the site's location and surrounding area in sufficient detail to clearly locate the subject property ? 1 Exemption: the foregoing sign-posting requirement shall not apply to development applications for individually-owned single-family and duplex properties. 2 If applicable  
(b)  The sign must contain the following information: 
(1)  A title stating NOTICE OF PUBLIC LAND USE HEARING; 
(2)  The application number(s); 
(2)  The planned public hearing and community meeting dates, times and locations; 
(3)  The department's contact information; 
(c)  The sign shall be posted at least 14 days prior to the first scheduled public hearing, if a community meeting is not required, or 14 days prior to the community meeting, if a community meeting is required. 
(d)  The sign shall be removed within 14 days of the application's final hearing. 
(e)  Exemption: the foregoing sign-posting requirement shall not apply to development applications for individually-owned single-family and duplex properties. 
    301.11.3. Mailed Notice. 
(a)  A courtesy notice shall be mailed to nearby property owners as specified herein. The notification area shall be from the outer perimeters of the subject property. property to the nearest point of any parcel of land located within the notification area. As stated in section 301.11, the failure of a property owner to be furnished with or to receive a courtesy notice shall not be deemed as a failure to furnish or receive legally required written notice pursuant to this Code subsection. The individuals who must receive notice are detailed in table 3 above. 
(b)  All lists of property owners to whom notice must be mailed shall be based upon the most recently updated records available from the Broward County Property Appraiser's Office (BCPA) and be obtained from the BCPA no more than 30 days prior to the date of mailing. A commercially available computerized listing of these records may be used to obtain the current address providing the source of information is at least as up to date as the property appraiser's records. If any part of the common elements, as defined in F.S. § 718.103 of a condominium or any part of the common areas as defined in F.S. § 719.103 of a cooperative building is within the required notice limits, notice shall be sent to the condominium or cooperative association as well as each unit owner in the subject building. If property within an adjacent governmental jurisdiction is within the notice limits, notice shall be sent to the clerk of the affected unit of government; notice shall not be required for each parcel of land within the adjacent jurisdiction. Mailed notice shall at a minimum be mailed by postpaid first class U.S. mail. Envelopes used for mailed notice shall contain the city's return address. Envelopes shall be provided by the city, at cost to the applicant. 
(c)  The mailed notice shall contain the following information: 
(1)  A title stating NOTICE OF PUBLIC LAND USE HEARING, which shall be at the top of the notice page, conspicuously placed, in bold type; 
(2)  A description of the application in layman's English language terms, that is the subject of the hearing, including the type(s) of approval requested, and the application number(s); 
(3)  A statement that information regarding the application(s), including community meeting (if required) and planned public hearing dates and times and locations and that a written report may be obtained from the department. The department's contact information shall be included in the notice. 
(4)  A graphic representation of the site's location and surrounding area in sufficient detail to clearly locate the property; 
(5)  A notice that the public hearing may be continued from time to time; 
(6)  The department's contact information; and 
(7)  Wording consistent with F.S. § 286.0105 as follows: 
Pursuant to F.S. § 286.0105, the City hereby advises you that if you or another person decide to appeal any decision made by the City Commission with respect to any matter considered at its meeting or this hearing that you or said person may need to insure that a verbatim record of the proceedings is made, which record includes the testimony and evidence upon which the appeal is to be based. This notice does not constitute consent by the City for the introduction or admission into evidence of otherwise inadmissible or irrelevant evidence, nor does it authorize challenges or appeals not otherwise allowed by law; and 
(8)  Wording consistent with F.S. § 286.26 as follows: 
In accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act and section F.S. § 286.26, persons with disabilities needing special accommodation to participate in this proceeding should contact the city clerk at least 48 hours prior to the proceedings at (954) 602-3011 for assistance. 
(d)  The notice shall be postmarked at least fourteen (14) days prior to the first scheduled public hearing, if a community meeting is not required, or 14 days prior to the community meeting if a community meeting is required. One mailed notice may be used to notify all scheduled meetings and hearings. 
(e)  Mail notice shall be mailed to all owners of property within the notification area as defined in Table 2 per Sec. 301.11.1 above. 
    301.11.4. Continuance and Deferrals. The commission and/or board may continue or defer a scheduled public hearing to a date and time certain without further notice; provided that the date and time of the continuance or deferral is announced by the at the originally scheduled hearing. 
    301.11.5. Community Meetings. All applications for conditional uses, site-specific rezonings, and site-specific land use plan amendments, developments of regional impact and amendments to the county trafficways plan shall be first scheduled for discussion at a community meeting. The meeting shall be held for the applicant to present the plans to city residents and property owners and to the adjacent communities and obtain community input regarding the application. The meeting shall be noticed by the applicant upon verification from the department that the application is complete and that the notice form is acceptable to the department. The community meeting shall be held at a time and place determined by the department to provide adequate notification to the community and report any issues raised. A lack of participation at this meeting by the public shall not prejudice the application in any manner. 
(Ord. No. 17-07, § 6, 11-14-16; Ord. No. 18-01, § 3(Exh. B), 11-1-17) 
Sec. 302. - Amendments to the Land Development Code. 
    302.1. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to provide a uniform procedure concerning the review of proposals for amendments to these regulations, to provide for the continued integrity of these regulations; to adapt to changes in the community; and to allow the public an adequate opportunity to be heard concerning issues arising under or incidental to these regulations and amendments hereto. Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning practice and planning techniques require, the city commission may, by ordinance duly adopted in accordance with the procedures set forth herein, amend and/or supplement this Code. All amendments of the code shall be consistent with the adopted comprehensive plan. 
    302.2. Initiation. An amendment to the text of this Code may be initiated by the city manager or the city commission. Any affected person or persons or interested parties may also petition the city to amend the text of this Code, subject to the payment of an application fee to cover the cost of processing the application. 
    302.3. Application Requirements. Land Development Code (LDC) text amendment application forms, along with all established and required fees, documents, studies and analysis, shall be submitted to the city by the applicant to the department. All applications shall be processed according to the procedures of this Code and shall address the standards of section 302.7. 
    302.4. Review by Staff and Development Review Committee (DRC). The department shall review applications for amendment to the text of the code and compile a written report which summarizes the proposed language including all relevant documents, facts, and analysis, and evaluates the proposed amendment with the general purpose and standards set forth in this section. The director shall transmit a copy of the amendment(s) and the staff report to the DRC for consideration of impacts and standards. 
    302.5. Review by Planning and Zoning Board. The board shall review and consider amendments to the text of the LDC and make recommendations to the city commission. 
    302.5.1. Public Hearing. The Board shall hold one public hearing on the proposed text amendment. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided in accordance with F.S. Ch. 166, and the public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
    302.5.2. Action by the Board. In considering amendments to the text, the planning and zoning board shall review the proposed language, the general purpose and standards set forth in this section, the report of the department and any oral or written comments received before or at the public hearing. If the board finds that the proposed amendments are in compliance with the general purpose and standards, then they shall recommend approval of the amendment to the city commission. If the board finds that the proposed amendments are not in compliance, then they shall recommend denial of the amendments to the city commission. The board may continue the matter until the requested information or studies have been completed and offered in testimony. The planning and zoning board, acting as the local planning agency, shall also make a recommendation to the city commission whether the proposal is consistent with the comprehensive plan. Any documentation, including all documents, papers, letters, maps, books, tapes, photographs, films, sound recordings, data processing software, or other material, regardless of the physical form, characteristics, or means of transmission, presented to the department prior to the scheduled public hearings or presented at either public hearing by anyone appearing before the planning and zoning board shall automatically be made a part of the record of the public hearing. Additionally, the minutes of the public hearing, city staff memoranda, the City Code, and the comprehensive plan shall automatically be made a part of the record of the public hearing. The board may continue the matter until the requested information or studies have been completed and offered in testimony. 
    302.6. Review by City Commission. The commission shall review all amendments to the text. The Director shall transmit to the city manager a copy of the complete application and a written staff report summarizing the proposed language including all relevant documents, facts, and analysis and the recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Board. The city manager shall schedule the proposed amendment for the next available commission meeting provided that the required notice procedures are met. 
    302.6.1. Public Hearing. In order to adopt an ordinance, the city commission shall hold two public hearings on the proposed amendments consistent with the procedures for adoption of an ordinance. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided in accordance with F.S. ch. 166, and the public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this Code. Any documentation, including all documents, papers, letters, maps, books, tapes, photographs, films, sound recordings, data processing software, or other material, regardless of the physical form, characteristics, or means of transmission, presented to the department prior to the scheduled public hearings or presented at either public hearing by anyone appearing before the city commission at the public hearing shall automatically be made a part of the record of the public hearing. Additionally, the minutes of the public hearings, city staff memoranda, the City Code, and the comprehensive plan shall automatically be made a part of the record of the public hearing. 
    302.6.2. Action by the Commission. In considering text amendments, the commission shall review the proposed amendment, the general purpose and standards, the report of the administration and recommendation of the board, and any oral and written comments received before or at the public hearing. Based upon the record developed at the public hearings, the city commission may: 
(1)  Adopt the proposed amendment with or without modifications by ordinance; or 
(2)  Reject the proposed amendment; or 
(3)  Refer the matter to the board or department for further consideration. 
    302.7. Standards for reviewing proposed amendments to the text of this Code. In deciding whether to recommend approval of a proposed amendment, city staff, the department, the planning and zoning board and the city commission shall determine whether or not: 
(1)  The proposed amendment is legally required; and 
(2)  The proposed amendment is consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies of the comprehensive plan; and 
(3)  The proposed amendment is consistent with the authority and purpose of this Code; and 
(4)  The proposed amendment furthers the orderly development of the city; and 
(5)  The proposed amendment promotes sustainability and efficiency of the city and whether the proposed amendment promotes the public health, safety, welfare, and aesthetics; and 
(6)  The proposed amendment improves the administration or execution of the development process. 
    302.8. Zoning-in-Progress. When a text amendment is being considered, the city commission may impose a hold or stay on any development applications, permits, and licenses pending before the city with respect to the text which is the subject of the proposed amendment. The hold or stay shall continue in effect for a period from the date of the publication of notice of the consideration of the zoning-in-progress by the commission until proposed legislation, with or without amendments, shall have been approved or disapproved, or for a period of 180 days (which may be extended one time for an additional three months by resolution), whichever is sooner, unless such development application would be in conformity with both the existing legislation and the proposed legislation. 
(Ord. No. 17-07, § 6, 11-14-16) 
Sec. 303. - Amendments to the Comprehensive Plan and Developments of Regional Impact. 
    The comprehensive plan may be amended in accordance with this section and the notice and hearing procedures as set forth in this Code and applicable Florida Statutes. Corrections, updates, or modifications of current codes, to the extent permitted by Florida law, which were set out as part of the plan shall not, for the purposes of this section, be deemed to be Plan Amendments. Modifications to update the capital improvement schedule may be accomplished by ordinance adopted pursuant to F.S. §166.041(3)(a) after review and public hearing by the planning and zoning board, sitting as the local planning agency, and the city commission, and shall not be deemed to be an amendment to the comprehensive plan. 
    303.1. Filing. Any person, board or agency affected by the city's comprehensive plan may apply to amend the plan, except as provided herein. An application to amend the map or text of the adopted land use plan (LUPA) may only be filed by the city manager, city commission or an owner of property subject to the amendment, except as otherwise provided by law. 
    303.2. Application Requirements. LUPA application forms, along with all established and required fees, documents, studies, data and analysis, shall be submitted by the applicant to the department. The applicant shall submit all information to adequately address the filing requirements adopted by the Florida department of economic opportunity, and if applicable, the requirements of the county planning council. In addition, the applicant shall submit all other information determined by the director to be necessary to address the comprehensive planning criteria of the city. 
    303.3. Limitations on Number of Amendments. The city manager shall establish a schedule for the acceptance of amendments to the comprehensive plan. The applicant shall comply with the limitations of F.S. § 163.3187 et seq., as amended, regarding the number and type of amendments which may be filed. If the amendment involves a change to the Broward County Land Use Plan (BCLUP), the schedule shall be established to meet the county's submittal deadlines. 
    303.4. Notice of Public Hearings. Public hearings shall be held in compliance with F.S. §§ 163.3174(4) and § 163.3184(11), as amended, and the provisions of this Code. 
    303.5. Amendment procedure. The procedure for a LUPA shall be by ordinance, in accordance with Chapters F.S. §§ 163,3174, 163.3184 and 163.3187, all as amended from time to time. 
    303.6. Local Planning Agency Public Hearing. The planning and zoning board, sitting as the LPA, shall hold at least one advertised public hearing on a proposed LUPA to review the amendment and provide recommendations to the city commission. The meeting shall be noticed in compliance with the notice requirements of this Code and F.S. §§ 163.3174. 
    303.7. City Commission Public Hearings. The commission shall hold at least two advertised public hearings on a proposed LUPA in compliance with F.S. §§ 163.3184 and 163.3187, all as amended from time to time. The meeting shall be noticed in compliance with the notice requirements of this Code and Florida Statutes. 
    303.8. Transmittal of Proposed Amendment. Following the first public hearing by the commission on a proposed LUPA, the city, if required by law, shall transmit the required documents of the proposed amendment to the required state, regional and county review agencies. If the LUPA involves an amendment to the county land use plan, then the city may transmit the required documents to the state concurrently with the county transmittal. 
    303.9. Adoption of Proposed Amendment. If Florida law requires transmittal of the proposed amendment as provided in section 303.8, upon receipt of the comments from the Florida department of economic opportunity, the commission shall adopt, adopt with changes, or deny the proposed LUPA in accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 163.3184, as amended from time to time. 
    303.10 Developments of Regional Impact (DRIs). The city contains several developments of regional impact (DRIs), approved by the state of Florida pursuant to a specified development order. For property located within one of the established DRIs, the development permits must be consistent with the development order, as well as the city's comprehensive plan. DRI and substantial deviation (as defined in F.S. §380.06(19), as amended from time to time), application forms, along with all established and required fees, documents, and plans, shall be submitted to the city by the applicant to the department for review. 
    An application for substantial deviation for an approved DRI development order shall be reviewed by the DRC. Upon a recommendation from the DRC, the applicant shall conduct a community meeting with regard to the application as per the procedures in section 301. Subsequent to the community meeting, the application shall be considered by the planning and zoning board for a recommendation to the commission, which shall conduct two readings that include statutory state review. 
(Ord. No. 17-07, § 6, 11-14-16) 
Sec. 304. - Amendments to the Official Zoning Map (Rezoning). 
    304.1. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to provide a uniform procedure concerning the review of proposals for amendments to zoning district designations (i.e., rezoning), to provide for the continued integrity of these districts and regulations; to adapt to changes in the community; and to allow the public an adequate opportunity to be heard concerning issues arising under or incidental to these districts and amendments hereto. Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning practice and planning techniques require, the commission may, by ordinance duly adopted in accordance with the procedures set forth herein, amend and/or supplement the zoning district boundaries or classifications of property now or hereafter established or by amendment hereto. All amendments of the map must be consistent with the adopted comprehensive plan. 
    304.2. Initiation. An amendment to the official zoning map may be initiated by the city or by any person(s) owning property within the area proposed for change on the map subject to the payment of an application fee to cover the cost of processing the application. An application for rezoning initiated by the city may be initiated by the city manager, the city commission, or the planning and zoning board. 
    304.3. Application requirements. Rezoning application forms, along with all established and required fees, documents, studies, data and analysis and plans, shall be submitted to the city by the applicant to the department. All applications shall be processed according to the code and shall address the standards of Sec. 304.7, as well as the standards for a specific zoning district. 
    304.4. Review by Staff and DRC. The department shall review applications for rezoning and compile a written report which summarizes the facts of the case including all relevant documents, and together with the DRC shall evaluate the proposed impacts of the amendment with respect to the general purpose and standards. The director shall transmit a copy of the staff report to the board. 
    304.5. Review by Planning And Zoning Board. The board shall review the proposed rezoning of property and make recommendations to the commission. 
    304.5.1. Public Hearing. The Board shall hold one public hearing on the proposed rezoning. Notice of the public hearing shall be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation at least ten days prior to the public hearing. The notice shall: state the date, time, and place of the public hearing; include a brief layman's language description of the proposal or present the title of proposed rezoning ordinance; and describe the place within the city where such proposed rezoning application may be inspected by the public. The notice shall also the public advise that interested parties may appear at the meeting and be heard with respect to the proposed rezoning or that the public may submit written comments to the department prior to the public hearing which written comments will be included in the record of the public hearing. The notice shall also include the disclosures described in F.S. §§286.0105 and 286.26. The public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
    304.5.2. Action by the Board. In considering a rezoning, the board shall review the proposed amendment, the general purpose and standards set forth in this section, the report of the department, administration and any oral or written comments received before or at the public hearing. If the board finds that the proposed amendment is in compliance with the general purpose and standards and the comprehensive plan, then they shall recommend approval to the city commission. If the board finds that the proposed amendment is not in compliance with the specified general purpose and standards or the comprehensive plan, then they shall recommend denial of to the city commission. The board may continue the public hearing for its convenience or matter until the requested information or studies have been completed and offered in testimony. 
    304.6. Review by City Commission. The city commission shall review and consider all amendments to the official zoning map. The director shall transmit to the city manager a copy of the complete application and a written staff report summarizing the facts of the case including all relevant documents, analysis of impacts, and compatibility, and an analysis of consistency with the comprehensive plan, copies of written public comment received, a copy of the board minutes, and the recommendations of the board. The city manager shall schedule the proposed rezoning for the next available city commission meeting for consideration providing, that the required notice procedures are met. 
    304.6.1. Public hearing. In order to adopt an ordinance the city commission shall hold two public hearings on the proposed rezoning consistent with the procedures for adoption of an ordinance. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided in accordance with F.S. Ch. 166, and the public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of this Code. The commission may continue the public hearing for its convenience or requested information or studies have been completed and offered in testimony. 
    304.6.2. Action by the city commission. In considering a rezoning, the commission shall review the proposed amendment, the general purpose and standards, the report of the administration, the application of the comprehensive plan, and the recommendation of the board, and any oral and written comments received before or at the public hearing. Based upon the record developed at the public hearings, the commission may: 
(1)  Adopt the proposed rezoning with or without modifications by ordinance; or 
(2)  Grant another zoning classification consistent with the land use plan land use plan designation and comprehensive plan and consistent with F.S. §166.031, giving reasons therefore; or 
(3)  Reject the proposed amendment and consistent with F.S. §166.031, giving written reasons for the denial; or 
(4)  Refer the matter to the board or department for further consideration. 
    304.7. Standards for reviewing proposed amendments to the Official Zoning Map. In deciding whether to recommend approval of a proposed amendment, city staff, the department, the planning and zoning board and the city commission shall determine whether or not: 
(1)  The proposed amendment is consistent with goals, objective, and policies of the city's comprehensive plan; and 
(2)  The proposed zoning district is compatible with the surrounding area's zoning designation(s) and existing uses; and 
(3)  The subject property is physically suitable for the zoned purpose and/or the proposed use and purpose; and 
(4)  There are sites available in other areas currently zoned for such use; and 
(5)  If applicable, the proposed change will contribute to redevelopment of an area in accordance with an approved redevelopment plan; and 
(6)  The proposed change would adversely affect traffic patterns or congestion; and 
(7)  The proposed change would adversely impact population density such that the demand for water, sewers, streets, recreational areas and facilities, and other public facilities and services would be adversely affected; and 
(8)  Whether the proposed change would have an adverse environmental impact on the vicinity; and 
(9)  Whether the proposed change would adversely affect the health, safety, aesthetics, and welfare of the neighborhood or the city as a whole. 
    304.8. Zoning-in-Progress. When a rezoning of a parcel of land is being considered, the city commission may impose a hold or stay on any development applications pending before the city with respect to the area which is the subject of the proposed amendment. The hold or stay shall continue in effect for a period from the date of the publication of notice of the consideration of the zoning-in-progress by the commission until proposed legislation, with or without amendments, shall have been approved or disapproved, or for a period of 180 days (which may be extended one time for an additional 90 days by resolution), whichever is sooner, unless such development application would be in conformity with both the existing legislation and the proposed legislation. 
(Ord. No. 17-07, § 6, 11-14-16) 
Sec. 305. - Conditional and Permitted Uses. 
    305.1. Purpose and Intent. Permitted uses are considered to be fundamentally appropriate within the district in which they are located and are deemed to be consistent with the comprehensive plan. These uses are permitted as of right subject to the required permits and procedures described in this section. Permitted uses require final site plan review and approval for compliance with the standards applicable to a particular permitted use as provided in the relevant use regulations and development standards. However, an examination of each use on particular properties must be examined to determine whether the proposed use, as applied, is consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
    Conditional uses are generally not compatible with the other uses permitted in a zoning district, but may be permitted following individual review as to their consistency with the comprehensive plan, compatibility, size, massing, impacts, number, location, design, configuration, and/or methods and hours of operation. To ensure that the particular use is compatible with the surrounding neighborhoods and appropriate at a particular location, consideration of the public need and the possible imposition of individualized conditions to ensure the use is compatible, will be analyzed. 
    All questions of interpretation relating to the comprehensive plan, the land development code and any regulations promulgated pursuant thereto shall be first presented to the director. Interpretations of the land development code or the comprehensive plan may include, but shall not be limited to, ascertaining the meaning and application of words, terms, and provisions herein and regulations promulgated pursuant hereto. In interpreting the comprehensive plan or the land development code and any regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, the director shall be guided first by the plain meaning of the word and terms in the land development code or the comprehensive plan and the implementing regulations and second by the intent expressed therein, if any. The director shall make interpretations by interpreting the comprehensive plan or the land development code and its implementing regulations, as a whole and not by taking specific words or clauses in isolation. Prior to making an interpretation of the provisions of the comprehensive plan, the land development code and any regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, the director may require the building official, city attorney, or city engineer to provide assistance. Interpretation of the provisions of the comprehensive plan, the land development code and any regulations promulgated pursuant thereto shall be made in writing, shall state the code provision or regulation being interpreted, the interpretation made, the basis for the interpretation, and advise the applicant for sais interpretation that appeals may be taken to the commission per procedures noted in section 315. The time within which an appeal must be taken and the manner of filing an appeal shall also be included within the director's letter of interpretation. After the interpretation of the comprehensive plan, the land development code or implementing regulation, copies of the interpretation shall be promptly distributed to the party seeking the interpretation and the department secretary. Upon receipt of the letter of interpretation, the department secretary, or said secretary's designee, shall promptly log in the letter of interpretation, including the date that the letter of interpretation was renders. The department secretary shall keep an index of letters of interpretation indexed by code or implementing regulation section. 
    305.2. Permits Required for Permitted Uses. Except as explicitly provided herein, no use designated as a permitted use in this Code shall be established until after the person proposing such use has applied for and received all required development permits which may include, final plat approval, final site plan and community appearance approval, a building permit, a zoning certificate of use and a certificate of occupancy all pursuant to the requirements of this Code. 
    305.3. Application Requirements for Conditional Uses. No use designated as a conditional use in this Code shall be established until after such use has received approval under the provisions of this section 305 and has received all other required permits. Conditional use application forms, along with all established and required fees, documents, and plans, shall be submitted to the city by the applicant to the department. The application shall include, at a minimum: 
(1)  A preliminary site plan meeting the technical merits for a final site plan review by the DRC or a final site plan, unless a separate site plan application is simultaneously submitted or a floor plan if a proposed use will be located within an existing space; and 
(2)  A written response and graphic summary of the proposed project and its relationship to the general standards of review (i.e., the conditional use criteria) in Sec. 305.4; and 
(3)  An ownership affidavit; and 
(4)  A sealed, as-built survey showing existing conditions of the property (if applicable). The survey shall be certified to and for reliance by the city and must be prepared by a registered and licensed Florida surveyor and mapper. The survey shall be current, meaning that the survey is no older than 180 days prior to conditional use application (or brought up to date) and depicts current conditions on the subject property. Said survey shall be prepared in accordance with the minimum technical standards of F.S. § 472.027, and F.A.C. Ch. 21HH-6, and attached as an exhibit to the application. 
    305.4. General standards of review. In addition to the standards set forth in this Code for the particular use, all proposed conditional uses shall meet each of the following standards: 
(1)  The proposed use shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan; and 
(2)  The establishment, maintenance or operation of the use shall not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, aesthetics, comfort, or general welfare; and 
(3)  The use shall be consistent with the existing natural environment and community character of the immediate neighborhood, and is appropriate at the particular location; and 
(4)  Utilities, roadway capacity, drainage, and other necessary public facilities, including police and fire protection and emergency-rescue services, shall exist at a minimum at the city's adopted level of service, or will be available prior to issuance of any certificate of occupancy; and 
(5)  Adequate measures exist or shall be taken by the applicant or the property owner to provide safe ingress and egress to the proposed use, for both vehicles and pedestrians, in a manner that minimizes traffic congestion in the public streets and the use may not result in a significantly greater amount of traffic on local streets than would result from a development permitted by right; and 
(6)  The establishment of the conditional use shall not impede the development and improvement of surrounding properties for uses permitted in the zoning district nor have a negative impact on the value of those properties; and 
(7)  The design of the proposed use shall minimize adverse effects, including noise, light, dust or other potential nuisances, of the proposed use on adjacent property through the use of building orientation and design, setbacks, buffers, landscaping and other design criteria; and 
(8)  The use meets a public need and does not have an adverse impact on the economic stability of the neighborhood; and 
(9)  The land area must be sufficient, appropriate and adequate for the proposed use; and 
(10)  The proposed use, based on size, massing, impact, aesthetics, impacts, number, location, design, configuration, and methods and hours of operation is compatible with adjacent properties and the neighborhood. 
    305.5. Review by DRC. A complete application shall be reviewed by the DRC. The DRC shall determine whether the proposed use complies with the general standards of review and use regulations and development standards and all other applicable development regulations. The DRC chair shall submit a written report, incorporating the findings of the DRC, to the planning and zoning board and city manager. 
    305.6. Community Meeting. A community meeting shall be held for the applicant to discuss and present the plans to the community in order to obtain the input regarding the application. 
    305.7. Review by the Planning and Zoning Board. The board shall conduct a public hearing in which they shall review the DRC report and the project proposal, prior to making a recommendation concerning the project to the commission. If the board determines that the proposed use is in compliance with the general standards of review and use regulations and development standards, then the burden of proof shall switch to opponents of the conditional use or the city to demonstrate that the issuance of the conditional use approval will be adverse to the public interest. If the proposed conditional use general standards of review and use regulations and development standards are satisfied, and there has been no showing that the proposed conditional use is adverse to the public interest, then, and in that event, the board shall recommend approval, with or without conditions, as determined appropriate. If the board finds that the proposed conditional use is not in compliance, with the general standards of review, use regulations, and development standards or is adverse to the public interest, the board shall recommend denial of the application. The board may continue the public hearing for its convenience, or when necessary to allow for the presentation of any additional information or studies found necessary to make a decision based on the applicable criteria. 
    305.8. Review by the City Commission. The commission shall review and consider all conditional use applications. The director shall transmit to the city manager a copy of the complete application and a written staff report summarizing the facts of the case including all relevant documents and the recommendations of the DRC, and the board. The city manager shall schedule the proposed application for the next available commission meeting providing that the required notice procedures are met. 
    305.8.1. Public hearing. The city commission shall hold one public hearing on the proposed conditional use. 
    305.8.2. Action by the City Commission. In considering a conditional use request, the commission shall review the proposed use, the general purpose and standards of review, the development standards, the report of the administration and recommendation(s) of the board, and any oral and written comments received before or at the public hearing. Based upon the record developed at the public hearings, the commission may: 
(1)  Adopt the proposed conditional use by resolution with or without conditions; or 
(2)  Deny the proposed conditional use by resolution; or 
(3)  Refer the matter to the Board or administration for further consideration. 
    305.8.3. Conditions. The commission may attach such conditions to the approval as it deems necessary to ensure the proposed use conforms to the standards set forth in section 305.4, and to prevent or minimize adverse effects on other property in the neighborhood, including, but not limited to, architectural design guidelines; limitations on size, bulk and location; duration of construction period; requirements for landscaping, signage, outdoor lighting, and the provision or limitation of ingress and egress; duration of the approval; hours of operation; and the mitigation of environmental impacts. The site plan submitted shall be a conceptual site plan demonstrating size, intensity, density, massing, approximate number of parking spaces, seating capacity, or other factors, and the conceptual site plan shall be a condition of the issuance of the conditional use. Alternatively, the commission may also require formal approval of a final site plan simultaneous with or prior to the issuance of the conditional use building permits. 
    305.9. Effect of Approval or Denial. 
    305.9.1. Eligibility to Apply for Permits. Final approval of the application authorizes the applicant to proceed with any necessary applications for final site plan and/or community appearance approval, building permits, zoning certificates of use, certificates of level of service, and other permits, which the city may require for the proposed development. No permit shall be issued for work that does not comply with the terms of the conditional use approval. 
    305.9.2. Expiration of Conditional Use Approval. Unless otherwise provided in the approval, the conditional use application shall be deemed void and terminated, if the recipient does not obtain site plan approval or a building permit for the proposed development within 540 days (18 non-calendar months) after the date of the final approval of the conditional use. Once a site plan is approved, the conditional use approval period will run concurrently with the established site plan approval period. An applicant who has obtained conditional use approval may request an extension of this time period by filing with the department, within the 540-day period, a letter stating the reasons for the extension request. Up to a 180-day (6 non-calendar months) extension may be granted administratively by the director, if determined by the director that the extension request is based on just cause and a reasonable justification by the applicant and provided that the application is filed at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the site plan approval. The commission may, at a regular meeting, grant an extension of up to 365 days (12 non-calendar months) for good cause and a reasonable justification shown by the applicant. 
    305.9.3. Rescinding of Approval by Abandonment of the Use. Any discontinuation of an approved conditional use for a period of 180 consecutive days, as determined by the director, shall constitute an abandonment and shall rescind the approval of the conditional use. Prior to determining an abandonment, the director shall contact the property owner, as shown on the most current ad valorem tax rolls maintained by the Broward County property appraiser, by certified U.S. first class mail, return receipt requested, advising the property owner that the property owner has not more than 15 days to contact the director by setting an appointment with the director to discuss the potential finding of an abandonment. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that the abandonment period commenced upon the termination of electrical or water service for the user, whichever occurs first. Any adversely affected person may appeal the decision of the director pursuant to the appeal process set forth in sections 315.10-315.13 of this Code. Any applicant shall be advised in writing at the time the written decision is rendered, how they may appeal the decision. 
    305.10. Amendments and Alterations to Approved Conditional Uses. 
    305.10.1. Any expansion to an approved conditional use and any addition to or expansion of an existing conditional use shall require the same application, review and approval as required for the original approval of the conditional use. 
    305.10.2. Minor changes in the site plan or design details of an approved conditional use which are consistent with the standards and conditions applying to the conditional use and which do not result in additional external impacts, such as a minor shift in the location of a building or structure, the realignment of parking spaces and drive aisles, the relocation of a driveway, for example, may be approved by the DRC without obtaining additional approvals. No increase in the intensity, density, or change in use shall be considered a minor change for the purposes of this section. 
(Ord. No. 17-07, § 6, 11-14-16; Ord. No. 18-01, § 3(Exh. B), 11-1-17) 
Sec. 306. - Amendments to the Trafficways Plan. 
    An applicant requesting an amendment to the Broward County Trafficways Plan (BCTWP), shall submit the proposal to the department for review. The city must endorse and submit all amendments to the BCTWP. The proposal shall be reviewed and considered by the DRC. After the DRC makes its recommendation, the city will conduct a community meeting regarding the proposal. Subsequent to the community meeting, department staff shall make a recommendation to the city commission. If approved by the commission, the resolution shall be transmitted to Broward County for consideration. BCTWP amendments require one public hearing with the county, unless the proposed amendment is for realignment only. The DRC and commission shall make a determination regarding the amendment based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  The goals, objective, policies, and other applicable requirements of the city's comprehensive plan and the Broward County comprehensive land use plan; and 
(2)  All applicable codes of the city; and 
(3)  Approved and accepted engineering design standards; and 
(4)  Mitigation of all traffic impact to both on-site and off-site development. 
(Ord. No. 17-07, § 6, 11-14-16) 
Sec. 307. - Plats. 
    307.1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure that all lands included within subdivisions will be suitable for the various purposes proposed in the request for subdivision approval; that all subdivisions will be served adequately and economically by public facilities and services which may be necessary in each particular case; and to establish the procedures and requirements for obtaining approval of a plat of a subdivision as defined by F.S. part 1, chapter 177, as well as procedures related to amending plats and related instruments. No plat of subdivision lying within the city shall be recorded in the public records of Broward County prior to approval by the city commission. When any subdivision of land is proposed, and before any permit for the erection of a principal structure in such proposed subdivision shall be granted, the subdivider or a duly authorized agent shall secure approval of and record in the official records such proposed subdivision in accordance with established procedures. No plat application shall be considered by the city unless the zoning district of the site is in conformance with the land use designation in the comprehensive plan future land use element. 
    307.2. Types of Plats Required. The city will consider two types of plats for approval: perimeter subdivision plats and full subdivision plats. The requirements for each type of plat are included below. A property owner/developer may submit either of the two types of plats provided for review and approval. A full subdivision plat or re-plat shall be approved by the city and recorded in Broward County's records for all land with residential fee-simple ownership lots. A perimeter subdivision plat satisfies the requirements for both a plat of nonresidential land and a plat of residential land without fee-simple ownership. Certificates of occupancy shall not be issued for buildings within the property until the plat has been recorded. 
    307.3. Plat Required. No building permit shall be issued for a principal building unless a plat, including the parcel(s) of land on which the building will be constructed has been approved by the Broward County Commission and recorded in the public records of Broward County subsequent to June 4, 1953, PB 32-15. This section shall not apply to an application for a building permit which meets the criteria for a plat waiver as provided for herein. 
    307.4. Plat Waivers. In those instances, and only those instances, where Broward County does not require platting or re-platting, the commission may waive any or all of the platting regulations. In granting said plat waiver, the commission may prescribe specific requirements or conditions designed to achieve the objectives of the LDC and the comprehensive plan for each individual case. 
    307.4.1. Application Required. In all instances when Broward County does not require platting or re-platting, a plat waiver application is required when a parcel of land requires subdivision to more than six parcels. Plat waiver application forms, along with all established and required fees, documents, and plans, shall be submitted by the applicant to the department. The petition shall identify the sections of the LDC from which the waiver is requested and shall state fully the grounds for the application and all facts relied upon by the applicant. A fee as established by the city shall be paid by the applicant. The department shall establish the information necessary to process the application. 
    307.4.2. Public Hearing and Notice. The public hearing and notice provisions for a plat waiver shall be the same as that for a final plat. 
    307.4.3. Conditions for Granting a Plat Waiver. A plat waiver shall be granted upon the commission finding that: 
(1)  It will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, aesthetics, interest and welfare; and 
(2)  It furthers and is consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies of the city's comprehensive plan; and 
(3)  It will not violate any provision of the city's comprehensive plan; and 
(4)  All land which is necessary to comply with the Broward County trafficways plan and appropriate city plans have been conveyed by deed or easement, at the option of the unit of government; and 
(5)  That all subdivided parcels have legal access, utilities and drainage connection and required easements recorded; and 
(6)  The subdivision has access from a publicly owned or dedicated right-of-way meeting the city's standards. 
    307.5. Final Plat Review. A applicant for final plat approval shall submit either a partial subdivision plat or full subdivision plat pursuant to the requirements. Final plats shall be reviewed by the DRC, and approved or denied by the commission. Plat application forms, along with all established and required fees, documents, and plans, shall be submitted by the applicant to the department. The application shall include all of the drawings required in the city's plat submittal requirements document and as required in F.S. §§177.041 through 177.061, 177.081, and 177.091, the requirements set forth in §5-189(a) through (c) in the Broward County Code of Ordinances, as amended from time to time. 
    307.6. Review by DRC. The DRC shall meet to determine if the proposed plat complies with the submittal requirements and all other applicable land development regulations. The DRC shall review with particular attention to such factors as: width, arrangement, access, location and type of streets; dedications; surface drainage; water supply; sewage disposal; lot sizes and arrangements; requirements for parks, open space, school sites, public building sites; common areas; lot designation, size, and dimensions; proposed stormwater treatment and drainage system; what properties are to be dedicated and to whom the properties will be dedicated; the creation or existence of any easements, the purpose of said easements, the location and size of said easements, and what person or legal entity will hold title to and maintain said easements; the location and size of common properties and what person or legal entity will hold title to and maintain said property; any security for performance or maintenance of properties to be dedicated to the public, including, but not limited to, rights-of-way and utility easements; and the adopted level of service standards. The DRC shall also review any documents relating to the creation of a property or home owners' association and covenants, conditions, easements, and restrictions, common to all or portions of the subdivision. Prior to the final DRC review of the proposed plat and subdivision-related documents, the plat and said documents will be submitted to the city attorney for review and comment. The DRC chairperson shall submit a written report incorporating the findings of the DRC to the applicant and to the city manager. 
    307.7. Review by City cOmmission. All final plats must be submitted to the city commission for action at a public hearing, which shall be duly noticed, once the plat and all required supporting documentation have been received by the staff and reviewed under the authority contained in the LDC. The director shall submit the DRC report to the city manager, for transmittal to the city commission. The city commission shall review the final plat application and the recommendations of the DRC and take one of the following actions: 
(1)  Approve the final plat as presented if the plat is found to be in conformance with these regulations, and issue a resolution setting forth such approval; or 
(2)  Approve the final plat with conditions, and issue a resolution setting forth such approval and conditions; or 
(3)  Disapprove the final plat when not found to be in conformance, setting forth the reasons for such disapproval. 
No plat shall be approved unless: 
(1)  It is consistent with the comprehensive plan; and 
(2)  It meets all requirements of the LDC; and 
(3)  It meets all requirements of the city's plat submittal requirements document; and 
(4)  It meets, or at the time of recording it will meet, all applicable requirements of F.S. §§177.041 through 177.061, 177.081, and 177.091; and 
(5)  The requirements set forth in §5-189(a) through (c) in the Broward County Code of Ordinances, as amended from time to time; and 
(6)  It furthers the public health, safety, welfare, aesthetics, and interest. 
The approval of any plat is conditioned by the payment of: any ad valorem taxes due prior to recording as required from time to time by law, the payment of any impact fees or fair share contributions due at or prior to the time of recording of the plat; and the conveyancing of any tracts or parcels of land or interests in land that the city desires to be conveyed, as opposed to being dedicated, simultaneous with recording of the plat or as otherwise directed in any plat approval. 
    307.8. Endorsement of the Final Plat. Upon approval of the final plat by the commission, it shall be endorsed by the city engineer and the city manager and attested to by the city clerk. The city engineer shall forward the signed original of the final plat to the applicant for county approval. A plat containing dedications of any interest in property, when properly recorded, shall constitute a sufficient, irrevocable conveyance to vest in all legal and equitable interests in the parcels of land so dedicated, to be held by the city in trust and the approval of the final plat by the commission shall have the force and effect of an acceptance of said legal and equitable interest. However, nothing shall be construed to create any obligation on the part of the city to perform any act of construction or maintenance within a dedicated area unless or until that obligation is voluntarily planned, budgeted and implemented by the city. 
    307.9. Requirements for Final City Signature. Prior to plat recordation, the property owner and developer shall have satisfied all the conditions of plat approval by the commission, executed approved agreements concerning the payment of the developer's share of required public facilities, impact fees, and any other requirements of the final plat approval. The applicant shall also provide one copy of the final plat, as approved by the city, in digital format deemed acceptable by the city engineer. 
    307.10. Time Limitations of Final Plat Approval. The burden is on the property owner and the developer to record the plat in the public records within the time specified by Broward County. Failure to record within the time specified by Broward County shall render the approval of said plat terminated, null and void. 
    307.11. Enforcement Provisions. 
    307.11.1. Recording of Plat. No plat shall be recorded in the public records of Broward County or have any validity whatsoever until it shall have been approved in a manner prescribed herein and the final plat shall incorporate all changes or modifications required by the commission. In the event any such unapproved subdivision is recorded, it shall be considered invalid and the commission may institute court proceedings to have it stricken from the public records of Broward County, Florida at the applicant or owner's cost. The foregoing requirement is a condition of any plat application. 
    307.11.2. Permits. The building official shall not issue any building permit for any habitable and occupiable structure to be constructed within the city until the plat is recorded with the county, unless the property owner has entered into a tri-party agreement approved by the city pursuant to Sec. 307.13.1. 
    307.11.3. Public Improvements. The commission hereby determines it to be public policy that the city shall withhold all public improvements and services of whatsoever nature, including the maintenance of streets and the furnishing of sewerage facilities and water services to all subdivisions or parcels of land which public improvements and utilities along with required easements and deeds, free and clear of all mortgage or other security interests or in the event of an easement, joined in and consented to by the mortgage or other security interest holder, have not been conveyed and accepted by the commission in the manner prescribed by the code. All deed and easement deeds conveyed shall require that the property owner/grantor shall covenant with said the grantee that the property owner/grantor is lawfully seized of said land in fee simple; that the property owner/grantor has good right and lawful authority to sell and convey said land; that the property owner/grantor does hereby fully warrant the title to the said land and will defend the same against the lawful claims of all persons whomsoever; and that said land is free of all encumbrances, except as otherwise described in the conveyance. 
    307.11.4. Revision of Plat Subsequent to Approval. Prior to recording any plat in the public records of Broward County, the property owner shall provide to the city engineer a copy of the subject plat reflecting all corrections and/or modifications which may have been made subsequent to the plat approval by the commission. The city engineer shall then review the plat to determine if any revisions or modifications have been made that are contrary to or inconsistent with that approval. After review, the city engineer will provide the property owner with a letter which will either authorize recordation of the revised plat or require that the revised plat be returned to the city commission. Any adversely affected person may appeal the decision of the city engineer pursuant to the appeal process set forth in sections 315.10-315.13 of this Code. Any applicant shall be advised in writing at the time the written decision is rendered, how they may appeal the decision. 
    307.11.5. Failure to Satisfy Conditions of Approval. A failure to satisfy conditions of approval. whether conditions precedent or subsequent to plat recordation. shall be reported to the city manager by the city engineer or the director. If upon written notice by the city manager or said manager's designee, the applicant or property owner fails to correct the failures within the timeframe set by the city manager, the commission shall be notified which shall upon notice to the property owner hold a public hearing. If the commission finds that the conditions have not been satisfied, then the city shall take immediate corrective action to ensure compliance. 
    307.12. Plat Exemptions. Modifications to recorded plats. A property owner may petition to modify a recorded plat. Plat exemption application forms, along with all established and required fees, documents, and plans, shall be submitted by the applicant to the department, and are subject to DRC review and administrative approval. 
    The modifications listed below may be accomplished upon a finding by both the city engineer and the DRC Chair that the subject property was platted subsequent to June 4, 1953, and that the regulations have been met. The following types of development shall be deemed to be exempt and not subject to the provisions of the mandatory platting requirements of the LDC: 
    307.12.1. No change to a recorded plat is created or no development is undertaken except in conformance with the recorded plat or as specifically allowed in this section. 
    307.12.2. The dedication of land or any interest in land to any governmental agency, entity or political subdivision. 
    307.12.3. The division of a multi-family residential zoned platted lot to permit individual ownership in conformance with all applicable zoning and Florida Building Code provisions. 
    307.12.4. The combination of lots and/or portions of lots (i.e., unity of title) in a residential zoning district to create a common building site provided that the property owner presents an instrument recordable in the public records of Broward County, Florida, identifying the boundaries of the building site and the intent to develop and convey as one site or parcel in perpetuity or so long as the proposed use exists said instrument must be presented to the DRC for acceptance or rejection. No combination shall be approved where it would allow violation of any other code provisions. The DRC may require that a bonding lot agreement in form and substance acceptable to the city attorney be executed by the property owners of all portions of the property and joined in and consented to by the holders of all mortgage or other security interests. 
    307.12.5. The combination of parcels and/or portions of parcels (i.e., unity of title) in a nonresidential or mixed-use zoning district to create a common building site provided that the property owner presents an instrument recordable in the public records of Broward County, Florida, identifying the boundaries of the building site and the intent to develop and convey as one site or parcel in perpetuity or so long as the proposed use. Said instrument must be presented to the DRC for acceptance or rejection. No combination shall be approved where approval would allow violation of any other code provisions. The DRC may require that a bonding lot agreement in form and substance acceptable to the city attorney be executed by the property owners of all portions of the property and joined in and consented to by the holders of all mortgage or other security interests. 
    307.12.6. The division of a nonresidential or mixed-use zoned platted parcel into not more than six parcels, when the city determines that a new public right-of-way or parcel access is not required. In this instance, the DRC chair and the city engineer may require that any or all of the following items be provided and approved: 
(1)  Current property survey showing all the recorded easements, including access, alley, drainage, landscape, maintenance, and utility easements between all the parcels. The survey shall be certified to and for reliance by the city and must be prepared by a registered and licensed Florida surveyor and mapper. The survey shall be current, meaning that the survey is no older than 180 days prior to application (or brought up to date) and depicts current conditions on the subject property. Said survey shall be prepared in accordance with the minimum technical standards of F.S. § 472.027, and F.A.C. ch. 21HH-6, and attached as an exhibit to the application; and 
(2)  Sketch plat; and/or 
(3)  Master parking plan and shared parking agreement (as approved by the city attorney); and/or 
(4)  Secondary access plan and cross-access agreement; and/or 
(5)  Paving, grading and drainage plan; and/or 
(6)  Water and sewer plans. 
    307.13. Building Permits Prior to Plat Recordation. Except as provided for in this section, no person or legal entity, shall be eligible for any building permit for a principal building on property located within the city for land which requires platting. 
    307.13.1. A building permit may be issued for a parcel of land for which plat approval has been given by the board of county commissioners and the city commission, although the plat has not yet been recorded, provided such authorization is granted in a tri-party agreement among the developer, the property owner, the city and the county. The agreement shall be joined in and consented to by any mortgagee or holder of a security interest in the parcel of land or any portion thereof. Such agreements shall, at a minimum, require compliance with the applicable provisions of plat approval and shall prohibit both the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, and the contract for sale, agreement for deed, or lease of any such lot to the ultimate consumer until the plat is recorded. The city and county shall be required to make a finding that facilities and services will be available at the adopted level of service standards concurrent with the issuance of the building permit. 
    307.13.2. A building permit may be issued for an essential governmental facility after preliminary plat review where the Broward County board of county commissioners and the city commission find that immediate construction of the governmental facility is essential to the health, safety, or welfare of the public and where the county and city determine that public facilities and services will be available at the adopted level of service standards concurrent with the impact of development of the governmental facility. Such a finding shall be made by agreement between the city and county. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until recordation in the public records of the plat. 
    307.14. Plat Note and Non-Vehicular Access Line Amendments Subsequent to Plat Recordation. 
    The city or a petitioner may request approval of an application with Broward County to amend the existing, recorded plat with respect to the text of the adopted plat note or to the restrictions of the non-vehicular access line (NVAL). Such approval would be granted by the county commission and the amendments shall be recorded in the public records of the county. 
    307.15. Vacation of Easements and Rights-of-Way. 
(a)  A property owner may petition to modify an easement or right-of-way on a recorded plat. Vacation of an easement and right-of-way application forms, along with all established and required fees, documents, and plans, shall be submitted to the city by the applicant to the department, and are subject to DRC review, and are subsequently approved or denied by the commission. 
(b)  The commission may, of its own motion, or upon petition of any person, adopt a resolution vacating, abandoning, discontinuing, and closing any existing public or private street, alleyway, road, highway or easement, and renouncing and disclaiming any right of the city and the public in and to any land in connection therewith. Prior to the adoption of such resolution, the commission shall hold a public hearing and shall publish one (1) notice, in a newspaper of general circulation at least fourteen (14) days prior to the hearing date. The resolution, as adopted, and the proof of publication of the notice of the adoption of such resolution shall be recorded in the public records of the county. 
(c)  The applicant may file an application to vacate or abandon an easement or a right-of-way or portion thereof. The application shall include: 
(1)  Location map: a drawing which clearly and legibly identifies the location of the application site in relation to the nearest public rights-of-way, excluding the site of the right-of-way or easement to be vacated, and all affected properties; the location map may be located on the survey provided for below; and 
(2)  Abutting property and affected property. The application shall include a map that identifies the boundaries of abutting properties and the name(s) of all property owners of property abutting the right-of-way to be vacated, as depicted on the Broward County ad valorem tax rolls as of the date of the application; and 
(3)  Survey. A land survey certified to and for reliance by the city certified to by a State of Florida licensed mapper and surveyor. Said survey shall measure not larger than 8.5 inches by 14 inches and shall be prepared in accordance with the minimum technical standards of F.S. § 472.027, and F.A.C. ch. 21HH-6, and attached as an exhibit to the application. The survey shall be certified to and for reliance by the city and must be prepared by a registered and licensed Florida surveyor and mapper. The survey shall be current, meaning that the survey is no older than 180 days prior to the date of application (or brought up to date) and depicts current conditions on the subject property. Said survey shall be prepared in accordance with the minimum technical standards of F.S. § 472.027, and F.A.C. Ch. 21HH-6, and attached as an exhibit to the application. The survey shall also contain or depict an accurate drawing and legal description of the right-of-way or easement to be vacated, and the boundaries of abutting properties with the identifying designation of those properties; 
(4)  In the case of a roadway easement or right-of-way, the application must include a petition executed by 75 percent of the abutting property owners by both number and land area, all as of the date of application for vacation; and 
(5)  Completion of an application to be developed by the director and payment of required application fees. 
(d)  An easement or right-of-way may be considered for vacation upon the following requirements being satisfied by the applicant: 
(1)  The vacation is consistent with the comprehensive plan. Merely showing an easement or right-of-way in a comprehensive plan map shall not be interpreted as mandating that the vacation application is inconsistent with the comprehensive plan; and 
(2)  Establishment that the easement or right-of-way is no longer needed or will not be needed in the foreseeable future, by the city, the county, the state, the federal government, the general public, or a utility. Traffic studies may be submitted as supportive evidence to satisfy this criterion; and 
(3)  That there is convenient access of property owners on adjoining street rights-of- way and that property owners contiguous with the right-of-way will not be adversely affected.by the vacation; and 
(4)  That the city has received written approval or consent from affected utilities to the abandonment of the right-of-way or an easement. If existing utilities or improvements are located in the application site, any provisions for the utilities or improvements to be relocated shall be defined in writing by the affected utility. Written consent of the utility if a new utility easement will be created within or over the original application site for existing or planned utility equipment located in the right-of-way that is being considered for vacation; and 
(5)  A determination whether any geographic areas within 1,000 feet may be impacted by the proposed action and the nature and degree of impact; and 
(6)  A determination of what other additional property, easements, utility relocations, agreements or other actions may also be required to accommodate the proposed action. The applicant may be required to provide an alternative right-of-way or easement; and 
(7)  Identification and evaluation of the nature and degree of any impacts that the proposed action might have on the delivery and provision of service by public service vehicles. 
(e)  No right-of-way or public easement giving access to any publicly accessible waters in the city shall be closed, vacated or abandoned except in those instances wherein the applicants offer to trade or give to the city comparable land for a right-of-way or public easement that provides access to the same body of water. Such access shall not create a hardship on the users. A determination on this, as well as the distance and comparable land being offered, shall be left to the discretion of the city commission. 
    307.16. Encroachment into Platted Easements. Any encroachment such as but not limited to fences, walls, sheds, signs, landscaping shall not be allowed on a public utility easement adjacent to a roadway right-of-way (either private or public). Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the city manager or designee may issue a revocable license agreement to encroach into easement on a platted utility easement or an easement used for utility purposes provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The encroachment on the platted utility easement used for utility purposes is de minimis in nature, as determined by the city; and 
(2)  The encroachment is a result of a permitted or approved structure or house meeting the city's setback requirements at the time the permit was issued; and 
(3)  All utilities having the right to the affected easement consent in writing to the encroachment; and 
(4)  The city or utility removing or destroying of any fence, walls, shed, sign, or landscaping for work within the easement, shall not be liable to the property owner or occupant and shall not be responsible for repair or replacement of any fence, walls, shed, sign, or landscaping. 
    307.17. Schematic Subdivision Improvements Plan. 
    307.17.1. Filing. Concurrent with the submission of a final subdivision plat, the applicant must submit a schematic subdivision improvements plan for all improvements necessary to bring water, sewer, roads and other required public improvements to the site including all paving, grading and storm drainage facilities required by the plat. Schematic engineering plans shall conform to the final plat and the city's subdivision improvements standards and specifications as established in the City of Miramar Land Development Process and Procedures Manual (Rev. 2016), which may be amended from time to time by resolution of the city commission and is on file with the city engineer. The plan shall be 24 inches times 36 inches size and to a scale of not more than one inch equals 100 feet. 
    307.17.2. Review and approval of schematic improvement plans. The city engineer shall review the schematic subdivision improvements plan and shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny said plans. Any denial shall include an explanation of why the schematic subdivision improvements plan was denied. 
(Ord. No. 17-07, § 6, 11-14-16) 
Sec. 308. - Level of Service Standards. 
    308.1. Purpose. This section is intended to ensure that development is consistent and prevents the issuance of development orders which result in a reduction in the level of service, below public facility standards, as provided within the comprehensive plan and this Code. 
    308.2. Monitoring System. The chairperson of the DRC shall be responsible to develop and maintain a system wherein the public facilities' capacities shall be monitored in an up-to-date manner as reasonably possible. The capacity monitoring system shall also be known as the city's concurrency management system. This system shall track and monitor the facility capacity, usage through existing developments, surplus or reserve capacity both existing and proposed through planned capital improvements projects, and usage through committed development (approved but not constructed). The chairperson shall also use such system to prepare reports to be submitted to the city manager. 
    308.3. Applicability. Unless exempted under the provisions of section 308.4 below, all development which must receive final plat or final site plan approval and will impact the facilities for which the city monitors level of service compliance shall obtain a final certificate of occupancy upon a determination that all levels of service, design and construction standards have been met. 
    308.4. Exemptions. The following development shall be exempt from the requirements of this section: 
(1)  A valid and approved development order which was final on the effective date of this Code, under the provisions of F.S. §380.06, and which contains conditions which ensure that adequate public facilities will be available consistent with the standards of this section. In such event, application for individual level of service compliance determination shall not be required so long as the terms and conditions of the final adopted development order are met. 
(2)  A valid and binding development order under the provisions of F.S. §380.06, which becomes final after the effective date of this Code in which the commission determines and finds level of service compliance for the entire DRI or on a phase-by-phase basis. In such event, application for individual level of service compliance determination shall not be required so long as the terms and conditions of the final adopted development order are met. 
    308.5. Standards. A DRC determination for approval of the plat or site plan shall not be issued for any development unless it is determined that planned and committed improvements have sufficient capacity to provide the design public facility level of service for all existing, permitted projects and the proposed development. 
    308.6. Determination of Available Capacity. Except as further defined below, the available capacity of a public facility shall be determined by: 
(1)  Adding together: 
a.  The total capacity of existing public facilities; and 
b.  The total capacity of new public facilities that will become available concurrent with the impact of development. The capacity of new public facilities may be counted only if one or more of the following is shown: 
1.  Construction of the new public facilities is under way at the time of the application; or 
2.  The new public facilities are the subject of a binding contract for the construction of the facilities or the provision of services at the time the development permit is issued; or 
3.  The new public facilities, excluding water, wastewater, or solid waste, have been included in the first three years for initiation of construction and completed in five years of the city, or the Broward County capital improvement program budget or the appropriate capital improvement program budget of the implementing agency. The new public facilities, including water, wastewater, and solid waste, will be complete prior to or simultaneous with the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy for the new development; or 
4.  The new public facilities are guaranteed in an enforceable development agreement. An enforceable development agreement may include, but is not limited to, development agreements pursuant to F.S. § 163.3220, or an agreement or development order issued pursuant to F.S. §380.06. 
(2)  Subtracting from that number the sum of: 
a.  The demand for the public facility service created by existing development; and 
b.  The new demand for the public facility service that will be created concurrent with the impacts of the proposed development by the anticipated completion of other presently approved developments. 
    308.7. Roads. The DRC shall certify compliance with specifications and Level of Service (LOS) standards adopted by the city and Broward County for roadway capacity. Developments shall not be approved unless it is determined that adequate road capacity is available or will be available prior to the granting of a certificate of occupancy. The city engineer shall be responsible for determining road capacity. 
    308.7.1. Traffic Studies and Analysis. 
(a)  The DRC may require an applicant to provide a traffic analysis regarding the potential impact of the proposed development on the road network within the city. All public roads within the city; including local, county, state and federal roads, excluding those roads listed in section 308.7.2 shall be required to operate at a LOS D or better on a peak hour basis. If it is determined that any proposed development would result in any road being over capacity then the DRC shall require improvements to be made in compliance with the adopted standards. 
(b)  When a site plan, plat, rezoning or LUPA application has been submitted to DRC, a traffic impact study shall be provided as per the guidelines established by the city engineer. Any roadway impact due to the proposed development must be mitigated by the developer prior to the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy for the development. 
(c)  The property owner is responsible for signalizing all full intersections where private roadways within the development intersect with a public right-of-way, when a signal is warranted and approved by the appropriate regulatory agency. The signal warrants study must be paid for by the property owner. A traffic signalization agreement needs to be executed between the city and the property owner that details obligations for the construction of the traffic signal. 
    308.7.2. The LOS of road segments operating below LOS D, according to the Broward County trips model and those segments operating below LOS D, shall not be permitted to deteriorate below 110 percent of the capacity of the roadway at LOS D on an AADT basis, except as provided for in section 308.7.3. 
    308.7.3. If road segments are operating below LOS D, a building or engineering permit shall be issued only in the following circumstances: 
(1)  The property is not within the compact deferral area for a planning improvement facility operating below LOS D on the Broward County trips model; or 
(2)  The property is within the compact deferral area for a planning improvement facility which is operating below LOS D on the Broward County trips model, but one of the following conditions applies: 
a.  The approved development would not cause deterioration below the "110 percent maintain" level of service and the traffic generated by the proposed development would not prevent the planned improvement from providing LOS D after construction; or 
b.  There is an approved action plan to accommodate the traffic impact of the development; or 
c.  The necessary improvements to provide LOS D or better are under construction at the time a permit is issued; or 
d.  The necessary improvements to provide LOS D or better are the subject of a binding executed contract for the construction of the roadway facilities; or 
e.  The necessary improvements for LOS D or better have been included in Broward County's capital improvement plan annual budget or the appropriate capital improvement program budget of the implementing agency. Said improvements must be shown to begin construction within the first three years with completion scheduled by the fifth year; or 
f.  The necessary facilities and services for LOS D or better are guaranteed in an enforceable development agreement. An enforceable development agreement may include, but is not limited to, development agreements pursuant to F.S. § 163.3230, or an agreement or development order issued pursuant to F.S. §380.06, provided that road improvements required by a development order for a DRI shall not be considered for concurrency for property outside the boundaries of the DRI unless provision c. or d. above has been met. 
    308.7.4. Traffic concurrency determinations for redevelopment shall be based on the net impact of redevelopment. 
    308.7.5. Transportation Proportionate Fair Share Contributions. 
(a)  An applicant may choose to satisfy the transportation concurrency requirement by making a proportionate fair share contribution to an eligible transportation project listed in the Broward County capital improvements element, pursuant to the requirements set forth in Sec. 5-182(a)(5)b) of the Broward County Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  In addition to satisfying the requirements of paragraph (a) of this subsection, the applicant may also be required to mitigate its impacts on the city's roadway system within the city by providing for a proportionate fair share contribution to an eligible transportation improvement within the city's five-year schedule of capital improvements. 
    308.8. Potable Water. Potable water shall be available at the rate of 325 gallons per equivalent residential connection concurrent with demand. 
    The DRC shall certify compliance with specifications and standards adopted by the city and the adequacy of potable water distribution and transmission systems and water plant capacity to service the proposed development. A development shall not be approved unless it is determined that adequate potable water service is available or will be available prior to the granting of a certificate of occupancy. The city engineer and utilities director shall be responsible for determining potable water capacity. 
    308.9. Wastewater Treatment Capacity. Wastewater treatment capacity shall be available at the rate of 300 gallons per day per equivalent residential connection. 
    The DRC shall certify compliance with specifications and standards adopted by the city, and the adequacy of sanitary sewage collection and transmission systems and wastewater treatment and disposal capacity to service the proposed development. A development shall not be approved unless it is determined that adequate wastewater service is available or will be available prior to the granting of a certificate of occupancy. The city engineer and utilities director shall be responsible for determining wastewater treatment capacity. 
    308.10. Solid Waste Disposal Capacity. The DRC shall certify compliance and adequacy of solid waste disposal capacity. A development shall not be approved unless it is determined that adequate solid waste storage facilities and disposal capacity exist or will exist at the time of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The public works department director shall be responsible for determining solid waste disposal capacity. The proposed development shall be designed to provide adequate areas to store solid waste until collection time, at the following levels of service: 
Land Use Level of Service Residential 8.9 lbs. per unit per day Industrial and Commercial Warehouse Distribution/Manufacturing 2 lbs. per 100 SF per day Office 1 lb. per SF per day Department Store / Shopping Center 4 lbs. per 100 SF per day Supermarket 9 lbs. per 100 SF per day Restaurant 2 lbs. per 100 SF per day Drugstore / Pharmacy 5 lbs. per 100 SF per day Schools Elementary Schools 10 lbs. per room +.25 lbs. per student per day Middle/High Schools 8 lbs. per room +.25 lbs. per student per day Institutional Uses Hospital 8 lbs. per bed per day Special Residential Care Facilities 3 lbs. per person per day  
    308.11. Parks and Recreational Areas. The owner of land who has applied for approvals for residential development containing twenty (20) or more residential dwelling units, and pursuant to the applicable land development regulations shall be required to provide for the park, open space, and recreational needs of the future residents of the developed areas. Parks and recreational areas shall be available at the rate of four (4) acres of parkland per 1,000 residents, concurrent with demand. Residential developments with less than twenty (20) units or located within the City's TOC are exempt from this requirement and instead shall be required to make payment of the established Community Parks Land Dedication impact fees. 
    The DRC shall certify compliance with specifications and standards adopted by the city and the adequacy of park land conveyed by the developer or property owner and/or park land funds to meet the obligations of the proposed development. A development shall not be approved, unless it is determined that adequate park land area is available or will be available prior to the granting of the first certificate of occupancy for the new developer. The city's director of parks and recreation shall be responsible for determining parks and recreation capacity. 
    Developers of residential property or residential units within a mixed-use category located within the transit oriented corridor land use designation shall be exempt from the procedures of sections 308.11.1 and 308.11.2 below for land conveyance or entering into a park agreement as provided for in section 308.11.1(2) with the city but shall instead pay the established community parks land dedication impact fee, prior to the issuance of a building permit for the proposed development. 
    308.11.1. Land Conveyance. In order to provide lands, funds, or a combination thereof to be used by the city as may be appropriate in order to provide additional community and neighborhood parks, or the maintenance and renovation of existing facilities necessary to meet the need for such local level parks created by additional residential demand within the city, a property owner or developer, at the discretion of the city shall either: 
(1)  Convey to the city land of suitable size, dimension, topography, soil conditions, and general character to serve as public parks, which will meet local level park needs created by the development. Such park land must be demucked and filled to a grade of at least +5.5 NAVD 88 and must have water, sewer and stormwater connection with paved access to the park site. Local level parks needs are based on a standard of four acres of land for every 1,000 residents. The total amount of land to be conveyed either on or off the development site must equal a ratio of at least four acres of land for every 1,000 potential residents estimated to occupy the development. Land to be conveyed must be located within the city. The city shall reserve the right to refuse any land proposed for dedication due to unsuitability, distance from the area it is intended to serve, or a surplus of land area intended for recreational purposes. If the city should refuse the land area conveyance, the developer/applicant may convey other lands that are deemed acceptable by the city or pay an amount equivalent to the value of the land that is suitable for development. The formula used to calculate the amount of land required to be conveyed shall be as established and amended from time to time by resolution of the commission; or 
(2)  Agree to deposit in the city's park development fund an amount of money equal to the fair market value of the land otherwise to be dedicated. The fair market value shall include the value of the improved land for the entire residential development requesting for approval (proposed zoning) which is demucked, filled to at least +5.5 NAVD 88, and has water, sewer, paving and drainage infrastructure available for the proposed public park land. For the purpose of determining land value it will be assumed that the entire site requesting approval will have water, sewer, paving, and drainage infrastructure in place as the park site could be anywhere within the development. 
    In order to determine the appropriate fair market value, the city shall select a state licensed real estate appraiser, the developer shall select a state licensed real estate appraiser and the average of the values determined by the two said appraisers shall be the fair market value of the property. Appraisers shall be members of the Appraisal Institute. The appraisal shall be based on recent sales of sites of similar zoning of the proposed development, and of comparable location in the tri-county area. The fee for both appraisals shall be paid by the developer. However, if the property required to be conveyed is less than four acres, the city and the developer may mutually agree on a value of the land to be dedicated. Should the city and the developer fail to agree upon the value of the land, the two appraisals, described above, shall be required. 
    308.11.2. Conveyance of Land or Collection of Fee. Prior to the DRC recommendation to the commission for the proposed development, the applicant shall enter into a park agreement with the city and be required to perform one of the following requirements: 
(1)  The park agreement providing for the aforesaid security in favor of the city shall be joined in and consented to by the mortgagee or other holder of security. The agreement shall run with the parcel of land and be enforceable against the property owner. The executed park agreement shall be accompanied by a title opinion in form acceptable to the city attorney and certified to and in favor of the city; and 
a.  Convey all required public park lands or pay the required fees as determined, to the city, with said conveyance being by warranty deed in form and substance acceptable to the city attorney. Any conveyance shall be free and clear of any mortgage or other security interest in the parcel of land conveyed. The property owner conveying said parcel of land in the warranty deed of conveyance shall covenant with the grantee city that the property owner grantor is lawfully seized of said land in fee simple; that the property owner grantor has good right and lawful authority to sell and convey said land; that the property owner grantor does hereby fully warrant the title to the said land and will defend the same against the lawful claims of all persons whomsoever; and that said land is free of all encumbrances, except the encumbrance set forth above; or 
b.  Post a bond, cash escrow, or irrevocable letter of credit, or other security acceptable to the city for 100 percent of the developer's contribution for local parks, guaranteeing the payment of fees or conveyance dedication of land prior to the issuance of a building permit. The letter of credit drawn on a U.S. banking institution located in the state of Florida which institution is not an institution headquartered in a foreign nation. The cash escrow shall be subject to an escrow agreement in form and substance acceptable to the city attorney. The bond shall be a performance and payment bond required, and the performance and payment bond provisions of all bonds required by this section shall be construed and deemed statutory payment bonds furnished pursuant to this section and such bonds shall not under any circumstances be converted into common law bonds. This alternative shall be subject to a three percent (3%) administrative fee payable within 14 days of execution of the park agreement by the city; however, the park fees or conveyance dedication of land shall be collected or obtained prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(2)  Unless otherwise required by the city commission, the park agreement shall be substantially in the form as set forth in the City of Miramar Land Development Process and Procedures Manual (Rev. July 2016). The manual may be revised from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
    308.11.3. Expenditure of Funds. Monies deposited by a developer pursuant to this section shall be expended within a reasonable period of time for the purpose of acquiring, maintaining and negotiating the facilities or land developing necessary to meet the need for city parks which will be available and substantially benefit the residents of the developed area. 
    308.12. Drainage. The DRC shall certify compliance with specifications and standards adopted by the city, and the adequacy of grading and drainage plans and capacity within the drainage system. The city engineer and public works director shall be responsible for determining drainage capacity. The proposed development shall be designed to provide adequate areas and easements for the construction and maintenance of a stormwater management system for stormwater treatment and drainage which conforms to all regulatory agency requirements. The applicant shall be responsible to secure the approvals of the applicable water management and drainage districts. Prior to the city engineer certifying level of service compliance, the applicant shall provide proof of the water management and drainage district approvals. 
    308.13.1. Road Protection. The city engineer shall determine compliance of roadway construction with the stormwater management and floodplain standards of section 816. 
    308.13.2. Buildings. The building official and city engineer shall determine compliance of all buildings and structures in a proposed development with the stormwater management and floodplain standards of section 816. 
    308.13.3. Off-site Discharge. Off-site discharge shall not exceed the inflow limit of the South Florida Water Management District primary receiving canal or the local conveyance system, whichever is less. 
    308.13.4. Storm Sewers. The design frequency minimum for storm sewers shall be the three year rainfall intensity of the FDOT zone 10 rainfall curves. 
    308.13.5. Floodplain Routing. Calculated flood elevations based on the ten-year and 100-year return frequency rainfall of three day duration shall not exceed the corresponding elevations of the ten-year "flood criteria map" and the "100-year flood elevation map," respectively. 
    308.13.6. Antecedent Water Level. The antecedent water level shall be considered as the higher elevation of either the control elevation or the elevation depicted on the map entitled "average wet season water levels." 
    308.13.7. On-site Storage. The minimum acceptable capacity above antecedent water level and below the floodplain routing elevations shall be the rainfall volume minimum off-site discharge occurring during a design rainfall. 
    308.13.8. Best Management Practices. Prior to discharge to surface or groundwater, best management practices will be used to reduce pollutant discharge. 
    308.14. Adequacy of Fire Protection. The DRC shall certify compliance with specifications and standards adopted by the city regarding the adequacy of fire protection services to meet the demands of the proposed development. The fire-rescue chief shall be responsible for determining fire protection capacity. Development shall not be approved unless it can be determined that adequate fire protection services will be available prior to occupancy. Should it be determined by the fire chief that the fire-rescue department will be unable to adequately serve a proposed development or that the additional development will result in a lessening of fire protection services to the community, then the city shall require the property owner/applicant/developer to provide for or maintain an adequate level of service through a public safety/fire protection service impact fee in addition to the city's existing fire/EMS impact fees. The amount of such fee will be determined by the city manager and the fire-rescue department. The impact assessment will be applied towards the city's operating costs in providing additional fire protection. Any such fees assessed shall be collected in full prior to the issuance of the first building permit unless an agreement is executed with the city that establishes another payment schedule. 
    308.15. Adequacy of Police Protection. The DRC shall certify compliance with specifications and standards adopted by the city regarding the adequacy of police protection services to meet the demands of the proposed development. The police chief shall be responsible for determining police protection capacity. Development shall not be approved unless it can be determined that adequate police protection services will be available prior to occupancy. Should it be determined by the police chief that the police department will be unable to adequately serve a proposed development or that the additional development will result in a lessening of police protection services to the community, then the city shall require the property owner/applicant/developer to provide for or maintain an adequate level of service through a public safety/police protection service impact fee in addition to the city's existing police impact fees. The amount of such fee will be determined by the city manager and the police department. The impact assessment will be applied towards the city's operating costs in providing additional police protection. Any such fees assessed shall be collected in full prior to the issuance of the first building permit unless an agreement is executed with the city that establishes another payment schedule. 
    308.16. Adequacy of School Sites and Facilities. Prior to approval of a final plat or site plan, the applicant for a residential development shall submit to the DRC chairperson a letter from the county school board evaluating the adequacy of the facilities needed to service the residents of the proposed development. 
    308.16.1. Public School Concurrency. Pursuant to the public school facilities element of the comprehensive plan (PSFE) and the amended Interlocal Agreement for public school facility planning (ILA), the city, in collaboration with Broward County and the School Board of Broward County, shall ensure public school facilities will be available for current and future students consistent with available financial resources and adopted level of service standards and that such facilities are available concurrent with the impact of proposed residential development. 
(1)  Applications subject to public school concurrency determination. The city shall not approve an application for a residential plat, replat, plat note amendment, findings of adequacy or site plan (an "application"), that generates one or more students or is not exempt or vested from the requirements of public school concurrency, until the school board has reported that the school concurrency requirement has been satisfied. 
(2)  Exemptions and vested development. 
a.  The following residential applications shall be exempt from the requirements of public school concurrency: 
1.  An application which generates less than one student at each level in the relevant concurrency service area (CSA). Such development shall be subject to the payment of school impact fees. 
2.  An application for age restricted communities with no permanent residents under the age of 18. Exemption for an aged restricted community shall only be available subject to a recorded restrictive covenant prohibiting the residence of school aged children in a manner not inconsistent with federal, state or local law or regulations. 
3.  A Development of Regional Impact (DRI) with a development order issued before July 1, 2005 (the effective date of chapter 2005-290 Laws of Florida) or an application submitted before May 1, 2005. 
4.  As may otherwise be exempted by Florida Statutes, including but not limited to, applications within municipalities which meet specific qualifying criteria outlined in the statute and approved by the School Board. 
b.  The following application shall be vested from the requirements of public school concurrency: 
1.  Any application located within a previously approved comprehensive plan amendment or rezoning which is subject to a mitigation agreement in accordance with the following: 
2.  The mitigation to address the impact of the new students anticipated from the development has been accepted by the School Board consistent with School Board Policy 1161, entitled "growth management", as may be amended from time to time, and; 
3.  A declaration of restrictive covenant has been properly executed and recorded by the developer, or the development is located within a boundary area that is subject to an executed and recorded tri-party agreement consistent with School Board Policy 1161, as may be amended from time to time. The declaration of restrictive covenants must be joined in and consented to by the mortgagee or holder of a security interest in the parcel of land subject to the declaration of restrictive covenants. 
4.  The applicant shall provide a letter from the School Board or other evidence acceptable to the county verifying 1. and 2. above. Other evidence may include documentation as specified in the tri-party agreement. 
c.  Any application which is included within a residential plat or development agreement for which school impacts have been satisfied for the dwelling units included in the proposed application. This includes any application approved between February 2, 1979 and March 19, 2008, the effective date of the public school facilities element of the comprehensive plan and this Code, which have not expired. In the transmittal of an application to the school district, the county shall include written information indicating that the units in the application are vested. 
d.  Any application that has received final approval, and which has not expired, prior to the effective date of the public school facilities element of the city's comprehensive plan. 
e.  To be exempt or vested from the requirements of public school concurrency, an applicant seeking such a determination shall be required to submit documentation with the application which shall include written evidence sufficient to verify that the subject development meets the exemptions stated herein, and as such, is exempt from the requirements of public school concurrency. 
(3)  Level of service standards. The Level of Service Standard (LOS) shall be 110 percent of the permanent Florida Inventory of School Housing (FISH) capacity for each Concurrency Service Area (CSA). The LOS shall be achieved and maintained within the period covered by the five-year schedule of capital improvements contained in the effective Five-Year Adopted District Educational Facilities Plan (DEFP). 
(4)  Concurrency service areas (CSAs). The areas for the implementation of public school concurrency in Broward County shall be known as concurrency service areas (CSA), and such CSAs shall be the approved school boundaries for elementary, middle and high schools as annually adopted by the school board. For the purposes of public school concurrency, such CSAs shall be effective on the first day of the school year, and end on the last day before the beginning of the next school year. 
(5)  Student generation rates. The Broward County adopted student generation rate(s) contained in Broward County Land Development Code section 5-182(m)(6) "Student Generation Rates" shall be utilized to determine the potential student impact anticipated from the residential development proposed in submitted applications. 
(6)  Review procedure. 
a.  Public school impact application (PSIA). Any applicant submitting an application with a residential component, that is not exempt or vested, is subject to public school concurrency and shall be required to submit a public school impact application (PSIA) for review by the school district. Evidence of acceptance of the PSIA and payment of the applicable application fee to the school district shall be required prior to acceptance of the application by city. 
b.  School capacity availability determination letter (SCAD). 
1.  No residential application or amendments thereto, shall be approved by the city, unless the residential development is exempt or vested from the requirements of public school concurrency, until a school capacity availability determination (SCAD) letter has been received from the school district confirming that capacity is available, or if capacity is not available, that proportionate share mitigation has been accepted by the school board. The SCAD letter shall be sent to the applicant, the Broward County development management division and the city with jurisdiction over the subject development, no later than 45 days after acceptance of the completed PSIA by the school district. 
2.  The school district shall determine the potential student impact from proposed residential development on the applicable CSA by performing the review procedure specified in school board Policy 1161, as amended. 
3.  If the school district reviews an application and determines that sufficient permanent capacity is available at the adopted LOS to accommodate students anticipated from the development, the school district shall issue a SCAD letter indicating that adequate school facilities exist to accommodate the student impact and that the proposed development satisfies public school concurrency requirements. 
4.  If the SCAD letter states that the development has not satisfied public school concurrency requirements, the SCAD letter shall state the basis for such determination, and the applicant shall have 30 days to propose proportionate share mitigation to the school district. 
5.  If the applicant proposes proportionate share mitigation within the 30-day deadline, upon the subsequent acceptance of the proposed mitigation by the school board, and upon the execution of a legally binding document among the school board, the city, if applicable, and the applicant, an amended SCAD letter shall state that adequate capacity anticipated from the accepted proportionate share mitigation will be available to accommodate the student impact anticipated from the proposed development and that the proposed development satisfies public school concurrency requirements. The total amount committed for any mitigation option shall not be less than the school impact fees due for the proposed units as calculated based upon the adopted school impact fee schedule provided in section 5-182 (m)(3) of the Broward County Code of Ordinances. The school impact fee for the development shall be considered included in the total proportionate share mitigation amount due or paid. If the proportionate share mitigation is not accepted by the school board, the amended SCAD letter shall state the basis upon which the mitigation proposal(s) was rejected and why the development is not in compliance with public school concurrency requirements. 
6.  An applicant adversely impacted by a SCAD determination may appeal such determination by written request to the school board within the designated 30-day time period. A timely request for an appeal shall stay the requirement for an applicant to propose proportionate share mitigation until the appeal has been resolved. 
    If an application or approval expires, the SCAD letter will no longer be valid. 
(7)  Expiration of concurrency/vesting. 
a.  The public school concurrency approval for a residential application shall expire if development does not commence, as outlined in 2) below, within five years following the date of city commission approval. 
b.  If a residential application received approval, the development and anticipated students shall be considered vested for up to five years beginning from the date the developer received approval from the city. Vesting of a residential application beyond the five years requires that one of the following conditions are met within the five-year period: 1) the issuance of a building permit for a principal building and first inspection approval or 2) substantial completion of project water lines, sewer lines and the rock base for internal roads. If the development was denied, the district shall deduct from its database, students associated with the development. 
    308.16.2. Miramar Regional Activity Center (MRAC). 
(a)  Educational mitigation requirement for residential development. Any application for a building permit for new residential development in the MRAC is subject to an educational mitigation requirement. As required by Broward County's approvals of the MRAC, by Policy 1161 of the school board, and by interlocal agreement with the county and school board, the applicant shall pay to the school board an amount equal to the cost per dwelling unit (regardless of residential types or bedroom mix) as derived from the cost per student station for each MRAC dwelling unit, as provided below. 
(1)  Amount. The student station cost shall be an amount equivalent to at least $2,036.00 or $2,312.00 per residential unit, depending on the location within the MRAC as provided by the inter-local agreement, and shall be determined by the State of Florida's cost per student station schedule in effect at the time of application for building permit. 
(2)  County determination of adequacy required. The applicant shall present documentation of the payment and notice to the city prior to submission of an application for a building permit. The city shall not issue a building permit or certificate of occupancy for residential development within the MRAC, without first receiving proof that Broward County has determined that the student station cost was paid as required and that the payment was adequate. 
(b)  Notice to school board. The city shall notify the superintendent of schools or said superintendent's designee of approval of any site plan or plat for residential development within the MRAC, which notice shall include the location of the project and the number and type of dwelling units approved. 
    308.17. Private Utilities and Service Providers. Prior to the final approval of a final plat or final site plan, if no plat is required, the applicant shall provide the DRC chairperson with a letter from the provider of electric, natural gas, if applicable, telephone and cable television services that the proposed development can be adequately serviced. 
    308.18. Conditions. A level of service determination may be granted by the DRC, subject to conditions intended to ensure compliance with the level of service standards contained in the comprehensive plan and this Code, including, but not limited to, the dedication of land, the construction of public facilities pursuant to a development agreement or the assessment of other fees which may be authorized under the laws the city. 
    308.19. Appeals of Determinations of Impact. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the DRC may appeal the determination to the city manager and then to the city commission whose decisions shall be final in accordance with the provisions of this Code. Any adversely affected person aggrieved by the decision of the DRC may appeal the decision of the DRC to the city manager. The appeal shall be pursuant to this appeal process. The adversely affected party must file with the city clerk a notice of appeal, together with established and required fees, and plans, stating the name of the applicant for the appeal, applicant's attorney (if any), development permit at issue, decision being appealed, and a brief description of the reasons and basis for the appeal, on a form approved by the city attorney. The notice of appeal must be filed in the office of the city clerk within 15 days of the rendition of the decision by the DRC. An appeal to the city manager stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the city manager, or the city manager's designee, certifies that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in the city manager's opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by the city manager or by a court of record on application. Any adversely affected person appealing the decision of the city manager shall file the appeal pursuant to the appeal process set forth in sections 315.10-315.13 of this Code. Any applicant shall be advised in writing at the time the written decision is rendered, how they may appeal the decision. 
(Ord. No. 17-07, § 6, 11-14-16; Ord. No. 18-07, § 3, 3-7-18) 
Sec. 309. - Development Agreements. 
    309.1. Purpose. Development agreements may be entered into by a developer and the commission to guarantee that the regulations existing at the time of execution of a development agreement shall govern the development of the land for the duration of the agreement and to govern phased developments and to include other provisions consistent with the authority granted by F.S. § 163.3220. Development agreements specifically do not mean agreements made between the city and other parties where the purpose of the agreement is exclusively to provide or pay for the construction, improvement, maintenance or other alteration of land or personalty by third parties where the property in question is owned or is to be owned by the city or some other governmental agency. 
    309.2. Application. Development agreement application forms, along with all established and required fees, documents, and plans, shall be submitted to the city by the applicant to the department, in conjunction with another application for development approval. The agreement shall include the following: 
(1)  A legal description of the subject land and the names of all legal and equitable owners; and 
(2)  The duration of the agreement, which shall not exceed 30 years; and 
(3)  The development uses permitted on the land, including population and unit densities, building intensities and heights, and square feet of nonresidential development; and 
(4)  A description of the public facilities that will service the development, including who shall provide such facilities; the date any new facilities, if needed, will be constructed; and a schedule to assure public facilities are available concurrent with the impacts of the development demonstrating appropriate financial commitments by either a unit of government or private party; and 
(5)  A description of any reservation or dedication of land for public purposes; and 
(6)  A description of all local development permits approved or required to be approved for the development of land; and 
(7)  A finding that the development permitted or proposed is consistent with the city's comprehensive plan and land development regulations; and 
(8)  A description of any conditions, terms, restrictions or any other requirements determined to be necessary by the city for the public health, safety, or welfare of its citizens; and 
(9)  A statement indicating that failure of the agreement to address a particular permit, condition, term, or restriction shall not relieve the developer of the necessity of complying with the law governing the permitting requirements, conditions, terms or restrictions; and 
(10)  A statement that the burdens of the development agreement shall be binding upon and the benefits of the agreement shall inure to all successors in interest to the parties of the agreement; and 
(11)  The provision that the entire development and/or any phases, shall be commenced or completed within a specific period of time. 
    309.3. Preparation of Draft Agreement. The applicant for a development agreement shall meet with the director and city manager and city attorney to discuss the format and conditions of the development agreement and shall prepare a draft agreement, incorporating any comments of the director's and city manager's review, and shall submit the draft to the director, city manager and the city attorney for review. In preparing the agreement, the applicant will be expected to pay for the services of the city attorney, and the applicant must recognize that the city attorney is not representing the applicant. 
    309.4. Review and Action by the City Commission. There shall be two public hearings prior to approval of a proposed development agreement or a proposed amendment or revocation: one to be held by the planning and zoning board and one to be held by the city commission. Notice of the intent to consider a development agreement shall be advertised in accordance with F.S. § 163.3225(2). A development agreement may be approved if: 
(1)  The agreement is consistent with the comprehensive plan; and 
(2)  The agreement is consistent with the LDC; and 
(3)  The agreement will promote the public health, safety, welfare, aesthetics, and the public interest. 
    309.5. Action Subsequent to Approval. Subsequent to approval of the application for the development agreement, the applicant shall submit to the city attorney the final development agreement, consistent with the approval granted and incorporating all conditions and requirements of the city commission. The city manager shall execute the agreement on behalf of the city after approval as to form by the city attorney. The applicant must promptly execute the agreement, obtainment the execution of the agreement by any property owner of land subject to the agreement, obtain the execution of the agreement by any developer performing the agreement, and obtain a joinder and consent to any mortgagee or other holder of a security interest in the property subject to the development agreement. 
    309.6. Recordation. The applicant shall record the development agreement within 14 days after execution by the president and shall provide a certified copy to the city clerk and director, who shall forward a copy to the state land planning agency within 14 days after recordation. 
    309.7. Periodic Review. The director shall review land subject to a development agreement at least once every 12 months to determine if there has been demonstrated good-faith compliance with the terms of the development agreement. If the city finds, on the basis of review, that there has been a failure to comply with the terms of the agreement, the city manager shall forward to the commission a recommendation that the agreement be revoked or modified. 
    309.8. Amendment or Cancellation. Agreements may be amended or canceled by mutual consent of all of the parties or their successors in interest. 
    309.9. Modification or Revocation. The agreement may be modified or revoked by the commission upon the following conditions: 
(1)  For failure to comply with the terms of the agreement; or 
(2)  In order to apply subsequently adopted local laws pursuant to this section. 
    Agreements shall be modified as is necessary to comply with relevant state or federal laws enacted after the execution of the agreement which preclude the parties' compliance with the terms of the agreement. 
    309.10. Application of Subsequently Adopted Local Laws and Policies. The city may apply subsequently adopted laws and policies to a development that is subject to a development agreement only if the commission has held a public hearing and determined that the subsequently adopted laws and policies: 
(1)  Are not in conflict with the laws and policies governing the development agreement and do not prevent development of the land uses, intensities, or densities specified in the agreement; or 
(2)  Are essential to the public health, safety, or welfare, and expressly state that they shall apply to a development that is subject to a development agreement; or 
(3)  Are specifically anticipated and provided for in the development agreement; or 
(4)  The city demonstrates that substantial changes have occurred in pertinent conditions existing at the time of approval of the development agreement; or 
(5)  The agreement was based on substantially inaccurate information supplied by the developer. 
    309.11. Enforcement. Any party, any aggrieved or adversely affected person, as defined in F.S. § 163.3215(2), or the state land planning agency may file an action for injunctive relief to enforce the terms of a development agreement. 
(Ord. No. 17-07, § 6, 11-14-16) 
Sec. 310. - Site Plans. 
    310.1. Site Plan Review Required. 
(a)  The director shall review applications and determine if they qualify for an exemption from site plan review; for a site plan revision exempt from DRC review; exemption for a site plan amendment exempt from city commission review; or whether to require final site plan review subject to city commission approval. Except as provided in this section, application for site plan approval for all development shall be submitted to the department for review by the DRC. Site plan shall be approved by the appropriate authority as set forth in table 4. 
(b)  The city contains several Planned Unit Developments (PUDS), which were adopted prior to 1998 by ordinance through the approval of a Master Development Plan (MDP). Most of them are solely residential in nature, although a few also include nonresidential property. New PUDs are no longer permitted; however, an existing community may apply to amend the existing site plan through the site plan amendment process described below. 
    310.2. Exempt Development. The following activities as shown in table 4 that are defined as "exempt" shall not require submission of a site plan to the DRC pursuant to this section. Furthermore, the director's determination on exemption status shall be recognized for the following to either be subject to DRC review (Site Plan Amendments) or to Staff Review (Site Plan Revisions) for minor amendments: 
Table 4 
SITE PLAN APPROVAL PROCESS 
APPLICATION TYPE EXEMPT 1 REVISION 
(STAFF APPROVAL) DRC APPROVAL CITY 
COMMISSION RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY Single-family residence ? Duplex ? Triplex ? 4 or more residential units within the TOC ? New construction of single-family subdivision ? ? New construction of multi-family residential community (outside TOC) ? ? Increasing building footprint which does not increase the originally approved total floor area of the structure in excess of 50% ? Increasing building footprint increases the originally approved total floor area of the structure in excess of 50% or that changes the nature of the development ? ? Installation of guardhouse and/or security gates meeting vehicular stacking requirements ? Relocation of swimming pools on individual lots ? Relocation of community swimming pools and site amenities ? Additions/renovations to individual single- or dual-family or triplex residences ? Relocation of parking spaces, drive aisles and driveways ? Addition to existing sites of parking spaces ? Addition/relocation of dumpster / compactor enclosures ? Modifications of stairs or elevations of decks, porches, terraces, trees, hedges and fencing ? Addition to existing sites of awnings, canopies or ornamental structures ? Accessory uses which do not increase plot coverage of the principal structure on individual lots ? Accessory uses which do not increase plot coverage of the principal structure for a community ? NON-RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY Compliance Plan (no increase in building footprint) 2 ? Cure Plan as a result of government takings ? ? New construction of commercial development ? ? New construction of industrial development ? ? New construction of community facilities ? ? New construction of city facilities ? ? Addition to existing sites of awnings, canopies or ornamental structures ? Relocation of commercial swimming pools ? Relocation of parking spaces, drive aisles and driveways ? Addition/relocation of dumpster / compactor enclosures ? Modifications of stairs or elevations of decks, porches, terraces, ramps, landscaping and/or fencing ? Modifications of stairs or elevations of decks, porches, terraces, ramps, landscaping and/or fencing ? Addition to existing sites of parking spaces ? Increasing building footprint which does not increase the originally approved total floor area of the structure in excess of 50% ? Increasing building footprint increases the originally approved total floor area of the structure in excess of 50% or that changes the nature of the development ? ? Construction of a new nonresidential accessory structure ? Renovation of buildings with no increase to building footprint (outside TOC) 2 ? Renovation of buildings with an increase to building footprint 2 ? Site plans in conjunction with a conditional use application ? ? Installation of guardhouse and security gates that meets vehicular stacking requirements ? APPLICABLE TO ALL PROPERTY The deposit and contouring of fill on land that does not require resource extraction and removal of fill from site 3 ? Land clearing activity done in compliance with a valid land clearing permit issued pursuant to this Code and a City Engineering Permit 3 ? New construction/renovation of mixed-use development within TOC ? New construction of mixed-use development outside of TOC ? ? Re-approval of Expired Site Plan approved by Commission ? ? Re-approval of Expired Site Plan approved by DRC ? TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES Tower on City property ? ? Tower on private property ? ? Co-location of antennas on City property 4 ? ? Co-location of antennas on private property 4 ? Distributed Antennas Systems (DAS) on public property 5 ? Repair and maintenance of telecommunication sites subject to building permit 4 ? 1 in all cases, shall be exempt from site plan review and subject to building and/or engineering permit review, provided that code requirements are met 
2 subject to CAB approval, and in the case of Compliance Plans, Commission approval of funding 
3 may be subject to Commission approval of a Conditional Use application per Section 319 
4 includes rooftop mounted antenna systems 
5 subject to City Code Article IV provisions  
    Proposed construction for accessory structures that do not violate any specific provision of the LDC may be exempt from site plan review. 
    310.3. General Site Plan Application Requirements. All site plan submittals shall have drawings prepared by one or more of the following design professionals, as appropriate: 
(1)  A planner who is a member of the American Institute of Certified Planners (AICP); and/or 
(2)  A landscape architect registered by the State of Florida (RLA); and/or 
(3)  An architect registered by the State of Florida (RA); and/or 
(4)  A civil engineer registered by the State of Florida (PE); and/or 
(5)  A land surveyor registered by the State of Florida. 
    All surveys and site plans, including design data, calculations, and analysis, shall be certified to and for the reliance of the city by an AICP planner and State of Florida licensed engineer, architect, landscape architect, and mapper and surveyor, according to their professional licensed discipline. No certification shall be older than 180 days prior to the date of application for site plan approval. All surveys and site plans must be current, meaning that the survey or site plan is no older than 180 days prior to site plan or site plan amendment application (or brought up to date) and depicts current conditions on the subject property. Surveys shall be prepared in accordance with the minimum technical standards of F.S. § 472.027, and F.A.C. ch. 21HH-6, and attached as an exhibit to the application. 
    310.4. Site Plan Submission Requirements. Site plan, site plan amendment, Site Plan Revision and site plan extension request application forms, along with all established and required fees, documents, and plans, shall be submitted to the city by the applicant to the department. An application for site plan review shall include all of the drawings required in the department's Site Plan Submittal Requirements Document, which is a part of the City of Miramar Land Development Process and Procedures Manual (Rev. 2016). The manual may be revised from time to time by resolution of the city commission. All proposals for new construction and amended construction plans will be reviewed by the city engineer and director for a determination of the scope of traffic impact analysis that shall be required for the proposal. If a traffic impact study is deemed to be required, then the applicant shall meet with the city engineer and city planning staff to develop the specific criteria and methodology that shall be required for the analysis of the case. Off-site traffic improvements may be required as determined by the city. 
    310.5. Final Site Plan Filing. A final site plan shall only be filed following a determination by the DRC that the preliminary site plan is in substantial conformance with the LDC. A final site plan shall be approved by the Commission prior to issuance of any building permit. 
    310.6. Development Review Committee (DRC). 
(a)  The DRC shall require that the proposed development satisfies the following criteria: 
    The DRC shall evaluate the site plan as it relates to conformance to the requirements of this LDC, and shall consider internal site vehicular circulation, ingress and egress, conformance with the character of the surrounding area, general layout of the site, architectural design of the structures, and whether the development as presented will enhance the quality of life in the city and promote the public health, safety, interest, aesthetics, and welfare of its citizens. The proposed development and site plan must comply with: 
(1)  The goals, objectives, policies and other applicable requirements of the city's comprehensive plan and the Broward County comprehensive land use plan; and 
(2)  All applicable codes of the city; and 
(3)  Approved and accepted architectural and engineering design standards; and 
(4)  The aesthetic character of the surrounding properties; and 
(5)  Mitigation of all traffic impact to both on-site and off-site development; and 
(6)  The requirements of the Site Plan Submittal Requirements document; and 
(7)  The requirements and findings of the Guidelines for Traffic Impact Study for Development Approvals. 
    The Site Plan Submittal Requirements and the Guidelines for Traffic Impact Study for Development Approvals are a part of the city of Miramar Land Development Process and Procedures Manual (rev. 2016.) The manual may be revised from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
(b)  DRC action. After review of the requirements of section 310.6(a), the DRC shall the following action by making a determination: 
(1)  That the site plan application meets the requirements of section 310.6. In such circumstance, the DRC shall issue a recommendation to the applicant and the city commission to approve the site plan application; or 
(2)  That the application does not meet the requirements of section 310.6, in which case the DRC shall issue a recommendation to the applicant and the city commission to deny the site plan application, which recommendation shall include a statement of the basis for the denial; or 
(3)  That the site plan application does not meet the requirements of section 310.6, but that the required changes to the application are of such a minor nature that a resubmittal of the application to the DRC is not warranted, in which case the director, after receiving evidence of revision submitted to the department and conformance to the required changes, shall indicate upon acceptable revision of the proposed site plan, a recommendation to the applicant and the city commission to approve the site plan application. 
(c)  Any adversely affected person may appeal the decision of the DRC pursuant to the appeal process set forth in sections 315.10-315.13 of this Code. Any applicant shall be advised in writing at the time the written decision is rendered, how they may appeal the decision. 
    310.7. City Commission Review. Except for plans qualified for exemption as a site plan amendment, or as a site plan revision, upon a determination by the DRC, or by department's planning staff, respectively, that the site plan complies with the review criteria and all applicable code provisions, the site plan will be scheduled for review by the commission. All site plans will be placed on the quasi-judicial portion of the commission agenda for final commission action. Action by the commission shall consist of one of the following: 
(1)  Remand the site plan to the DRC for review and recommendation; or 
(2)  Continue or table the site plan in order to obtain additional information; or 
(3)  Approve, approve with conditions, or deny the site plan. 
    The commission must consider the same criteria as the DRC when making the decision. 
    310.8. Review Procedures for Amendments and Revisions. 
    310.8.1 Review Procedures for Amendments: 
(1)  The DRC may either approve, approve with any reasonable conditions, limitations or requirements, disapprove, or postpone consideration of any application pending submittal of additional information which may be required to make a determination. The DRC shall submit the decision in a written report to the applicant. The report shall be provided to the applicant and kept on file in the department. 
(2)  A DRC approval of the plan for development final without commission review and determination, unless appealed by an adversely affected person. 
(3)  If the plan is denied by the DRC or the applicant disagrees with conditions set forth on the approval, the applicant may appeal the decision to the commission pursuant to the Appeal process of this chapter. 
(4)  Any adversely affected person may appeal the decision of the DRC pursuant to the appeal process of this chapter. The adversely affected party must file a notice of appeal, in a form approved by the city attorney, with the city clerk within 15 days of the DRC determination. 
    310.8.2 Review Procedures for Revisions. Site plan revisions may be filed with the department for minor modifications to the approved site plan or site plan amendment or to existing construction for alterations that do not affect existing or proposed infrastructure, site access or life safety provisions. 
    The scope of the proposed revisions is limited to the following: 
• Building footprint modifications that do not alter previously approved site functionality 
• Addition/elimination/relocation of accessory structures that do not alter previously approved site functionality 
• Alteration of landscaping or signage 
    The department's planning staff will review the application to determine if the proposed revisions do not compromise existing conditions, or a previously approved site layout. If the modifications require review by other disciplines that serve on the DRC, other than planning and landscaping, such as engineering or fire-rescue or public works or utilities, then the application shall be subject to review by the entire DRC as a site plan amendment. The director shall have the discretion based on the above guidelines to determine whether a proposed revision requires full or administrative site plan review. The applicant may appeal the decision of the director to the commission within fifteen (15) days of the decision, pursuant to the appeal procedure. The decision of the city commission shall be final and binding upon the applicant. 
    The department's planning staff shall either approve or deny the application or approve with conditions or after modifications are implemented. If an applicant is denied such approval, then the applicant may request a review by the full DRC, after paying the fee for a minor site plan amendment application. If the DRC denies the request, then the applicant may appeal to the city commission, pursuant to the appeal procedure. The decision of the city commission shall be final and binding upon the applicant. 
    310.9. Approved Plans. Revised site plans will be submitted to the department. Upon a finding that the site plan is in conformance with the LDC, the previous commission approval or previous DRC approval as outlined in this section, the site plan shall be signed by all DRC members. All building permit plans shall conform to the approved site plan. Approved plans shall be signed and sealed by the professional preparing them. 
    310.10. Time Limit for Approved Plans. A site plan approved pursuant to city commission action shall remain valid for a period of 540 days (18 non-calendar months) from the date of approval. If a building permit has not been issued within the 540 day time period, then the site plan shall be considered null and void. Additionally, if at anytime building permits lapse after expiration of said 540-day period, the site plan shall be considered null and void. A 6-month extension may be granted by the director, if determined by the director to have a reasonable justification by the applicant and provided that the application is filed at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the site plan approval. A 12-month extension may be granted by the city commission, provided that the application for same is filed prior to the expiration of the site plan approval. After a site plan has officially expired, an applicant desiring to move forward with the proposal must re-apply for site plan approval, including another review by the DRC, to obtain final site plan approval by the commission. 
    310.11. Engineering Plans. A building permit shall not be issued for any approved site plan unless and until all final engineering plans for on and off-site water, sewer, roadway and drainage systems are approved by the city engineer and a permit for same has been issued. 
    310.12. Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED). 
    310.12.1. Intent and Purpose. 
    Applications for approval as they relate to plat access to trafficways, access to non-trafficway collector roads, applications for site plan approval and architectural design reviews shall undergo CPTED review for all uses except for one single-family dwelling or one duplex. The CPTED review shall be completed by the DRC representative(s) who shall have successfully completed 40 hours of basic CPTED training and 40 hours of advanced CPTED training. Compliance with the comments noted by the CPTED reviewers shall be mandatory for privately owned properties, as well as all sites owned or leased by the city. 
    310.12.2. CPTED Review. The CPTED review performed by the individual(s) set forth above shall encompass the following CPTED principles: 
(1)  Provision of natural surveillance. 
a.  The placement and design of physical features shall maximize visibility which shall include building orientation; windows; building and site entrances and exits; parking lots; walkways; landscaping; fencing, security gates, and walls; signage and other physical obstructions. 
b.  The placement of persons, cameras, and/or activities to maximize surveillance possibilities. 
c.  Lighting that provides for adequate nighttime illumination of parking lots, walkways, entrances and exits. 
(2)  Provision for Natural access control. 
a.  The use of sidewalks, pavement, lighting, signage, street furniture, and landscaping to clearly guide the public to and from entrances and exits. 
b.  The use of fences, walls and landscaping to prevent and/or discourage public access to or from dark and/or unmonitored areas. 
(3)  Provision of territorial reinforcement. The use of pavement treatments, landscaping, art, furniture, signage, screening, walls, and fences to define and outline ownership of property. 
(4)  Maintenance. The use of low maintenance landscaping and lighting treatment to facilitate the CPTED principles of natural surveillance, natural access control and territorial reinforcement, and the adoption of a perpetual maintenance plan for the property. 
(Ord. No. 17-07, § 6, 11-14-16) 
    310.13 Administrative approval and variances for development proposals within the Transit Oriented Corridor (TOC) land use. 
    310.13.1. There shall be two types of authorized deviations from the requirements of this LDC: administrative approvals and variances for developments within the Transit Oriented Corridor land use. The DRC shall have the authority to administratively approve or disapprove a request for an administrative approval. Variances shall be subject to review and approval by the planning and zoning board or city commission, in accordance with the requirements of section 315 "variances" of the LDC. 
(a)  An administrative approval is a ruling that would permit a practice that is not in strict conformance with a specific provision of this LDC, but is determined to be consistent with the goals of the applicable TOC in accordance with subsections 310.13 and 715. 
(b)  Deviations from this LDC which are authorized for administrative approval are as specifically provided in the TOC code and shall be reviewed, and approved or denied, by the DRC. 
(1)  Administrative approvals involving deviations from development standards, except for administrative approvals from table 9A "specific function and use" of section 715 which shall be considered under the criteria provided in subsection b(2) of this section, the applicant shall demonstrate satisfaction of all of the following criteria: 
(A)  The strict application of this LDC would prohibit site improvements to bring a TOC development site as close as possible to meeting TOC code requirements; 
(B)  The need for the proposed waiver of the applicable TOC standard arises from some condition peculiar to the specific property involved; 
(C)  The proposed waiver of the applicable TOC standard would improve the quality and/or safety of the property and will not diminish the use of the property, nor negatively impact surrounding properties and the TOC area; and 
(D)  The proposed development meets the requirements of the TOC code as nearly as possible under the unique circumstances. 
(2)  Administrative approvals involving specific function and use standards. For administrative approvals provided in table 9A of section 715, specific function and use, the applicant shall demonstrate that all of the following standards have been met: 
(A)  The proposed use is appropriate in the area in which it is proposed; and 
(B)  The proposed use will be reasonably compatible with surrounding uses; and 
(C)  The proposed use will not contaminate the Biscayne Aquifer; and 
(D)  Any nuisance or hazardous feature involved is suitably separated and buffered from adjacent uses; and 
(E)  The proposed use will not hinder development of the site or nearby vacant property; and 
(F)  That the use will not have a detrimental effect on vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or parking conditions, and will not result in the generation or creation of traffic inconsistent with the health, safety and welfare of the community; and 
(G)  The land or building which is involved is adequate for the proposed use; and 
(H)  The proposed use complies with the comprehensive plan; and 
(I)  Drive-thru facilities shall not have direct ingress from or egress to commercial streets. 
(3)  Applications for administrative approval shall be submitted to the department, and scheduled for review by the DRC. 
(A)  A variance is a ruling on a deviation which is not Qualified for consideration as an administrative approval in accordance with this subsection. Variances shall be available for relief from development standards provided in this LPC, which are not expressly subject to administrative approval. Variances shall not be granted to allow the establishment of a use which is not otherwise allowed in the TOC land use. Variances from the TOC code shall be processed and reviewed in accordance with section 315 "variances, appeals, and zoning relief" of the LPC. 
(B)  The request for a variance shall not subject the entire application to public hearing, but only the specific issue requiring the relief. 
    310.13.2. Site plan submittal and consideration. Site plans for projects within the TOC area that do not require variances shall be processed, and approved or denied, by the DRC. The procedure for site plan filing and submittal shall be as provided for in sections 310.3 through 310.5 of the LPC. However, for applications subject to administrative review by the DRC under this subsection, the DRC shall determine whether the site plan meets the standards of this code, and the general site plan criteria of section 310.6 of the LPC. The requirements of sections 310.9 through 310.11 of the LPC shall apply to all site plans approved under this subsection. Site plan approvals may be subject to conditions as approved by the DRC. 
    310.13.3. Request for quasi-judicial hearing. An applicant or affected party may request a quasi-judicial city commission hearing on an application subject to an administrative decision of the DRC under this subsection. Within five (5) days of the rendition of the DRC's decision to grant or deny administrative approval of a site plan or other administrative approval under this subsection, the director shall provide posted and mailed notice of the DRC's decision to the applicant and all owners of property located within 500 feet of the property that is subject to the site plan or administrative approval, advising them of their right to request a quasi-judicial hearing of the city commission on the application by filing an application on a form provided by the director. Such request for a hearing of the city commission shall be made within thirty (30) days of the mailing of the notice by the director. An approved administrative site plan or administrative approval shall become effective thirty (30) days following the director's posting and mailing of the notification of the DRC's decision, provided that no request for city commission hearing is filed. If a request for a quasi-judicial hearing is made by the applicant or an affected property owner, it shall be scheduled for a city commission meeting following the director's completion of his or her review of the request. The city commission hearing and decision shall be governed by the standards applicable to site plans and administrative approvals under this section. 
    310.13.4. Should a violation of the regulating plan or an approved site plan occur during construction, or should any construction, site work, or development be commenced without an approved regulating plan or site plan, the building official shall be authorized to require the owner to stop, remove, and/or mitigate the violation. 
(Ord. No. 17-07, § 6, 11-14-16; Ord. No. 18-01, § 3(Exh. B), 11-1-17) 
Sec. 311. - Community Appearance Board. 
    311.1. Community Appearance Board Review Required. 
    Applications for site plan approval and site plan amendment approval where buildings and structures and proposed to be built or modified, shall be accompanied by an application for CAB review. CAB and CAB revision application forms, along with all established and required fees and cost recovery deposits, documents, and plans, shall be submitted to the city by the applicant to the department. 
    While the DRC reviews the proposal for the technical merits of the site plan layout and conformance with the Code and established engineering and life safety standards, the CAB will review the same proposal for its aesthetic merit and its conformance with the established architectural and site design standards. The CAB consulting architect and landscape architect meet with the applicant's design professionals to critique the design of the proposal with respect to its site layout, amenities, architectural design of all buildings and structures, landscaping and hardscape, lighting and signage. 
    311.2. Exempt Development. 
    The following activities that are defined as "exempt" shall not require submission of a site plan to the CAB pursuant to this section. Furthermore, the director's determination on exemption status shall be recognized for the following to either be subject to CAB review or to department's staff review (CAB Revisions) for minor amendments: 
    Proposed construction for accessory structures that do not violate any specific provision of the Land Development Code may be exempt from CAB review, but subject to the established design standards. 
    311.3. General CAB Application Requirements. Refer to Sec. 310.3. 
    311.4. CAB Submission Requirements. 
    CAB-New Construction, CAB-Renovation, and CAB-Revision application forms, along with all established and required fees, documents, and plans, shall be submitted to the city by the applicant to the community and economic development department. An application for CAB review shall include all of the drawings required in the department's Site Plan Submittal Requirements document. The Site Plan Submittal Requirements is a part of the city of Miramar's Land Development Process and Procedures Manual (rev. 2016). The manual may be revised from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
    311.5. Final CAB Application Filing. A final site plan shall only be filed following a determination by the CAB that the preliminary site plan is in substantial conformance with the land development code. A final site plan, incorporating the CAB's recommendations, shall be approved by the city commission prior to issuance of any building permit. 
TABLE 5 
COMMUNITY APPEARANCE APPROVAL PROCESS 
APPLICATION TYPE EXEMPT 1 REVISION 
(STAFF APPROVAL) CAB 
APPROVAL CITY 
COMMISSION RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY Single-family residence ? Duplex ? Triplex ? 4 or more residential units within the TOC ? New construction of single-family subdivision ? ? New construction of multi-family residential community (outside TOC) ? ? Increasing building footprint which does not increase the originally approved total floor area of the structure in excess of 50% ? Increasing building footprint increases the originally approved total floor area of the structure in excess of 50% or that changes the nature of the development ? ? Installation of guardhouse and/or security gates meeting vehicular stacking requirements ? Relocation of swimming pools on individual lots ? Relocation of community swimming pools and site amenities ? Additions/renovations to individual single- or dual-family or triplex residences ? Relocation of parking spaces, drive aisles and driveways ? Addition to existing sites of parking spaces ? Addition/relocation of dumpster / compactor enclosures ? Modifications of stairs or elevations of decks, porches, terraces, trees, hedges and fencing ? Addition to existing sites of awnings, canopies or ornamental structures ? Accessory uses which do not increase plot coverage of the principal structure on individual lots ? Accessory uses which do not increase plot coverage of the principal structure for a community ? NON-RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY Compliance Plan (no increase in building footprint) 2 ? Cure Plan as a result of government takings which include façade renovation ? New construction of commercial development ? ? New construction of industrial development ? ? New construction of community facilities ? ? New construction of city facilities ? ? Addition to existing sites of awnings, canopies or ornamental structures ? Relocation of commercial swimming pools ? Relocation of parking spaces, drive aisles and driveways ? Addition/relocation of dumpster / compactor enclosures ? Modifications of stairs or elevations of decks, porches, terraces, ramps, landscaping and/or fencing ? Addition to existing sites of parking spaces ? Increasing building footprint which does not increase the originally approved total floor area of the structure in excess of 50% ? Increasing building footprint increases the originally approved total floor area of the structure in excess of 50% or that changes the nature of the development ? ? Construction of a new non-residential accessory structure ? Renovation of buildings with no increase to building footprint (outside TOC) 2 ? Renovation of buildings with an increase to building footprint 2 ? Site plans in conjunction with a conditional use application ? ? Installation of guardhouse and security gates that meets vehicular stacking requirements ? APPLICABLE TO ALL PROPERTY The deposit and contouring of fill on land that does not require resource extraction and removal of fill from site 3 ? Land clearing activity done in compliance with a valid land clearing permit issued pursuant to this Code and a City Engineering Permit 3 ? New construction/renovation of mixed-use development within TOC ? New construction of mixed-use development outside of TOC ? ? Re-approval of Expired Site Plan approved by Commission ? ? Re-approval of Expired Site Plan approved by DRC ? TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES Tower on City property ? ? Tower on private property ? ? Co-location of antennas on City property 4 ? ? Co-location of antennas on private property 4 ? Distributed Antennas Systems (DAS) on public property 5 ? Repair and maintenance of telecommunication sites subject to building permit 4 ? 1 in all cases, shall be exempt from site plan review and subject to building and/or engineering permit review, provided that code requirements are met 
2 subject to CAB approval, and in the case of Compliance Plans, Commission approval of funding 
3 may be subject to Commission approval of a Conditional Use application per Section 319 
4 includes rooftop mounted antenna systems 
5 subject to City Code Article IV provisions  
    311.6. Community Appearance Board (CAB). The CAB shall require that the proposed development satisfies the following criteria: 
    The CAB shall evaluate the proposal as it relates to conformance to the requirements of this land development code, and shall consider conformance with the character of the surrounding area, general layout of the site, architectural design of the structures, and whether the development as presented will enhance the quality of life in the city. The proposed development shall comply with: 
(1)  The goals, objectives, policies and other applicable requirements of the city's comprehensive plan and Community Design Plan (CDP); and 
(2)  The established architectural design standards and precedents; and 
(3)  The aesthetic character of the surrounding properties. 
    311.7. City Commission Review. Except for plans qualified for exemption of the companion site plan amendment application, or as a minor community appearance revision, upon a determination by the department's planning staff, that the proposal complies with the review criteria and all applicable code provisions, the CAB application will be scheduled for review by the city commission and will be placed on the quasi-judicial portion of the city commission agenda for final city commission action in tandem with the related site plan application. Action by the Commission shall consist of one of the following: 
(1)  Remand the proposal back to the CAB for review and recommendation; or 
(2)  Continue or table the plan in order to obtain additional information; or 
(3)  Approve, approve with conditions, or deny the plan. 
    311.8. Review Procedures for Amendments And Revisions. 
    311.8.1 Review Procedures for Amendments: 
(1)  The CAB may either approve, approve with any reasonable conditions, limitations or requirements, disapprove, or postpone consideration of any application pending submittal of additional information which may be required to make a determination. The CAB shall submit the decision in a written report to the applicant. The report shall be provided to the applicant and kept on file in the department. 
(2)  A CAB approval of the plan for development final without city commission review and determination, unless appealed by an adversely affected person. 
(3)  If the plan is denied by the CAB or the applicant disagrees with conditions set forth on the approval, the applicant may appeal the decision to the city commission pursuant to the appeal process of this chapter. 
(4)  Any adversely affected person may appeal the decision of the CAB pursuant to the appeal process of this chapter. The adversely affected party must file a notice of appeal, in a form approved by the city attorney, with the city clerk within fifteen (15) days of the CAB determination. 
    311.8.2 Review Procedures for Revisions: CAB plan revisions may be filed with the department for minor modifications to the approved plan or to existing construction. 
    The scope of the proposed revisions is limited to the following: 
• Building footprint modifications that do not alter previously approved site functionality 
• Addition/elimination/relocation of accessory structures that do not alter previously approved site functionality 
• Alteration of landscaping or signage 
    Department staff will review the application to determine if the proposed revisions do not compromise existing conditions, or a previously approved site layout. The director shall have the discretion based on the above guidelines to determine whether a proposed revision requires full or administrative site plan review. The applicant may appeal the decision of the director to the commission within 15 days of the decision, pursuant to the appeal procedure of this chapter. The decision of the city commission shall be final and binding upon the applicant. 
    Staff shall either approve or deny the application or approve with conditions or after modifications are implemented. If an applicant is denied such approval, then the applicant may request a review by the full CAB, after paying the fee for a minor site plan amendment application. If the CAB denies the request, then the applicant may appeal to the city commission, pursuant to the appeal procedure of this chapter. The decision of the city commission shall be final and binding upon the applicant. 
    311.9. Approved Plans. Revised plans will be submitted to the department. Upon a finding that the plans are in conformance with the Code, the previous city commission approval or previous CAB approval as outlined in this section, the plans shall be considered for approved by the CAB. All building permit plans shall conform to the approved plans. Approved plans shall be signed and sealed by the professional preparing them. The issuance of temporary and final certificates of occupancy (TCOs and COs) is subject to zoning approval to ensure conformance with the CAB approved plans, after post-construction, on-site inspections have been completed and approved by department officials. 
    311.10. Time limit for approved plans. The CAB approval is tied to the site plan with which it was approved. If the related site plan is deemed to be officially expired, then the CAB approval shall also be considered null and void. Similarly, if the site plan has been granted an extension, then the CAB approval shall also be considered valid. 
    311.11 Community Appearance Board (CAB) review approval for development Proposals within the Transit Oriented Corridor (TOC) land use. 
    311.11.1 All proposed development within the TOC is subject to CAB review and approval. These CAB applications shall be exempt from city commission approval at a public hearing, in accordance with section 310.13.3. 
(Ord. No. 17-07, § 6, 11-14-16; Ord. No. 18-01, § 2(Exh. B), 11-1-17) 
Sec. 312. - Compliance Plans. 
    Compliance plan application forms, along with all established and required fees, documents, and plans, shall be submitted to the city by the applicant to the department. 
    312.1. Existing Commercial Properties. All non-conforming commercial properties existing as of March 7, 2001, the date of the original enactment of the code provision (ordinance no. 01-23) adopting the overlay district design regulations, for properties located within the state road 7 corridor overlay district/transit oriented corridor (TOC) must be improved to minimize site and building non-conformities. The process by which the non-conforming properties will be brought into compliance is detailed in the provisions below. 
    312.1.1. Compliance Measures for Existing Commercial Properties. All commercial properties of record as of the date of adoption of this ordinance, March 7, 2001, shall be exempt from complying with the requirements of the SR-7 corridor overlay district/TOC design regulations provided that the building footprint is not increased by more than fifty (50) percent of the ground floor gross square footage, or no improvement is made to the structure that exceeds 50 percent of the costs of replacing the entire structure. Current commercial property owners and/or business owners shall be responsible for compliance with the requirements listed in section 312.1.2.2 within the implementation period as provided for in section 312.1.2.3 of this Code. 
    312.1.2. State Road 7 Corridor Overlay District/TOC compliance plan approval process. 
    312.1.2.1. Application Requirements and Processing Procedure. All existing commercial properties, as of the enactment of ordinance no. 01-23, will be required to submit a compliance plan application to address site and building non-conformities. 
    All applications must be submitted in the same manner described as per section 310 site plan review and section 311 community appearance board. All compliance plan and CAB applications must be submitted to the department and reviewed by the DRC and CAB. 
    Upon completion of the review and a final decision by the CAB, all compliance plans must then be submitted to the commission for review and approval of funding prior to the issuance of a building permit. Building permit application procedures are as set forth in section 318 review of building permits. The city commission has the discretion to waive any fee or fees related to development review and/or building permit applications within the SR-7 overlay district. 
    312.1.2.2. Review Criteria. All existing commercial properties must meet the minimum standards as identified below in accordance with the time frame set forth in section 312.1.2.3. The compliance plan application shall be prepared to minimize all non-conformities to the greatest extent feasible recognizing the following criteria, in order of priority: lot functionality and unsafe site and/or structural conditions; physical site limitations; lot functionality for intended use; negative impact to adjacent properties with respect to traffic, noise, pedestrian movement, appearance or intended operations, and economic impact to the applicant. The principal site and building design elements to be reviewed are outlined in section 712 overlay district and section 813, community appearance board. 
    312.1.3. Implementation. Compliance plans will be in effect for a period of 730 days (two non-calendar years) from the date of approval, with an option for one extension of 180 days (six non-calendar months) with city commission approval. Any extension must be shown by the applicant to be with reasonable justification and for good cause shown for both the reason and time of the extension. Improvements can be phased during this term with site design elements being undertaken in the first non-calendar year (365 days) and building design elements in the second non-calendar year (period of 365 days). Once all the improvements have been completed, the property owner and/or business owner (tenant) will be issued a letter of compliance from the department for recordation in the public records of Broward County. 
    All non-conforming buildings and sites within the SR-7 corridor overlay district must perform the work necessary to receive a letter of compliance no later than 3,650 days (ten non-calendar years) from the date of the adoption of the SR-7 overlay district design regulations on March 7, 2001. If it can be demonstrated to the city's satisfaction that a building is less than 20 years old at the date of the adoption of the overlay district provisions, the period allowed for compliance shall be ten years plus the difference between the established age of the building and 7,300 days (20 non-calendar years). If, within the period allowed for compliance, the property owner is unable to alter the building to comply with the requirements of the overlay district, it can request an extension of compliance. The property owner must demonstrate to the city commission's satisfaction that it has made all reasonable effort to comply with the requirements of the district. If the commission finds that an extension is warranted, it may grant an increase in the period of compliance by up to 1,095 days (three non-calendar years) from the date that compliance would otherwise have been required. 
(Ord. No. 17-07, § 6, 11-14-16) 
Sec. 313. - Telecommunication Facilities. 
    313.1 General Process: 
    Site plan/site plan amendment/revision, CAB, and, if applicable, conditional use and variance application forms for proposed telecommunication towers and/or antenna facilities, along with all established and required fees, documents, and plans, shall be submitted to the city by the applicant to the department. The applications shall be simultaneously reviewed by the DRC and CAB, respectively. 
    Applicants for the construction of new tower structures on either private or public property shall be granted final approval by the city commission, upon receiving a recommendation from the DRC and CAB. 
    Co-location of antennas on existing towers or structures located on city property which require a lease agreement with the city shall require final approval by the Commission for the agreement. 
    Co-locations of antennas on existing towers or structures located on property not owned by the city and not increasing the height of the existing structure or increase the ground space area are exempt from the DRC and CAB approval process. The applicant is required to submit and obtain a building permit from the department. 
    Co-locations of antennas on existing towers or structures located on property not owned by the city that are increasing the height of the existing structure or increase the ground space area and meeting the hierarchy for such an approval may be approved administratively by the DRC and CAB, unless a conditional use or variance application is also required to proceed. 
    313.2 Preservation of city zoning authority: 
(a)  General authority. The city shall have authority over the placement, construction, and modification of personal wireless service facilities, subject to all applicable federal and state of Florida regulations. 
(b)  Limitations. 
(1)  The regulation of the placement, construction, and modification of personal wireless service facilities by the city shall not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services and shall not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services. 
(2)  The city shall act on any request for authorization to place, construct, or modify personal wireless service facilities within a reasonable period of time after the request is duly filed with such government or instrumentality, taking into account the nature and scope of such request. 
(3)  Any decision by the city to deny a request to place, construct, or modify personal wireless service facilities shall be in writing and supported by substantial competent evidence contained in a written record. For a decision denying a request to place, construct, or modify personal wireless service facilities to be "in writing", it must: (i) be separate from the written record, (ii) describe the reasons for the denial, and (iii) contain a sufficient explanation of the reasons for the denial to allow a reviewing court to evaluate the evidence in the record that supports those reasons. The use of minutes shall not be a substitute for a written order separate from the written record. A "denial" of an application for a personal wireless service must findings of fact, citations to the evidence, or any other explanation as to why application was denied. 
(4)  The city may not regulate the placement, construction, and modification of personal wireless service facilities on the basis of the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such facilities comply with the commission's regulations concerning such emissions. 
(Ord. No. 17-07, § 6, 11-14-16) 
Sec. 314. - Governmental Takings/Cure Plans. 
    Cure Plan application forms, along with all established and required fees, documents, and plans, shall be submitted to the city by the applicant to the department. 
    314.1. Structures, lot size and land use made illegal as a result of governmental acquisition. In the event that an acquiring authority acquires private property for a public transportation facility or other public purpose or facility and the acquisition results in the increase of or the creation of nonconformity, such private property shall constitute a non-conforming use unless a variance is granted in accordance with this section. 
    314.2. Authority to apply for variance. The acquiring authority and/or the property owner are each hereby granted the authority to apply for a variance from the LDC to cure non-conformities, pursuant to this section. Application may be made prior to or after the creation of the nonconformity. 
    314.3. Authority to grant variances. The commission shall have the authority to grant variances to cure non-conformities pursuant to this section. 
    314.4. Standard for grant or denial of variance; conditions. 
    314.4.1. Existing lots, parcels, structures or uses which become or will become non-conforming or suffer an increase in nonconformity as a result of governmental acquisition by an acquiring authority, and constitute a deviation from the LDC standards at the time of the proposed taking, may be granted a variance by the commission, provided a determination is made by the commission, after a public hearing that: 
    314.4.1.1. The requested variance will not adversely affect visual, safety, aesthetic or environmental characteristics of the community; 
    314.4.1.2. The requested variance will not adversely affect the safety of pedestrians or the safe operation of motor vehicles; 
    314.4.1.3. The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the vicinity; 
    314.4.1.4. The requested variance will not cause motor vehicle parking shortages which adversely impact the community; and 
    314.4.1.5. The requested variance will not encourage or promote the continuation of existing uses of the property which have been or will be rendered unfeasible or impractical due to the impacts of the acquisition and/or construction of the roadway or other public facility including, but not limited to, aesthetic, visual, noise, dust, vibration, safety, land use compatibility and environmental impacts. 
    314.4.2. The commission may impose conditions upon any variance granted so as to assure compliance with the above listed criteria. 
    314.5. Status of lots, parcels, structures or uses after granting of a variance. The granting of a variance pursuant to subsection 314.4 shall serve to cure the nonconformity, subject to implementation of the variance in accordance with the specific approval granted and in accordance with any conditions imposed upon the grant of such variance. 
    314.6. Procedure for application for variance. 
    314.6.1. The acquiring authority and/or property owner may apply in writing to the department director for a variance pursuant to subsection 314.2. The application may request alternative cures. The applicable fee established for review and processing of the application shall be submitted with the application. 
    314.6.2. If an application for a variance is submitted by the acquiring authority, the property owner shall be notified via U.S. certified mail, return receipt requested, of the application by the director. 
    314.6.3. If an application for a variance is submitted by the property owner, the acquiring authority shall be notified via U.S. certified mail, return receipt requested, of the application by the director. Notice shall be addressed to the property owner's most current address as depicted in the current ad valorem tax rolls maintained by the county property appraiser. 
    If the acquiring authority desires to submit an application for a cure or variance in addition to the plan proposed by the property owner, it shall do so within 30 days of such notification, so that the applications of both the property owner and acquiring authority may be considered at the same time. If such application is not timely submitted by the acquiring authority, the application shall not be heard by the city commission unless the commission finds good cause and reasonable justification for the delay by the acquiring authority. 
    314.6.4. Hearings before the commission shall be conducted in accordance with the city code procedure for quasi-judicial hearings. Public notice shall be provided in accordance with section 501. 
    314.7. Expedited review; preliminary decision. 
    314.7.1. The acquiring authority or property owner may request, and the city commission may grant an expedited review of an application in those situations in which the primary purpose of the application is to facilitate the property acquisition by providing input early in the acquiring authority's appraisal process. 
    314.7.2. Under an expedited review, the application may be advanced for placement on a commission agenda any determination made by the commission shall be preliminary and non-binding. 
    314.7.3. Thereafter, the applicant may request the application to be processed for final binding consideration pursuant to subsection 314.6 above. 
    314.7.4. The application fee for an expedited review shall be the same as the fee for a regular variance application. 
    314.8. Code violations. 
    314.8.1. The provisions of this Code shall not be interpreted to allow for the continued existence of building or safety code violations that are determined to be an immediate threat to the public health, safety, aesthetics or welfare. 
    314.8.2. The appropriate building officials and inspectors of the city are hereby authorized to take any necessary steps to enforce all applicable building and safety codes even though the subject property is part of a pending governmental acquisition. 
(Ord. No. 17-07, § 6, 11-14-16) 
Sec. 315. - Variances, Appeals and Zoning Relief. 
    315.1. Purpose and Scope of a Variance. The variance process is intended to provide limited relief from the requirements of this Code in those cases where strict application of those requirements will create a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, prohibiting the use of land in a manner otherwise allowed under this Code. Variances shall not be granted to allow the establishment of a use (i.e., a use variance) which is not otherwise allowed in a zoning district or which would change the zoning district classification of any or all of the affected property. Use variances are therefore prohibited. 
    315.2. Application Requirements for a Variance. Variance application forms, along with all established and required fees, documents, and plans, shall be submitted to the city by the applicant to the department. 
    315.3. Review and Approval Authority for a Variance. Variances from the requirements applicable to and affecting individual single-family or duplex dwelling units shall be granted final consideration by the planning and zoning board. All other variances shall be given final consideration to be granted by the city commission. Refer to Table 6. 
    315.4. Staff and DRC Review of a Variance Request. The department shall review the application to evaluate whether the proposed variance complies with the general purpose and standards set forth for the granting of variances. The director shall compile a written staff report summarizing the facts of the case including all relevant documents and plans and an analysis of the applicant's submitted criteria responses. The DRC shall review the request and render a recommendation for all variance cases, except for those that do not affect a building footprint or site layout, such as signs, and for cases affecting individual single-family and duplex homeowner properties. The complete application and staff report shall be prepared and transmitted to the board or commission pursuant to the respective required process noted in section 315.3. 
    315.5. Review by the Planning and Zoning Board. Applications for variances subject to review and approval by the board shall be scheduled for a public hearing by the director. The board shall hold one public hearing on the proposed variance. Notice of the public hearing and the conduct of the public hearing shall be in accordance with the provisions of this Code. In considering whether to approve or deny the application, the board shall review the application, the general purpose and standards of the Code, staff reports, and any oral and written comments received before or at the public hearing. An applicant may appeal the decision of the board pursuant to the appeals procedure. 
    315.6. Review by City Commission. Applications for variances subject to review and approval by the commission shall be transmitted to the city manager, with a written staff report. The city manager shall schedule the proposed variance for the next available commission meeting, provided that the required notice requirements are met. The commission shall hold one public hearing on the proposed variance. In considering whether to approve or deny the application, the city commission shall review the application, the general purpose and standards of the Code, staff reports, and any oral and written comments received before or at the public hearing. 
    315.7. Standards of Review. 
(a)  A variance shall be granted only where the preponderance of the evidence presented in the particular case shows that either of the following is met: 
(b)  Undue hardship. The following are the requirements for a demonstration of an undue hardship: 
(1)  The particular physical surroundings, shape, topographical condition, or other physical or environmental condition of the specific property involved would result in a particular hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the regulations were carried out literally; and 
(2)  The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are unique to the parcel and would not be generally applicable to other property within the vicinity; and 
(3)  That the special conditions or circumstances do not result from the deliberate actions of the applicant or property owner of the subject property to establish a use or structure which is not otherwise consistent with this Code; and 
(4)  That the granting of the variance will not confer on the applicant or the property owner of the subject property any special privilege that is denied by the Code to other similarly situated lands, buildings, or structures in the same zoning district; and 
(5)  The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the vicinity; and 
(6)  The proposed variance will not substantially increase the congestion in the public streets, or increase the danger of fire, or endanger the public safety, or substantially diminish or impair property values within the vicinity. 
(c)  Practical Difficulty. If the application does not meet the undue hardship criteria, the application may be considered under the requirements of practical difficulty, which shall require a vote of at least three quarters of the full commission or board members, whether said members be present or abstain or not. The following are the standards for consideration of whether a practical difficulty exists: 
(1)  The variance shall not be substantial in in relation to what is required by the Code; 
(2)  The approval of the variance will be compatible with development patterns, and whether a substantial change will be produced in the character of the neighborhood; 
(3)  The essential character of the neighborhood would be preserved; 
(4)  The variance can be approved without causing substantial detriment to adjoining properties; 
(5)  The request is due to unique circumstances of the property, the property owner, and/or the applicant which would render conformity with the strict requirements of the Code unnecessarily burdensome; 
(6)  The special conditions and circumstances which exist are the result of the actions beyond the control of the applicant; 
(7)  The difficulty can not be obviated by some method feasible for the applicant to pursue other than by a variance; and 
(8)  In view of the manner in which the difficulty arose, the interest of justice will be served by allowing the variance. 
Administrative Variances. 
    For owner-occupied, single-family and dual-family residences, a variance from the setback requirements may be granted by the director, utilizing either of the criteria listed above. This request shall only apply to a maximum threshold of twenty (20) percent or five (5) feet of the required setback, whichever is less. Where structures exist or are proposed to be located within easements, in addition to the setback encroachment, such easement encroachments must obtain approval from the city engineer. 
Table 6 
VARIANCE TYPE ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVAL PLANNING AND 
ZONING BOARD CITY 
COMMISSION Single family/Duplex OWNER OCCUPIED Less than 20% of the required setback ? Multi-family 
OWNER OCCUPIED Less than 20% of the required setback ? Parking standards ? Height ? Landscaping Mitigation Options ? Signs ? All other issues ?  
    315.8. Conditions. In granting a variance, the board or commission may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a variance as may be necessary to comply with the standards for granting a variance or to prevent or minimize adverse effects on other property in the neighborhood, including, but not limited to: limitations on size, bulk and location; requirements for landscaping, signage, aesthetics, outdoor lighting, and the provision of adequate ingress and egress; hours of operation; and the mitigation of environmental impacts. 
    315.9. Expiration of Approval. The approval of a variance shall be void if the recipient does not receive site plan or conditional use approval or a building permit for the proposed use within 18 months after the granting of the variance. Once the site plan or conditional use is approved, the variance approval period will run concurrently with the established site plan or conditional use approval period. If a site plan is not required, the variance approval period shall run concurrently with the period of the building permit's effectiveness. An applicant who has obtained approval of a variance may request an extension of this time within the original approval period. The commission or the board-on matters they have final jurisdiction on-may, at a regular or special meeting, grant up to a 365 day (12 non-calendar months) extension request for good cause and reasonable justification shown for both the extension and period of extension by the applicant. 
Appeals. 
    315.10. Purpose and Applicability. This section is intended to provide for a procedure for appeals from the decisions of decision-making and administrative bodies having development approval authority under this Code (i.e., the planning and zoning board, the DRC and/or the CAB) or from any written order, requirement, decision, determination, or interpretation made by an administrative official in the enforcement of these regulations. The right to appeal pursuant to this section shall include the applicant for a development permit as well as an adversely affected person who believes they have been aggrieved by a decision. The authority to decide appeals shall be as specified in this Code. 
    315.11. Filing of Application and Notice of Appeal. 
(a)  Any adversely affected person may appeal the decision of the DRC, CAB, planning and zoning board, the director, or other administrative official if the appeal relates to development. The appeal shall be pursuant to this appeal process. The adversely affected party must file with the city clerk a notice of appeal, together with established and required fees, and plans, stating the name of the applicant for the appeal, applicant's attorney (if any), development permit at issue, decision being appealed, and a brief description of the reasons and basis for the appeal, on a form approved by the city attorney. The notice of appeal must be filed in the office of the city clerk within 15 days of the rendition of the decision by the CAB, DRC, director or other administrative decision-maker. 
(b)  Stay of proceeding. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the city manager, or the city manager's designee, certifies to the commission after the notice of appeal is filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in the city manager's opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by the commission or by a court of record on application. 
    315.12. Review. Upon receipt of a complete application the city manager shall review the application and schedule a public hearing to be conducted by the commission. The city manager shall forward a copy of the application to the commission together with a report and recommendation summarizing the facts of the case, any relevant documents and any comments received on the application. 
    315.13. Action by the City Commission. A public hearing shall be held by the commission to consider the application. The applicant shall be advised in writing of the hearing date and time. The commission shall review the application, the report and recommendation of the administration and consider the evidence and testimony provided at the hearing. The appeal hearing shall be de novo. After the public hearing is held, the commission shall issue a written decision and order granting the relief sought in the application, with or without conditions, or denying the appeal. 
Zoning Relief Request Procedures. 
    315.14. Purpose and Applicability. In order to address possible unintended violations of federal and Florida laws, subsequent to implementation of this Code or its related rules, policies, and procedures in advance of costly litigation, zoning relief may be granted pursuant to this section. 
    315.15. Application. A person or entity shall request relief under this section prior to filing a lawsuit, by completing a zoning relief request form. Zoning relief request application forms, along with all established and required fees, documents, and plans, shall be submitted to the city by the applicant to the department. The form shall contain such questions and requests for information as are necessary for evaluating the relief requested. 
    315.16. Notice. The city shall display a notice on the city's public notice bulletin board and shall maintain copies available for review in the department and the office of the city clerk. The notice shall advise the public that a request for zoning relief under a federal and Florida law is pending. The location, date and time of the applicable public hearing shall be included in the notice. Mailed notice shall also be provided to property owners within 300 feet of the subject property, if the request for relief is site specific, in accordance with the procedure provided in section 301.11.3. 
    315.17. Application and Hearing. The commission shall have the authority to consider and act on requests for zoning relief submitted to the department. Prior to this, the planning and zoning board shall hear this item and provide a recommendation on the matter to the city commission within 120 days of receipt by the city of the request for relief. A final public hearing shall be held at the next available commission meeting or within a period not exceeding 90 days of the planning and zoning board public hearing, whichever is less. A written determination shall be issued by resolution no later than thirty days after the conclusion of the final public hearing. The determination may: (a) grant the relief requested; (b) grant a portion of the request and deny a portion of the request, and/or impose conditions upon the grant of the request; or (c) deny the request. Any determination denying the requested relief shall be final, in writing, and shall state the reasons the relief was denied. The final written determination shall be sent to the requesting party by U.S. certified mail, return receipt requested. 
    315.18. Additional Information. If necessary, prior to the public hearing, the city may request additional information from the requesting party, specifying in sufficient detail what information is required. In the event a request for additional information is made to the requesting party by the city, the 120-day time period to schedule a public hearing shall be extended to ninety (90) days to include the time necessary to seek and review the additional information. The requesting party shall have fifteen (15) days after the date the information is requested to provide the needed information. If the requesting party fails to timely respond with the requested additional information, the city shall notify the requesting party and proceed with scheduling a public hearing and issuing its final written determination regarding the relief requested. 
    315.19. Criteria. In determining whether the zoning relief request shall be granted or denied, the applicant shall be required to establish: 
(1)  The applicant has a claim to relief or damages under a federal and Florida law or combination thereof, which will likely be successful; and 
(2)  The applicant believes in good faith that the city through implementation of its LDC has intentionally or unintentionally violated federal and Florida law for the reasons stated in the zoning relief request; and 
(3)  The applicant satisfies the standard set forth in the applicable federal or Florida statute(s), or legal precedent interpreting the applicable statute(s). 
    315.20. Exhaustion Required. Completion of the zoning relief procedures shall be a supplement to and not a substitute for any other pre-litigation dispute resolution processes available by law to the city or the applicant. Completion of the zoning relief procedures shall constitute the exhaustion of all administrative remedies available from the city. 
    315.21. Effect while Pending. While an application for zoning relief or appeal of a determination of same is pending before the city, the city will not enforce the subject LDC, rules, policies, and procedures against the property owner, except that the city may seek injunctive relief if an imminent threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public is present. 
(Ord. No. 17-07, § 6, 11-14-16) 
Sec. 316. - Engineering Permits, Final Engineering, and Roadway Plans. 
    316.1. Purpose. The review of engineering and subdivision plans by the city engineer and the issuance of the appropriate permits is required to ensure that all work is performed in conformance with generally accepted engineering standards and practices, and city specifications; and that all work is completed in a timely manner. 
    316.2. Final Subdivision Improvements Plan. 
    316.2.1. Filing. Prior to the issuance of an engineering construction permit, the applicant must submit a final detailed subdivision improvements plan in conformance with the city's plan review checklist. These plans shall show all information required for schematic improvements plans and all paving, grading, stormwater, drainage, water and sanitary sewer facilities to be provided by the applicant as part of the development. A final site plan shall be approved prior to approval of the final subdivision improvements plan. The applicant shall submit to the city the required signed and sealed plans which shall conform to the approved final plat and final site plan, the city's subdivision improvement standards and shall be 24 inches by 36 inches in size, to a scale of not more than one inch equals 50 feet, except where a smaller scale is approved by the city engineer. Appropriate security shall be provided for all public improvements. The engineer-of-record shall certify that the plans as submitted are in conformance with the approved site plan. The improvements plan shall include or be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  A sealed current survey showing existing topography and existing improvements. The survey, at a scale of not be less than one inch equals 50 feet, shall include: 
a.  Existing ground elevations on a grid system having a grid interval appropriate to the overall property; and 
b.  Existing buildings, utility poles, underground utilities and other structures within 100 feet of the area included in the proposed plat; and 
c.  Perimeter spot grades; and 
d.  Certification that no dedications or improvements exist except as shown 
e.  The survey shall be certified to and for reliance by the city and must be prepared by a registered and licensed Florida surveyor and mapper. The survey shall be current, meaning that the survey is no older than 180 days prior to the application (or brought up to date) and depicts current conditions on the subject property. Said survey shall be prepared in accordance with the minimum technical standards of F.S. § 472.027, and F.A.C. ch. 21HH-6, and attached as an exhibit to the application. 
(2)  Engineering plans including, but not limited to: 
a.  Locations, widths, profile elevations and types of all existing pavements, and type of pavement construction, such as rock base course, subgrade, pavers, asphalt, concrete, and pervious materials; and 
b.  Locations and widths, centerline grades, and driveway locations of proposed street pavements, sidewalks, walkways and bike paths; and 
c.  Location and description of proposed drainage structures, including length of exfiltration trenches, proposed finished floor elevations of building sites, gutters and inlets; and 
d.  Direction of flow of gutters, ditches and swales and final disposition of stormwater; and 
e.  Water distribution system, sewage collection system, lift stations, mains and the like; and 
f.  Data on size and character of drainage area tributary to each inlet; latitude and longitude of all outfalls and culverts; percolation test data and design computations for runoff and sizing of drainage facilities; and 
g.  Location and width of all existing and proposed easements for water, sewer, drainage and franchise utilities; and 
h.  Typical sections of all proposed street pavements which shall include the following: 
1.  Width of pavement and crown slopes; and 
2.  Width and grade of gutters; and 
3.  Width and slope of shoulders; and 
4.  Width and grade of sidewalks; and 
5.  Side slopes to natural ground, including side ditches of canals, if any; and 
6.  Positions of right-of-way lines indicating existing and proposed dedication; and 
7.  Materials of road construction and other dimensions, such as thickness of base and surface course, conforming to city specifications. 
(3)  Profile sheets showing proposed grades for street and stormwater drainage construction and water and sewer mains if requested by the city; and 
(4)  An estimate of the cost of construction of all improvements shown on the improvements plan, sealed by a professional engineer registered in Florida; and 
(5)  Final legal documentation acceptable to the city attorney ensuring perpetual maintenance of private roads, parking areas, drainage systems, common areas and landscaping within the adjacent public right-of-way; and 
(6)  Wetland mitigation areas including grades; and 
(7)  A plan which shows the relationship of landscaping to utilities and lighting; and 
(8)  Any other information deemed necessary by the city engineer, utilities director or fire chief. 
    316.2.2. Review and Approval of Final Subdivision Improvement Plans. The city engineer shall review and approve the plans and accompanying cost estimate. 
    316.2.3. Modification of Design of Improvements. If at any time before or during the construction of the required improvements, it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city engineer that unforeseen conditions make it necessary or preferable to modify the location or design of such required improvements, the city engineer may approve modifications to the improvements plan. These modifications shall be within the spirit and intent of the commission's approval and shall not extend to the waiver or substantial alteration of the function of any improvements required by the city. Modifications shall substantially comply with an approved final site plan and/or final plat. The city shall issue any authorization in writing. The process for modification of approved plans shall be in the same manner as required by this section for the approval of the original plans. 
    316.2.4. Posting of Security. 
    316.2.4.1. Security Required. The applicant shall post a payment and surety bond, letter of credit drawn on a U.S. banking institution located in the state of Florida which institution is not an institution headquartered in a foreign nation, a cash escrow, or other security with the city in a form acceptable to the city manager in the amount of 125 percent of the final estimated cost of construction of all required public improvements as approved by the city engineer. Improvements shall include, but not be limited to, roads, drainage, landscaping, irrigation, curb and gutter, sidewalks, lighting, and water and sewer utilities. This security shall be posted prior to the issuance of an engineering construction permit. The security shall be a guarantee that the improvements shall be made in accordance with approved plans and specifications. 
    316.2.4.2. Return of Funds. The original security may be reduced to 25 percent of the original amount, provided that: 
(1)  The plat has been recorded; and 
(2)  The required improvements are completed and ready for acceptance by the city; and 
(3)  The release of liens have been received by the city; and 
(4)  All required easements have been dedicated. 
    The reduced security shall be continued for a period of one year (365 days) from the date of acceptance of the improvements by the commission to cover latent defects, maintenance and repairs. The owner/developer of the project shall in writing also warranty the improvements, and indemnify the city against the costs of removing, repairing, installing, and rehabilitation, all to cover latent defects, maintenance and repairs. 
    316.2.5. Construction of Improvements. 
    316.2.5.1. Inspection of Improvements. At least one day prior to commencing construction of required improvements, a pre-construction conference shall be scheduled and the applicant shall notify the city engineer in writing of the time when proposed to commence construction of such improvements. The construction permit shall not be issued until appropriate security, as described in section 316.2.4.1, has been posted by the applicant and accepted by the city, and all other necessary permits have been issued by applicable governmental entities. The developer shall, at its expense, and at no risk or expense to the city, retain the services of a registered and licensed Florida professional engineer for the purposes of providing necessary observation, directly or through an authorized representative, and certification to the city of the construction of public improvements to insure that construction is at all times in compliance with accepted construction practices and in compliance with the approved plans and specifications. The engineer-of-record shall keep accurate records of all required tests and inspection of public improvements. A copy of each field report shall be submitted to the city. 
    316.2.5.2. Proper Installation of Improvements. If the city finds upon inspection of the improvements that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city engineer, the city may take action to stop construction or issuing further development permits. The city shall notify the applicant, and if necessary, the agency securing the applicant's performance, and shall take all necessary steps to preserve the city's rights under the security. 
    316.2.5.3. Completion of Improvements. The public improvements shown on the approved final subdivision improvements plans for that parcel or phase of construction, with the exception of the final lift of asphalt pavement and the permanent pavement markings, shall be completed and ready for acceptance by the appropriate governmental agencies prior to the first certificate of occupancy being issued by the building official for the parcel or phase of construction. 
    316.2.6. Engineering Construction Permit. No land development activity shall commence without first obtaining engineering plan approval, an engineering construction permit, and paying the appropriate fee(s) including: 
(1)  Clearing and grubbing; and 
(2)  Filling or excavation work; and 
(3)  Road construction; and 
(4)  Underground utility installation and/or rehabilitation; and/or any other related activity. 
    316.2.7. Engineering Excavation Permit. No excavation shall commence without first obtaining engineering plan approval of the excavation activity, an engineering excavation permit, and paying the appropriate fee. 
    316.2.8. Annual Permit for Mining, Quarrying or Excavation. An annually renewable engineering permit issued in accordance with the regulations of this Code shall not be transferable and shall be obtained prior to commencing any resource extraction activity pursuant to this Code. Said permit shall be renewed on the first day of each calendar year, subject to full compliance with all city requirements and regulations and the payment of any required fees. 
    316.2.9. Engineering Right-of-Way Crossing Permits. No right-of-way crossings that involve the cutting or removal of pavements shall commence without first obtaining plan approval, an engineering right-of-way crossing permit, and paying the appropriate fees. 
    316.2.10. Revocation of Engineering Permits. The city shall revoke any applicable engineering permit pursuant to any of the following situations: 
(1)  Final plat approval has expired; or 
(2)  The security posted with the city to guarantee the construction of the subdivision improvements is in default or has expired; or 
(3)  Failure to commence engineering construction within one year (365 days) of the date of the engineering permit issuance and/or lapse of the engineering work on the site for a period of greater than ninety (90) days, after the one-year period, when there is no active city building construction permit in effect on the site; or 
(4)  The absence of a designated developer's engineer-of-record for a period of seven (7) consecutive calendar days. Said engineer shall be as defined in F.S. ch. 471, representing the developer, in responsible charge of the permitted engineering work at all times. 
    Any successive developer/builder's engineer for the job shall be able to document and produce, upon request, evidence that he or she has, in fact, repeated all the work done by the original engineer, per the requirements of chapter 61G15.27.001 of the Florida Administrative Code. 
    The city engineer shall notify the developer in writing of the intention to revoke an engineering permit. The developer may appeal the decision to the city manager. 
    316.2.11. Roadway Plans Review by DRC. Roadway plans, which shall include all civil plans, as well as lighting and landscaping plans, shall be reviewed by the DRC. The city engineer and DRC Chair shall approve the roadway plans upon satisfaction of DRC representatives' comments and the payment of the review fee(s). 
(Ord. No. 17-07, § 6, 11-14-16) 
Sec. 317. - Lake Excavation and Resource Extraction Improvements. 
    317.05. Blasting prohibited. Blasting, in connection with lake excavation or resource extraction, is prohibited anywhere within the city. 
    317.1. Conditional use approval required. Resource extraction, mining, or the removal of fill from a parcel shall not be permitted without obtaining a conditional use approval from the commission. An application shall be submitted and processed in conformance with this Code. The application shall be processed in conformance with the procedures for a conditional use, except it shall be exempt from planning and zoning board review. 
    317.2. Conditional use approval is not required for excavations for the purposes set forth in this section. Notwithstanding the exemption from conditional use review, all activity listed in subsections (c) and (d) shall conform to the design specifications in sections 317.6 through 317.15. 
(1)  Excavations for structural components such as building footers and pads, swimming pools and accessory structures which have been permitted by the building division. 
(2)  Canal rehabilitation activities of the South Broward Drainage District (SBDD) or the South Florida Water Management District (SFWMD). 
(3)  Excavation of lakes on residential or nonresidential parcels for the purpose of providing building pads or raising the grade of the site. However, no such activity will be exempted if there is any removal of fill from the site. The excavator is required to show compliance with all other permitting agencies prior to the commencement of lake excavation. 
(4)  Excavation to create water hazards on a bona fide 18-hole golf course. However, no such activity will be exempted if there is any removal of fill from the site. 
    317.3. Submission requirements. Applicants for conditional use approval to permit resource extraction, mining, or the removal of fill from a parcel shall submit to the department, along with the application for conditional use approval, engineering and other data, as set forth below, in sufficient detail to permit the city to evaluate the potential effect of the operation on existing and planned development in the vicinity, to anticipate any adverse effects which might arise from the operational characteristics of the project, the duration of the project, and the finished conditions which will exist at the time the project is terminated. Applicants shall be required to submit the additional information set forth below. A site development and reclamation plan which shall show the proposed use of the property upon completion of the mining or quarrying and shall also include the following: 
(1)  A plot plan to show the property owned and controlled by the applicant with reference to streets, highways and contiguous platted areas; 
(2)  Cross-sections to show approximate elevation and grades at the final outside boundaries of the mining or quarrying operation. The estimated cubic yards to be removed, and the depths and slopes of voids created, cut and fill calculations must be provided. The plan shall show the ratio of the slope depth to distance from the final lake boundary as specified in section 317.6; 
(3)  A final grading plan to show the ground elevations of the land immediately adjacent to the site of the mining or quarrying and all adjacent and contiguous streets and roads; 
(4)  The physical layout, with linear dimensions of all proposed lakes, canals or other excavations, arterial and collector roads and development parcel boundaries; 
(5)  The plans, maps, elevations and cross sections required by this section shall be made and sealed by a surveyor or engineer registered as such by the state of Florida; 
(6)  Proposed and required wetland mitigation areas as provided for in a Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP) dredge and fill permit. 
    A stormwater management plan shall be designed to prevent contamination of the Biscayne Aquifer and control erosion caused by wind and rain. 
    317.4. Prior to the granting of conditional use approval, the commission shall attach such conditions and stipulations to ensure that the following standards have been met. The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to establish that each of the foregoing standards has been met. 
(1)  The proposed conditional use approval is appropriate in the area in which it is proposed; 
(2)  The proposed conditional use approval will be reasonably compatible with surrounding uses; 
(3)  The proposed conditional use will not contaminate the Biscayne Aquifer; 
(4)  Any nuisance or hazardous feature involved is suitably separated and buffered from adjacent uses; 
(5)  The proposed conditional use approval will not hinder development of the site or nearby vacant property; 
(6)  Traffic will not be generated on local streets; 
(7)  The land or building which is involved is adequate; 
(8)  The proposed conditional use complies with the comprehensive plan; 
(9)  The proposed conditional use is consistent with applicable mitigation plans approved by the Army Corps of Engineers and Department of Environmental Protection; and 
(10)  The slope to the lake shall have a safe vertical to horizontal ratio. 
    317.5. In granting a conditional use approval the commission may prescribe any reasonable conditions, restrictions or limitations it deems necessary or desirable in addition to those set forth herein, in order to maintain and be consistent with the city's comprehensive plan for the area. The city commission may revoke, modify or change any resolution adopted granting a conditional use approval, if the city finds that there has been a variation or violation of any imposed conditions, restrictions or limits in any such resolution. 
    317.6. Lake bank slopes or inclines from the design finished grade shall not be steeper than one foot vertical to four feet horizontal and shall extend downward from the design finished grade into the water to an elevation of three feet below the SBDD's basin control elevation. The slopes below this point may be excavated as vertical downward to the steepest safest slope the soil will bear upon the recommendation of a certified soils engineer. These sloping requirements may be modified in accordance with a wetland mitigation cross-section approved by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. However, in no case shall the deep cut line be closer than 18 feet to the water's edge at low water elevation. 
    317.7. Canal bank slopes or inclines from the design finished grade which are part of a canal system to be dedicated to the SBDD shall not be steeper than one foot vertical to two feet horizontal and shall extend downward from the design finished grade into the water to an elevation of two feet below the average annual low water table elevation established on the SBDD Basin Map, as amended or replaced from time to time. At depths lower than two feet below the low water table, the slope may be increased to the steepest safe slope the soil will bear upon recommendation of a certified soils engineer. Canal banks or inclines from the design finished grade which are not dedicated to the SBDD shall be required to provide and maintain a slope in accordance with this Code. 
    317.8. The city shall require the dedication of all rights-of-way within or adjacent to the project as shown on the Broward County trafficways plan prior to the granting of a conditional use approval and additional rights-of-way as shown in the city's comprehensive plan. 
    317.9. The grading, leveling and sloping of the banks shall be on a progressive basis, and the perimeter around the excavation shall be backfilled and graded to meet with the approval of the city engineer and to conform to the accepted site development plan. 
    317.10. The boundaries and the top of bank slope line in the portion of the final perimeter to which the mining, quarrying or excavation extends shall be staked so as to meet with the approval of the city engineer and said stakes shall be maintained in proper fashion at all times so that the final exterior boundary limits of excavation, slopes and grade levels may be easily determined and verified. Moving of any stake without the written permission of the city engineer shall be a violation of section 1-13, subjecting a violator to both a fine and/or a term in jail. 
    317.11. An annual inspection will be performed by the city and a report of any deviation from the approved permit shall be reported to the city manager. In conjunction with such inspection, the applicant shall present progress drawings of mining, quarrying and excavations, prepared and sealed by a registered surveyor and mapper, to substantiate their conformity to the approved site development plan. The annual progress drawing must contain or be accompanied by the following data: 
(1)  Base line around the perimeter of the lake shall coincide with the top of the four to one slope and shall be clearly referenced to at least one lot line or land line; 
(2)  Aerial photographs at a scale of one inch equals 300 feet; and 
(3)  In areas where the deep cut line approaches within 100 feet of the baseline, cross section surveys will be required. Said cross sections shall be perpendicular to the baseline at 100 foot stations. 
    317.12. During the mining or quarrying operations the property shall be suitably posted, at intervals of 200 feet on the perimeter of the excavation-site, with warning signs denoting the operation and of such character as may be adequate to warning the public concerning possible hazards. 
    317.13. If the area in the surrounding neighborhood becomes substantially developed, as determined by the city, and if, in the opinion of the city engineer, the excavation then becomes hazardous to the surrounding area, the property shall be fenced. 
    317.14. Security shall be maintained on the premises during all daylight hours, including Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, when there are no workers on the premises. 
    317.15. Any public roads in the vicinity of the project used in connection with the project shall be so designated prior to use and shall be repaired and restored to their original conditions when, in the opinion of the public works director, they have deteriorated beyond normal wear and tear due to the operation of the project. The opinion of the public works director in connection with the repair and restoration of the public roads used in connection with the project shall be final. Use of any other public roads shall be grounds for revoking the conditional use. All access roads shall be continuously well sprinkled to minimize dust, provided such sprinkling shall not be required 500 feet or more from an improved public road. 
    317.16. Upon completion of the mining or quarrying and also when, in the opinion of the city engineer, there is a question that the excavation being done is not in accordance with the site development plans approved, a certified topographical survey showing elevations and cross-sections of the excavation shall be submitted upon request of the city engineer. 
    317.17. Muck or marl may be removed from the premises, provided that a sufficient amount is retained to landscape the property around the lake. 
    317.18. The conditional use approval granted under this section shall be granted only to the applicant, and such approval shall not be transferred to a subsequent owner following a transfer or ownership of the property, unless the commission has approved such transfer. 
    317.19. The city commission shall determine a starting date and a completion date during which time the mining, quarrying, resource extraction and removal of fill work shall be accomplished. 
    317.20. If mining, quarrying or excavation is discontinued for a period in excess of 180 days, the body of water created by such mining, quarrying or excavation shall either be fenced or sloped in accordance with the requirements of this Code provision. 
    317.21. Bonding and insurance is required. In order to insure compliance with all terms and conditions imposed, a cash or performance and payment surety bond shall be posted with the city clerk, payable to the city issued by a Florida licensed surety in a form acceptable to the city attorney, in the amount of $100,000.00. Before commencing the work, the bond or other form of security shall be posted prior to the commencement of any on-site activity or land disturbance. The bonds shall insure that during the operation and after discontinuation of the operation, all public roads shall be repaired and restored, a fence shall be installed if required, all sloping shall conform to the terms of this section and shall insure compliance with the approved site development plan and site reclamation plan. Every applicant or operator of any mining or quarrying operation shall be continuously insured with a commercial general liability insurance policy that does not exclude coverage for lake extraction, mining or quarrying, in an amount not less than $100,000.00 per person and up to $500,000.00 per occurrence against any liability arising from any activity or operation incidental to the operation. 
    317.22. The city clerk shall record a copy of any resolution granting conditional use approval for the purpose of mining, quarrying, resource extraction or removal of fill. The resolution shall be recorded in the public records of Broward County, Florida, and the applicant shall pay the costs of recordation. 
    317.23. The minimum distance between a lake and a right-of-way line or property line shall be as provided for in this subsection. These distances may be increased if it is determined through the review of excavation plans that the lake bank slopes will not be stable and the potential shifting of the finished lake banks would affect the development of adjacent property. These minimum distances shall include the required lake bank slopes provided for in this section. The minimum distance between a lake's deep cut line and an existing or planned right-of-way line, or an adjacent property line shall be 50 feet or the distance required to maintain the lake's angle of natural repose, whichever may be greater. If the adjacent road is curvilinear or a dead-end this minimum distance may be increased to provide additional safe recovery area between the lake and road. This minimum distance may be decreased provided the applicant can demonstrate that the reduction meets or exceeds the distance required by the lake's angle of natural repose or FDOT's minimum standards, whichever may be greater. 
    317.24. The applicants and operators of all mining or quarrying operations shall comply with all applicable federal, state, regional, county, city and other governmental laws, ordinances, rules, policies and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 17-07, § 6, 11-14-16) 
Sec. 318. - Building Permits. 
    318.1. Purpose and Applicability. The building or site improvement permit and certificate of occupancy represent the last point in the development review process. All other approvals, permits and certificates required by this Code must be obtained before an application for a building permit may be considered for approval by the city, with the exception of certain zoning permits requested subsequent to construction. The Florida Building Code, Broward County edition, as amended, is hereby adopted as the regulation governing the construction of buildings and structures in the city. Any qualified applicant desiring a permit to be issued by the building official as required, shall file the appropriate application forms, along with all established and required fees, documents, and plans, to the department's building division. No development shall occur until and unless the building division has issued the appropriate building or site improvement permit(s). 
    318.2. Application Requirements. Each application shall describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done, by legal description and address; shall be accompanied by an up-to-date survey no less than 180 days old (or seven years old for single- or dual-family homeowner owner-occupied properties); shall show the use or occupancy of the building or structure; shall be accompanied by plans and specifications as required; shall state the value of the proposed work; shall give such other information as reasonably may be required by the building official to describe the proposed work; and shall be attested by the qualified applicant. The building official may waive the requirements for such survey when property line stakes are existing and are determined by the building official to be in place, and the work involved is minor in character or is clearly within building lines. 
    318.3. Action by the Department. The building official or said designee(s) shall review all applications for building permits or certificates of occupancy for compliance with the provisions of this LDC, the City Code and the Florida Building Code, Broward County edition, as amended. The division shall issue a building or site improvement permit if the applicant demonstrates that the proposed development is in compliance with all applicable codes and level of service standards and any other approvals required by this Code. 
    318.4. Permit Card. Upon approval of plans, specifications and application for permit and the payment of the required fees, the building official shall issue a permit. With each permit, the building official shall issue a permit card which shall bear the description of the property, the nature of the work being done, the name of the owner and contractor and other pertinent information; and such card shall be maintained in a conspicuous place on the front of the premises affected thereby during the hours of work in progress and available on demand for examination by inspectors. 
(Ord. No. 17-07, § 6, 11-14-16; Ord. No. 18-07, §§ 4, 5, 3-7-18) 
Sec. 319. - Certificates of Occupancy. 
    319.1. Purpose and Effect. No new building or structure shall be used or occupied unless and until a certificate of occupancy (CO) has been issued by the building official. No addition or structural alteration to any existing building or structure, other than a single-family detached dwelling, shall be used or occupied until and unless the CO or certificate of completion (CC) has been issued. No new nonresidential use, and no change in the occupancy of an existing nonresidential use, shall be established until and unless a CO has been issued by the building official. 
    319.2. Standards and Review. A CO shall be issued only after the premises have been inspected and found to comply with all applicable standards and requirements for the zoning district in which they are located, and that the use or structure conforms to the plans and specifications for which the building permit was issued. 
    319.3. Action by Building Division and Fire Department. The CO shall be issued, or notice shall be given to the applicant specifying the reasons a CO cannot be issued, no later than 14 days after the building division is notified that the building or premises are ready for occupancy. A CO cannot be issued until all inspections have been approved by all required city departments. The CO may be issued in the following forms: 
(1)  Partial Certificate of Occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for less than the entire built-out space in any given project may be issued, provided that basic life safety concerns have been provided. 
(2)  Conditional/Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. In situations where life-safety concerns have been provided for, a certificate of occupancy may be issued conditioned upon the completion of specific enumerated items. 
    319.4. Contents of Certificate. Every CO shall be dated, shall state the use or occupancy of the land or structure involved, shall state that the use or occupancy complies with the terms of this Code, and shall be approved by and signed by the building official. 
    319.5. Posted Notice of Issuance. Every CO required by virtue of a change in use or occupancy in a nonresidential zoning district shall be permanently posted in a prominent place on the premises at all times. 
(Ord. No. 18-07, § 6, 3-7-18) 
Sec. 320. - Zoning Permits and Planning Services. 
    Zoning permit application forms, along with all established and required fees, documents, and plans, shall be submitted to the city by the applicant to department, with the exception of those applications and requests originating from another governmental entity as well as building permits originating from the building division. Zoning permits and planning services include, as set forth in table 7 below, the review and determination of: 
TABLE 7 
ZONING PERMITS ADMINISTRATIVE CITY 
COMMISSION EXTERNAL AGENCY CODE REFERENCE 1 Alcohol Beverage License Review (ABL) - permanent ? LDC 405.4 Alcohol Beverage License Review (ABL) - Temporary (1 to 3 day license) ? L.D.C. 405.4.2 Bottle Club License ? ? L.D.C. 405.4.5 Temporary Alcohol Consumption Permit (TAC) ? ? City Code 4-3 Assisted Living Facility (ALF, RCF, GH) Research and Letter ? ? L.D.C. 405.5; FS 419 Extended Hours License (Alcoholic Beverages) ? City Code 4-2 Declaration of Covenants and Restrictions ? - Shared Parking and Cross Access Agreements ? - Letter of Stipulation (LS) (Zoning) ? - Charitable Clothing Donation Bin (TUP) ? L.D.C. 405.8 Flexibility Allocation or Reserve Unit (FR) ? ? - Mailing List/Public Hearing Notification Preparation ? - No-Fee Operational License (NOL) ? - Portable Storage Units (TUP) ? L.D.C. 405.21 Property Information ? - Public Records Requests ? - Recording Documents (Broward County) ? ? - Repainting (RPT) ? L.D.C. 813 GIS, Mapping and Special Surveys (GIS) ? - Temporary Sign Permit (TSP) ? L.D.C. 1008 Temporary Use (TUP) ? L.D.C. 505 Tree Removal/Relocation Permit (TRP) ? L.D.C. 903.2.4 Zoning Confirmation Letter (ZL) ? - Zoning Certificate of Use (ZCU) ? L.D.C. 321 1 current code reference until adoption  
(Ord. No. 17-07, § 6, 11-14-16; Ord. No. 18-01, § 2(Exh. B), 11-1-17) 
Sec. 321. - Zoning certificates of use. 
    321.1. Purpose, Intent and Scope. 
    321.1.1. Generally. This chapter is intended to protect the city's residents and consumers from the harmful effects of illegal business operations by establishing a zoning certificate of use (ZCU) requirement, which shall provide a review procedure to ensure that new business occupancies and uses, and changes of existing business occupancies and uses, comply with the city's LDC, Code of Ordinances, Building Code and life safety requirements, and other applicable codes and regulations. The director shall administer the ZCU program in coordination with the police chief, fire-rescue chief, code compliance manager, and other personnel of the city. 
    321.1.2. Zoning Certificate of Use Required. No building, location, or structure used for the purpose of exercising the privilege of doing business within the city limits shall be used or occupied for any business, profession or occupation without first obtaining a ZCU pursuant to this LDC. Businesses, professions or occupations which are subject to the requirement for a business tax receipt (BTR) pursuant to section 11-27 of the Code of Ordinances shall be subject to the ZCU requirement. Home occupations, as defined in section 201 of the LDC, shall not be required to obtain a ZCU. Multi-family residential, group homes, and special residential care facilities are also subject to the ZCU requirement. 
    New commercial establishments proposing to construct interior renovations must file for zoning approval of the use prior to or concurrently with the submittal of the building permit. The ZCU shall be issued along with the Certificate of Occupancy with no additional fee. The ZCU shall be issued along with a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy (TCO)/Certificate of Occupancy (CO) with no additional fee. 
    321.1.3. Requirements. A separate ZCU shall be obtained for each place of business and each separate commercial entity, including those sharing space within the same establishment. It shall be the duty of every person owning, operating, or purchasing any business within the city limits to comply with the requirements prior to opening any business, profession, or occupation within any building, structure, or location within the city. Existing businesses with nonconforming uses shall be required to provide documented evidence of their established date of operation. 
    321.1.4. Term of Zoning Certificate of Use. 
(a)  Once issued, a ZCU shall remain valid until there is a change of the use, business, business ownership, business name, or business location from that specified on the approved ZCU, or in the case of a non-conforming use, an abandonment or change of the use, business, business ownership, business name, or business location from that specified on the approved ZCU. 
(b)  When there is a change of the use, business, business ownership, business name, or business location from that specified on the approved ZCU, a new ZCU application shall be required. In the case of a non-conforming use of property, when there is an abandonment of the non-conforming use or a change in the use, business, ownership, business name, or business location from that specified on the approved ZCU, a new ZCU application shall be required. 
    321.1.5. Due Date for Payment of Zoning Certificate of Use Fee. Payment of the ZCU fee shall be required prior to issuance. 
    321.1.6. Penalty. Any person or entity engaging in or managing any business without first obtaining a ZCU, if required, shall be subject to a penalty of 25 percent of the fee determined to be due, in addition to any other penalty provided by law or ordinance. 
    321.1.7. Fees. The director shall collect the ZCU fee, which shall be as provided in the city's adopted fee schedule. 
    321.1.8. Existing Businesses; Effective Date. All existing businesses, professions, and occupations requiring a ZCU, which hold a valid BTR as of January 27, 2010, the effective date of ordinance no. 10-03 from which this Code provision is derived, shall be considered to have an active ZCU. However, all existing businesses, professions, and occupations requiring a ZCU as of January 28, 2010, shall make an application at the same time as their BTR is renewed. Nothing contained in this Code shall prohibit the revocation of a ZCU for existing businesses which fail to make application within the time period as required or which otherwise fail to comply. 
    321.1.9. Inspections. Any person applying for or obtaining a ZCU shall be subject to an inspection of the place of business to ensure compliance with all zoning regulations, life safety code requirements, and all applicable local and state regulations. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions, inspectors designated by the director, the building official, or the code compliance manager, shall have the right of inspection, provided that said inspection shall be reasonable and scheduled at the reasonable convenience of the applicant or certificate holder and the inspector. Failure to obtain proper inspection of the premises shall be grounds for denial of a ZCU application or revocation of an existing ZCU. 
    321.2. Application Procedures. 
(a)  Procedures for Issuance. No zoning certificate of use shall be issued or granted to any person to engage in any business, profession, or occupation unless: 
(1)  An application is filed; a ZCU application form, along with the established and required fee, documents, and plans, shall be submitted to the city by the applicant to the department; and 
(2)  There has been a site inspection of the applicant's business premises; and 
(3)  The department has reviewed and approved the zoning use classification; and 
(4)  The city has verified compliance with all applicable laws and regulations and has collected all applicable fees due to the city. 
(b)  Legality of use. In the event there is a question as to the legality of a use, the director, as appropriate, may require affidavits and such other information s/he may deem appropriate or necessary to establish the legality of the use, before a ZCU shall be issued. 
(c)  Obtaining a certificate of occupancy prior to issuance of a zoning certificate of use. All businesses required to obtain a TCO/CO pursuant to the City Code must do so, prior to the issuance of a ZCU. 
(d)  State license, certification, registration requirements. All businesses and professions regulated by the state must submit a copy of their current state license, certification, and/or registration, prior to the issuance of a ZCU. 
(e)  Grounds for denial. The director, as appropriate, shall have the authority to deny a ZCU application on the following grounds: 
(1)  That the applicant has failed to disclose or has misrepresented a material fact or any information required by this chapter in the application; and/or 
(2)  That the applicant desiring to engage in the business, profession, or occupation, as described in the application, has selected a proposed site or type of business activity, which does not comply with the city's LDC; and/or 
(3)  That the applicant has failed to obtain a CO as required by this Code; and/or 
(4)  That the CO for the proposed location has been denied, suspended or revoked for any reason; and/or 
(5)  The issuance of a ZCU is based on the applicant's compliance with specific provisions of federal, state, county or city law or ordinance, with respect to the specific use, and the applicant has violated such specific provisions; and/or 
(6)  The applicant has violated any provision of the City Code or LDC, and has failed or refused to cease or correct the violation within thirty (30) consecutive days after notification thereof; and/or 
(7)  The premises have been condemned by the local health authority for failure to meet sanitation standards or the premises have been condemned by the local authority because the premises are unsafe or unfit for human occupancy; and/or 
(8)  The applicant is delinquent in the payment of the applicable ZCU fee, or is delinquent on any code compliance lien, special assessment lien and/or any other debt, fee, or obligation due to the city; and/or 
(9)  The applicant has been denied a BTR, or the applicant's BTR has been revoked within the last 12 non-calendar months (365 days); and/or 
(10)  The applicant failed to permit the require inspection by the city. 
(11)  Any person whose application has been denied as provided herein shall have the right to appeal pursuant to section 315, appeals. 
    321.3. Issuance and display of certificate. Each ZCU issued by the city shall be displayed conspicuously at the place of business and in such a manner as to be viewable to the public and subject to the inspection of all duly authorized officers of the city. Failure to display the ZCU in the manner provided for shall subject the owner/operator to applicable code compliance procedures and penalties and/or any other remedies as permitted by law. A duplicate ZCU shall be issued by the director, as appropriate, to replace any valid and duly issued certificate which has been lost, stolen, defaced or destroyed without any willful conduct on the part of the certificate holder. A duplication fee shall be charged for each duplicate certificate. 
    The director, in consultation with the police chief, fire-rescue chief, and code compliance manager is granted the authority and charged with the duty to revoke or suspend any ZCU as follows: 
(1)  A ZCU of use issued pursuant to this section may be revoked, suspended on any of the following grounds: 
a.  The certificate holder has failed to disclose or has misrepresented a material fact or information required by this section in the application; or 
b.  The certificate holder does not engage in the use described in the application or has changed the use without authorization through approval of a new certificate for the changed use, as required herein; or 
c.  The CO for the business location has been denied, suspended or revoked for any reason; or 
d.  In the event of a conviction of any owner, operator, manager, supervisor, or any employee acting at the direction or with the knowledge of the owner, operator, manager, or supervisor, by a court of competent jurisdiction, for the violation of any criminal statute committed in conjunction with the business operation; or 
e.  The certificate holder has violated any provision and has failed or refused to cease or correct the violation after notification; or 
f.  The premises have been condemned by the local health authority for failure to meet sanitation standards or the premises have been condemned by the local authority because the premises are unsafe or unfit for human occupancy; or 
g.  The ZCU holder, or the holder's designated manager, operator, or supervisor, refuses to permit an authorized law enforcement officer or code enforcement officer to inspect the premises during normal business hours for the purpose of investigating a complaint which has been filed against the business operation. 
(2)  Procedure. 
a.  The director shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke and/or suspend the ZCU, which shall set forth the grounds upon which the notice is issued, the corrections necessary for compliance, and the certificate holder's right to request an administrative hearing in front of the city's special magistrate, and that said appeal must be taken within 30 calendar days of the service of said notice. 
b.  The 30 calendar days shall be considered a warning period during which the noticed certificate holder may come into compliance as required herein. If compliance is achieved within said warning period, the director shall void the revocation proceeding and the certificate holder shall dismiss any pending appeal. 
c.  The notice shall be sent U.S. certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address provided in the application or the last known address of the applicant. Alternate service may be made by delivery of the notice of hearing to the place of business and/or posting such notice. 
d.  The request for an administrative appeal hearing before the special magistrate to appeal the revocation notice shall stay any revocation action, and the ZCU shall remain in effect unless, within the sole discretion of the department, it is determined that the grounds for denial represent an immediate threat to the health, safety, and/or welfare of the public. 
(3)  Scheduling and conduct of hearing. 
a.  At any time prior to the expiration of 30 days following the service of the notice of intent to revoke and/or suspend the ZCU, the certificate holder may request, in writing, an administrative appeal hearing on the basis that s/he wishes to appeal the pending revocation notice. The hearing shall be conducted by the special magistrate in accordance with the procedures of section 2-338 of the City Code. 
b.  Upon the expiration of 30 days following the service of the notice of intent to revoke and/or suspend the ZCU, and no such appeal having been filed, or upon the affirmation of the administrative revocation decision pursuant to the hearing before the special magistrate, the ZCU shall be revoked and a new ZCU shall not be issued. Upon revocation, the certificate holder shall immediately cease doing business in any location listed therein. 
    321.4. Additional violations. It shall be unlawful for a property owner to allow by lease, license, grant or other written or oral agreement, the use of any real property for the operation of a business without a valid and current ZCU. Violations of this section shall be subject to prosecution and enforcement pursuant to section 2-330 et seq. of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 17-07, § 6, 11-14-16; Ord. No. 18-07, §§ 7-9, 3-7-18) 
Sec. 322. - Temporary Use and Structures. 
    322.1. Permit required. All temporary uses and/or structures which are not otherwise treated by this Code as a permitted use or conditional use in a particular zoning district and which are not otherwise prohibited under the terms of this Code shall be conducted or erected after obtaining a temporary use permit (TUP). This section shall not override, and shall not substitute for, any other section of this Code which requires another type of permit, certificate, or approval. Temporary structures and uses shall conform to the fire safety, means of egress, accessibility, light, ventilation and sanitary requirements of this LDC and the FBC Building Section 3103, as found by the building official to be necessary to ensure public health, safety and general welfare. 
    322.2. Review and approval. An application for temporary use shall be submitted and reviewed in conformance with the procedures contained in this Code. Notice and public hearing requirements shall not apply to TUPs. TUP application forms, along with all established and required fees, documents, and plans, shall be submitted to the department. All tax-exempt organizations who qualify under section 501 of the internal revenue code are exempt from payment of the TUP fee. Applications for TUPs shall be reviewed and approved by the department, or the city commission, as designated, who may impose reasonable conditions upon the TUPs. 
    322.2.1. Administrative Approval. The establishment of the following uses indicated in Table 8 shall require a TUP issued by the department, which may attach conditions; including, but not limited to, the duration of the TUP on any of the TUPs approved 
    322.2.2. DRC Approval. The establishment of the following uses indicated in Table 8 shall require a TUP issued by the department, after approval by the DRC which may attach conditions; including, but not limited to, the duration of the TUP on any of the TUPs approved. 
    322.2.3. Commission Approval. Applications for the following types of TUPs indicated in Table 8 shall be transmitted to the city manager, who shall schedule the application for review by the city commission. The city commission may approve the application by resolution and may impose reasonable conditions as necessary to ensure public safety and welfare, including, but not limited to duration of the TUP on any of the TUPs approved: 
TABLE 8 
Temporary Use Permits Events with less than 1,000 in expected attendance Events with more than 1,000 in expected attendance Administrative Approval DRC Approval Commission Approval Car Show and Sales ? ? Carnival, Fairs and Circuses ? ? Charitable Donation Bins ? Community Garage Sales and Flea Markets ? ? Construction Office and Storage Trailers ? Fireworks displays and shows ? Festival, Concert and Musical Events ? ? Food Trucks ? Fundraiser and Awareness Events ? Farmer Markets ? Mobile Produce Food Vendor 1 ? Sales Office Trailer and Model Home Complex ? Seasonal Sales (e.g. Fireworks, Christmas trees) 1 ? Sidewalk or Parking Lot Sale 1 ? ? Other temporary uses or structures 7 ? ? ? 1 Seasonal sales lots offering products such as Christmas trees, or pumpkins, or flowers; provided, however, no temporary permit shall be issued for sales within public rights-of-way, and fireworks sales shall be subject to fire-rescue department approval. 
2 Sidewalk or parking lot sales by businesses having a city-issued BTR. with all such activities located within the property of those businesses and not in the right-of-way, 
3 "Food Trucks", mobile catering sales by properly licensed and Inspected businesses. 
4 Temporary sales offices and model homes established for the express purpose of marketing a real estate development project with final site plan approval. The model homes shall be located on and limited to the property which is being marketed for sales. Temporary sales offices may also be located on contiguous parcels upon approval as noted herein. Prior to issuance of a TUP for offices and model homes, a plat for the project must be approved by Broward County 
5 Outdoor events, sales, and services held on non-city owned properties, which are anticipated to have at least fifty (50) and less than 1.000 attendees at any given time, other than private social events held completely within a residentially zoned property. Outdoor events held on non-city owned properties, which are anticipated have at least 1,000 attendees at any given time, shall be permitted in accordance with section 322.2.3. 
6 Carnivals, fairs, circuses, and other outdoor events held on non-city owned properties which anticipate having over 1,000 attendees at any given time (subject to DRC review, prior to commission approval) 
7 Other temporary uses or structures which in the opinion of the city manager may require commission review  
    322.3. Maximum time limit. A maximum time limit shall be established for all TUPs based on the minimum amount of time needed to conduct the permitted activity; provided however, for those uses or structures that are to be permitted for longer than 365 days, every TUP applicant shall be required to pay the fee on an annual basis. TUPs related to real estate development projects shall not be maintained longer than the time necessary to complete the construction of the project (i.e., the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy). Temporary signs shall be limited to the duration provided for in this LDC and shall be submitted for review and approval with the TUP application. 
    322.4. Revocation of TUPs. Any temporary use or structure which becomes a nuisance, violates the conditions of the permit, endangers the public health, aesthetics, or safety or is in violation of this Code shall be immediately subject to revocation by the city manager. 
    322.5. Exemption. A TUP is not required when such use or structure is part of a construction project by or for the city; provided however a building permit shall be required. 
    322.6. General Criteria and Limitations. 
    322.6.1. The temporary use must be compatible with the surrounding lands uses; provided however, TUPs shall not be issued in developed single-family residential areas, except for community garage sales. 
    322.6.2. A parking problem must not be created. If off-site parking is to be utilized, permission must be in writing from the subject property owner who must demonstrate that the parking requirement of the temporary use does not cause the loss of legally required parking spaces for the site. 
    322.6.3. An applicant may receive a TUP on the same property not more than once every 30 days, unless approved by the city manager or said manager's designee, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Farmers' markets may be permitted weekly provided the TUP is renewed annually. 
(2)  Sidewalk or parking lot sales by city-licensed businesses (i.e., those having a valid BTR and ZCU) may be permitted on a bi-monthly basis. 
(3)  Mobile produce vending may be permitted weekly provided the TUP is renewed annually. 
(Ord. No. 17-07, § 6, 11-14-16; Ord. No. 18-01, § 3(Exh. B), 11-1-17; Ord. No. 18-07, §§ 10-12, 3-7-18) 
Sec. 323. - Archaeological and Historical Landmarks. 
    323.1. Purpose and Intent. The intent of this subsection is to preserve and protect the heritage of the city through the identification, evaluation, and public awareness of the city's archaeological and historical resources. This subsection is further intended to: 
(1)  Effect and accomplish the protection, enhancement and perpetuation of archaeological resources which represent distinctive elements of the area's heritage; 
(2)  Foster civic pride in the accomplishments of the past; 
(3)  Protect and enhance the city's attraction to residents, tourists and visitors, thereby serving as a support and stimulus to the economy; 
(4)  Promote the use of archaeological sites for the education, pleasure, and welfare of the people of the city and the community; 
(5)  Provide the framework and legal mechanism for identifying and designating those properties that have significance in the city's archaeological heritage; and 
(6)  Assure that ground disturbing activity and new construction within designated archaeological sites is compatible with the properties' character. 
    323.2. Standards for Designation. 
    Properties may be designated as archaeological sites only if they have significance in the archaeological heritage of the area, state, or nation, and meet one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Are associated in a significant way with the life of a person important in the past; 
(2)  Are the site of a historic event with significant effect upon the community, city, state, or nation; 
(3)  Exemplify the historical, cultural, political, economic, or social trends of the community; 
(4)  Have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or history; 
(5)  Contains any subsurface remains of historical or archaeological importance or any unusual ground formations or archaeological significance; 
(6)  Is designated in the comprehensive plan and/or Florida Master Site File. 
    323.3. Procedures for Designation. 
Procedures for Designation. 
    Properties which meet the criteria above may be designated as archaeological or historical sites in accordance with the following procedures. 
    323.3.1. Proposals. Proposals designation may be made by the property owner, commission or the city manager and shall include, but not be limited to, the legal description of the site, photographs of the site, a statement of significance and other information supporting the proposal. 
    323.3.2. Designation Report. For every proposed archaeological site, the city manager or designated city staff shall prepare a designation report containing the following information: 
(1)  Statement of Significance: A statement of the planning and zoning board outlining the significance of the proposed archaeological site, the criteria upon which the designation is based, and a physical description of the property; and 
(2)  Boundaries: A map or map series indicating the proposed boundaries. Archaeological site boundaries shall generally conform to natural physiographic features which were the focal points for prehistoric and historic activities or may be drawn along property lines, streets, or geographic features to facilitate efficient management; and 
(3)  Recommendation: The designation report shall also contain a recommendation on whether the city commission should designate the property as an archaeological site or historic landmark. 
    323.3.3. Review by Planning and Zoning Board. The planning and zoning board shall provide public notice and hold a public hearing for the purpose of considering any proposed designation. Based upon the evidence at such hearing and the designation report, the board shall make a recommendation to the commission on whether to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed designation. 
    323.3.4. Consideration by City Commission. The city commission shall conduct a public hearing to determine whether the proposed archaeological site meets the criteria outlined in section 323.2, for the purpose of considering any proposed designation and shall act to approve, approve with conditions, amend or deny the proposed designation. 
    323.3.5. Appeals. Appeals from decisions of the city commission may be made to the courts as provided by the Florida rules of appellate procedure. The decision of the commission shall be final and remain in effect during the entire appeal process, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
    323.4. Effect of Designation. Upon designation, no new construction or ground disturbing activity shall be permitted within the designated archaeological site without the issuance of a development approval by the commission. No permits shall be issued by the city for any work until such approval is granted. 
    323.5. Procedures for Obtaining Development Approval. 
    323.5.1. Pre-application Conference. Before submitting an application for a development approval, an applicant is encouraged to confer with the city to obtain information and guidance. 
    323.5.2. Application for Development Approval. The application shall submit to the city an application together with supporting exhibits and other material as required by the city. 
    323.5.3. Planning and Zoning Board Public Hearing. When a complete application is received, the planning and zoning board shall hold a public hearing. The purpose of the hearing is to hear all the evidence and formulate and make a recommendation to the commission. 
    323.5.4. Decision of the City Commission. The decision of the city commission shall be based upon the guidelines, as well as the general purpose and intent of this subsection and any specific design guidelines officially adopted for the particular archaeological site. 
    323.5.5. Expiration of Development Approval. Any development approval issued pursuant to the provisions of this section shall expire 12 non-calendar months (365 days) from the date of issuance, unless the authorized work is commenced within this time period. 
    323.6. Guidelines for Issuing Development Approval. No development approval shall be issued by the commission for new construction, excavation, tree removal, or any ground disturbing activity unless there is substantial competent evidence that the work will not alter the character and integrity of the archaeological site. Where it is determined that the character and integrity of the archaeological site will be altered, the commission may grant the development approval if the applicant can demonstrate that a denial of such approval will result in an unreasonable economic hardship. The commission, in granting a development approval, may require one or more of the following: 
(1)  Scientific excavation and evaluation of the site at the applicant's expense by an archaeologist approved by the commission. 
(2)  An archaeological survey at the applicant's expense conducted by an archaeologist approved by the commission containing an assessment of the significance of the archaeological site and an analysis of the impact of the proposed activity on the archaeological site. 
(3)  Mitigation, including protection or preservation of all or part of the archaeological site for green space. Any report or survey shall be prepared by archaeologist with a substantial practical or academic background in historical archaeology, ethnoarchaeology, experimental archaeology, archaeometry or archaeological science and shall be certified to and for reliance by the city. 
    323.7. Administration, Enforcement, Violations, and Penalties. 
    323.7.1. Enforcement. The department shall assist the city by making necessary inspections in connection with the enforcement of this section. The department shall be responsible for promptly stopping any work attempted to be done without or contrary to any development approval required under this subsection, and shall further be responsible for ensuring that any work not in accordance with a development approval is voluntarily corrected to comply with said development approval. 
    323.7.2. Violation and Penalties. Any person who conducts or causes any work in violation of this subsection shall be required to restore the site either to its appearance prior to the violation or in accordance with a development approval by the city. 
    323.7.3. Conflicts. Where there are conflicts between these requirements and other code provisions regarding the same subject, the most restrictive requirements shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 17-07, § 6, 11-14-16) 
Chapter 4 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-07, § 7, adopted November 14, 2016, repealed ch. 4, § 401. Former ch. 4 pertained to comprehensive plan amendments and derived from Ord. No. 16-04, adopted Jan. 27, 2016. Similar provisions can now be found in ch. 3. 

ARTICLE I. - ZONING DESIGNATIONS IN GENERAL 
    There is hereby established a chapter named "Zoning" which describes the use of land within the city. Functional uses shall either be: permitted by-right; permitted by-right but having specific, detailed requirements; permitted as an accessory use; permitted as a temporary use; permitted as a conditional use; out-right prohibited; or considered non-conforming. Uses must be consistent with the city's comprehensive plan future land use element (FLUE). A use that is not specifically mentioned in this LDC and that does not relate to any mentioned category or like use shall be deemed prohibited, as determined by the director. 
    For all districts described in this chapter, buildings and structures, all or in part, shall only be erected, altered or used, or land used in whole or part for the uses noted in the permitted use, accessory use, conditional use, temporary use or specific use regulations of the respective subsection for those districts. Under no circumstances shall a prohibited use or structure be permitted in such district. Furthermore, use variances shall not be permitted. Approval of site plan, conditional use. ZCU, BTR and home BTR, and TUP, and permit applications shall be consistent with this LDC and the city's comprehensive plan. Notwithstanding any other provision of this LDC or the city code of ordinances, the issuance of a BTR does not create a vested right or entitlement to a particular use or structure. 

Section 401. - Zoning districts. 
    Purpose. To effectively promote compatibility, convenience, health, safety, and general welfare in addition to being consistent with and accomplishing the purposes of the city's comprehensive plan FLUE, these regulations divide the city into districts (see Table 401-1). References to the FLUE and future land use map (FLUM) shall refer to those portions of the city's adopted comprehensive plan, as may be amended from time to time. 
    401.1. Division of City into Districts. 
    For the purpose of regulating the use of land, water and building(s), and height, bulk, population density, the intensity of use and open space, the city is hereby divided into the following zoning districts: 
Residential Districts 
Rural Residential Districts 
• Rural District (RL) 
• Suburban Estate (E) 
• Residential-1 (RS1) 
Single-family Residential Districts 
• Residential-2 (RS2) 
• Residential-3 (RS3) 
• Residential-4 (RS4) 
• Residential-5 (RS5) 
• Residential-6 (RS6) 
• Residential-7 (RS7) 
• Residential-8 (RS8) (formerly TOC Residential Single-Family-1 RS) 
• Planned Unit Development Districts (PUDs) 
• Trailer/Mobile Home Park District (T) 
Multi-family Residential Districts 
• Low Medium Density Residential-1 (RM1) 
• Medium Density Residential-2 (RM2) 
• Medium High Density Residential-3 (RM3) 
• Medium Density Residential-4 (RM4) (formerly TOC Residential Multi-Family-1 RM) 
When the term "residentially zoned" properties is utilized in this LDC. it shall refer to the above designated residential zoning districts. 
Non-residential Districts 
Civic and Recreational Districts 
Conservation District (CNS) 
Recreation/Open Space District (OS) 
Commercial Recreation District (CR) 
Community Facilities District (CF) 
Utilities District (U) 
Activity Center Districts 
Neighborhood Business (B1) 
Community Business (B2) 
Heavy Business (B3) 
Workplace Districts 
Office Park (OP) 
Employment Center (EC) 
Planned Industrial Development (PID) 
Mixed-Use Districts 
Traditional Neighborhood Development (TIMD) 
Mixed-Use High (MH) 
Mixed-Use Low ML (ML) 
Special District (SD) (formerly TOC Special District 11) 
TABLE 4-401: ZONING DISTRICTS 
Rural Residential Single Family Residential Multi-Family Residential Civic and Recreational Commercial and Industrial Mixed Use RL RS2 RM1 CNS B1 TND E RS3 RM2 OS B2 MH RS1 RS4 RM3 CR B3 ML RS5 RM4 CF OP SD RS6 U EC RS7 PID RS8 PUD T  
    The zoning districts contained herein generally correspond by name and purpose to the categories of the city's adopted FLUE; however, some districts may be applied to more than one future land use category. 
    Districts within the TOC land use designation include two residential districts (RS8 and RM4), three mixed use districts (MH. ML, and SD). one community facilities district (CF), and one recreation/open space district (OS). In 2017, RS8 was renamed from the TOC-RS consolidated single-family district that was intended to preserve the single-family residential characteristics of the previously zoned established neighborhoods. Likewise, in 2017, RM4 was renamed from the TOC-RM consolidated multiple-family district that was intended to preserve the multiple-family residential characteristics of those neighborhoods. The TOC-MH and TOC-ML, now renamed as MH and ML. are mixed-use districts permitting a mix of retail, office, restaurant, entertainment, and special commercial uses, and multi-family residential dwelling unit types oriented in vertical fashion within a compact building design. These districts may also be assigned by the city commission outside of areas designated TOC on the FLUM. In 2017, Special Districts 2 and 3 (SD2 and SD3), have been converted to the existing districts of OS and CF. respectively, which are also found throughout the city. In 2017. Special District 1 (SD1), has been renamed to SD. which allows a mix of arts and entertainment, retail, office, restaurant, and special commercial uses and multi-family residential dwelling unit types within the framework of adaptive reuse and/or redevelopment of existing warehouse buildings. 
401.1.1. Distance Separations. When certain uses in this LDC throughout this chapter, are required to have a minimum distance separation from the same or different uses, then that distance shall be measured using a straight airline measurement from property line of one property to the nearest property line of the other zoned or used property. In addition to those included in other subsections of this chapter, the following standards also apply; 
(a)  Residentially-zoned property or uses shall not be located within 200 feet of any fuel service station. Where the pump service area is screened by the principal building, this distance may be reduced to 150 feet. 
(b)  Commercial recreation, community facilities, recreation/open space, or residentially zoned properties, shall not be permitted to be located within 1,500 feet of an adult entertainment use. 
401.2. Water Area. The water surface and land under the water surface of all canals, waterways, lakes and other water areas in the city not otherwise zoned is hereby placed in the same zoning district as the land which it abuts as shown on the Official Zoning Map. When the zoning districts shown on the zoning map are different on opposite sides of the water area, then the kind of zoning district on each side shall extend to the centerline or midpoint of the water area. For convenience of mapping and clarity, the zoning of water areas is not shown on the zoning map but is determined by the provisions of this section. 
401.3. Districting of Vacated Ways. Where a street or alley shown on the Official Zoning Map is hereafter officially vacated by re-platting or otherwise, the land formerly in such street or alley right-of-way shall be included within the zoning district of adjoining property on either side of said vacated street or alley. In the event such street or alley was a district boundary between two or more different zoning districts, the new district boundary shall be the former centerline of the vacated street or alley. 
    401.4. Boundaries of Districts. Unless otherwise shown, the zoning district boundaries are street lines, alley lines or subdividing or boundary lines of recorded plats or the extensions. 
    401.5. Zoning for Annexed Areas. All areas hereafter annexed into the city shall be designated as the city's zoning districts) which most closely resembles the more restrictive land designation of the effective FLUE/FLUM or the zoning district previously applicable for the annexed area under the requirements of the previous jurisdiction, providing said zoning district is consistent with the effective FLUE/FLUM. After the comprehensive plan is amended to include the annexed property and a land use designation is assigned, the commission shall adopt a zoning designation consistent with the Land Use Plan (LUP) and this LDC. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 4(Exh. C), 11-1-17; Ord. No. 18-05, § 3, 11-27-17) 
ARTICLE II. - THE DISTRICTS 

Section 402. - Residential zoning districts. 
    These residential districts are intended to provide for residential development in conformance with the parcel's LUP designation. A residential parcel's zoning designation shall be equivalent to the designation of the LUP. The number of dwelling units permitted per gross acre of a zoning parcel, as defined in this LDC. shall not exceed the total number of dwelling units permitted by the city's LUP designation for the zoning parcel. The uses within this district shall be consistent with, but may be more restrictive than, the corresponding residential land use plan category permitted uses. These zoning districts shall be applied to land designated Residential or Regional Activity Center on the city's LUP map. A development parcel also may have a maximum number of dwelling units based on adopted DRI development orders. 
    402.1. Rural District (RL). 
    Purpose of District. This district is intended to serve as an area where low density residential development coexists with agricultural and related uses. Clustering of uses and dedication of open space in undeveloped areas are encouraged. The total number of dwelling units on a zoning parcel shall not exceed the total number of dwelling units permitted by the city's LUP designation for the parcel. The uses within this district shall be consistent with, but may be more restrictive than, the Rural LUP category permitted uses. This zoning district shall be applied to land designated Rural on the City's LUP map. 

    402.2. Estate Residential Districts (E) and (RS1). 
    Purpose of Districts. The E (Suburban Estate district") is a low density, semi-rural residential district, which permits limited agricultural activities on plots at least two acres in size. 
    The RS1 zoning district is established for one-family detached dwelling on plots at least one acre in size. 


    402.3. Single-family Residential Districts (RS2. RS3. RS4. RS5. RS6. RS7. RS8). 
    Purpose of Districts. The R1B district in existence prior to 2017 has been renamed to RS2. The RS district in the TOC in existence prior to 2017 has been renamed to RS8. 
    The RS2, RS3, RS4, RS5, RS6, RS7, and RS8 zoning districts are established for one-family living environment with a wide range of lot sizes to be utilized for individually-owned, one-family homes. 







    402.4. Multi-family Residential Districts (RM1, RM2, RM3, RM4). 
    Purpose of Districts. The RM10, RM16, and RM25 districts in existence prior to 2017 have been renamed to RM1, RM2 and RM3, respectively. The RM district in the TOC in existence prior to 2017 has been renamed to RM4. 
    The RM1, RM2, RM3, and RM4 zoning districts are established for low, medium, medium-high and high density multi-family residential units and single-family detached structures. 






NOTE: These graphics are included for illustrative purposes. The requirements are shown in the tables. 
    402.5. Planned Unit Development Districts (PUDs.) 
    Purpose of Districts. Planned Unit Developments (PUDS) were adopted by master development plans that met the level of development quality required by the city, but that may not have standard design features and regulations permitted by any of the city's other existing zoning districts. The intent of these districts was to offer development design flexibility to developers, in order to encourage imaginative, functional development planning. Refer to Table 402-6 for the adopted standards of existing PUDs. New PUDs are no longer permitted. For PUDs with a non-residential, commercial component. B2 bulk and parking standards shall apply. For any standards that were not adopted by ordinance or resolution, the closest, comparable and adjacent single-family or multi-family district regulations shall apply. 
    402.6. Trailer/Mobile Home Park District (T). 
    Purpose of District. This district is designed to accommodate, create, and encourage high-quality residential mobile home subdivisions and mobile home parks by permitting uses, activities, and services which are compatible with the residential environment. This district shall be permitted in the Low 5. Low Medium 10, and Medium 16 LUP categories. 

402.7. Tables 
TABLE 402-1A 
RURAL (RL)/ESTATES (E)/RESIDENTIAL 1 (RS1) 
Permitted Specific Accessory Conditional Use Prohibited SINGLE FAMILY ? DUPLEX ? TRIPLEX AND QUADRUPLEX ? TOWNHOUSES ? APARTMENTS ? ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT 405.1 ? GROUP HOMES ? 405.5.4 ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES ? 405.5.4 ADULT FAMILY CARE HOMES ?. 405.5.4 PARKS 405.12 ? SCHOOLS ?. OFFICES ? LIBRARIES 405.12 ? AGRICULTURAL AND RELATED ? 405.3 ? ANIMAL BREEDING, RAISING, TRAINING, BOARDING OR RIDING ? 405.3 ? MOBILE PRODUCE VENDING 405.3.6 ? FARMERS' MARKETS ? 405.3.5 ? URBAN FARMS 405.3.2.1 ? URBAN GARDENS 405.3.2.2 ? COMMUNITY GARDENS 405.3.3 ? BEES 405.3.4 ? COTTAGE FOOD OPERATORS ? BED & BREAKFAST ? 405.11 ? VACATION HOMES ?. 405.11 ? SHORT TERM RENTALS ? 405.11 ? LIVE-WORK ? 405.11 TINY HOMES 405.1 ? MANUFACTURED HOMES 405.1 ? MICRO-UNIT ? PUBLIC UTILITIES ? ? NEIGHBORHOOD SUPPORT BUSINESS AND RETAIL FACILITIES 1 ? GOVERNMENT ? POLICE-FIRE FACILITIES ? TELECOMMUNICATION ? ? 1 Maximum intensity of one acre of commercial to 250 acres, of RL zoned land with no commercial site exceeding ten acres in size  
TABLE 402-1B 
RESIDENTIAL RS2/RS3/RS4/RS5/RS6/RS7/RS8 
Permitted Specific Accessory Conditional Use Prohibited SINGLE FAMILY ? DUPLEX ? TRIPLEX AND QUADRUPLEX ? TOWNHOUSES ? APARTMENTS ? ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT 405.1 ? GROUP HOMES ? 405.5.4 ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES ? 405.5.4 ADULT FAMILY CARE HOMES ? 405.5.4 PARKS 405.12 ? SCHOOLS 405.24 ? OFFICES ? LIBRARIES 405.12 ? AGRICULTURAL AND RELATED ? ANIMAL BREEDING, RAISING, TRAINING, BOARDING OR RIDING ? MOBILE PRODUCE VENDING 405.3.6 ? FARMERS' MARKETS ? 405.3.5 ? URBAN FARMS 405.3.2.1 ? ? URBAN GARDENS 405.3.2.2 ? COMMUNITY GARDENS 405.3.3 ? BEES 405.3.4 ? COTTAGE FOOD OPERATORS ? BED & BREAKFAST ? 405.11 ? VACATION HOMES ?. 405.11 ? SHORT TERM RENTALS ? 405.11 ? LIVE-WORK 405.11 ? TINY HOMES 405.1 ? MANUFACTURED HOMES 405.1 MICRO-UNIT ? PUBLIC UTILITIES ? NEIGHBORHOOD SUPPORT BUSINESS AND RETAIL FACILITIES ? GOVERNMENT ? POLICE-FIRE FACILITIES ? TELECOMMUNICATION ?  
TABLE 402-1C 
RESIDENTIAL MULTI-FAMILY RM1/RM2/RM3/RM4 
Permitted Specific Accessory Conditional Use Prohibited SINGLE FAMILY 1 ? DUPLEX ? TRIPLEX AND QUADRUPLEX ? TOWNHOUSES ? APARTMENTS ? ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT 405.1 ? GROUP HOMES ? 405.5.4 ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES ? 405.5.4 ADULT FAMILY CARE HOMES ? 405.5.4 PARKS 405.12 ? SCHOOLS 405.24 ? LIBRARIES 405.12 ? AGRICULTURAL AND RELATED ? ANIMAL BREEDING, RAISING, TRAINING, BOARDING OR RIDING ? MOBILE PRODUCE VENDING 405.3.6 ? FARMERS' MARKETS 405.3.5 ? URBAN FARMS 405.3.2.1 ? URBAN GARDENS 405.3.2.2 ? COMMUNITY GARDENS 405.3.3 ? BEES 405.3.4 ? COTTAGE FOOD OPERATORS ? BED & BREAKFAST ? 405.11 ? VACATION HOMES ? 405.11 ? SHORT TERM RENTALS ? 405.11 ? LIVE-WORK ? 405.11 TINY HOMES 405.1 ? MANUFACTURED HOMES ? 405.1 MICRO-UNIT 2 ? 405.11 PUBLIC UTILITIES ? NEIGHBORHOOD SUPPORT BUSINESS AND RETAIL FACILITIES ? GOVERNMENT ? POLICE-FIRE FACILITIES ? TELECOMMUNICATION ? 1 Permitted by-right in unrecorded plats of Tropical Valley 
2 Per section 405.11.4, for housing sold or leased as affordable, attainable, or workforce units or 25% maximum  
TABLE 402-2 
BULK REGULATIONS RURAL AND SFR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS* 
MIN LOT SIZE MIN LOT WIDTH (feet) MAX HEIGHT (feet) PLOT COVERAGE 5 SETBACK (feet) MIN FLOOR AREAS 4 Front Side Rear Corner Water Front RL RURAL 2.5 acres 200 40 40% 50 25 25 25 25 2,500 E ESTATE 2 acres 200 40 40% 50 25 25 25 25 2,500 RS1 RESIDENTIAL 1 1 acres 150 40 40% 50 25 25 15 25 2,500 RS2 RESIDENTIAL 2 7,500 sq. ft. - 35 - 25 7.5 6 25 15 30 1,500 RS3 RESIDENTIAL 3 7,000 sq. ft. - 35 - 25 7.5 20 15 30 1,800 RS4 RESIDENTIAL 4 6,500 sq. ft. - 35 - 25 7.5 20 3 15 30 1,500 RS5 RESIDENTIAL 5 6,000 sq. ft. - 35 - 25 7.5 20 3 15 30 1,500 RS6 RESIDENTIAL 6 5,000 sq. ft. 50 35 - 20 7.5 1 15 15 30 1,400 RS7 RESIDENTIAL 7 4,000 sq. ft. 50 35 - 20 7.5 2 15 15 30 1,400 RS8 RESIDENTIAL 8 4,000 sq. ft. - 35 - 20 7 5 15 15 30 1,250 T MOBILE HOME PARK 4,000 sq. ft. 50 25 - 10 5 10 10 20 500 1 For two stories and 6' for one story unit 
2 Zero lot line dwelling in only the RS7 district. Side setback for zero lot of 15 feet 
3 For two stories and 15 feet for a one story unit 
4 Not including garage or unairconditioned areas 
5 The combined plot area covered by all principal and accessory buildings 
6 All lots previously zoned R1B (now RS2) located in plats that have been recorded or received tentative plat approval on or prior to March 19, 1973 (PB 78, Pg. 45) are hereby permitted to construct structures utilizing a minimum interior side setback of five feet. 
7 To the garage; 15 feet to a structure; 10 feet to a front porch 

*Note: All legal, non-conforming structures may maintain existing setbacks; this Includes proposed additions to the home.  
TABLE 402-3 
BULK REGULATIONS MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
MIN LOT SIZE MIN LOT WIDTH (feet) STORIES MAX HEIGHT (feet) PLOT COVERAGE 5 SETBACK (feet) Front Side Rear Corner Water Front RM1 RESIDENTIAL 1 Single family 3,600 45 2 35 50% 15 5 15 15 30 Duplex/Triplex 4,000 35 3 35 40% 20 10 15 15 30 Townhouses 16,000 160 3 35 40% 20 10 15 15 30 Apartments N/A N/A 3 45 40% 20 15 15 15 30 Non-residential N/A N/A 3 35 40% 30 25 30 15 30 RM2 RESIDENTIAL 2 Single family 3,600 45 2 35 50% 15 5 15 15 30 Duplex/Triplex 4,000 35 3 35 40% 20 10 15 15 30 Townhouses 16,000 160 3 35 40% 20 10 15 15 30 Apartments N/A N/A 4 60 40% 20 15 15 15 30 Non-residential N/A N/A 3 35 40% 30 25 30 15 30 RM3 RESIDENTIAL 3 Single family 3,600 45 2 35 50% 15 5 15 15 30 Duplex/Triplex 4,000 35 3 35 40% 20 10 15 15 30 Townhouses 16,000 160 3 35 40% 20 10 15 15 30 Apartments N/A N/A 5 75 40% 20 15 15 15 30 Non-residential N/A N/A 3 35 40% 30 25 30 15 30 RM4 RESIDENTIAL 4 Single family 3,600 45 2 35 50% 15 2 5 10 10 30 Duplex/Triplex 4,000 35 3 35 40% 10 5 10 10 30 Townhouses 16,000 160 3 35 40% 10 5 10 10 30 Apartments N/A N/A 4 60 40% 10 5 10 10 30 Non-residential N/A N/A 3 35 40% 10 5 10 10 30 1 For each dwelling unit 
2 To the garage; 15 feet to a structure; 10 feet to a front porch 
* Note: All legal, non-conforming structures may maintain existing setbacks; this includes proposed additions to the unit.  
TABLE 402-4 
MINIMUM FLOOR AREAS 
TYPE FLOOR AREA sq. ft. ONE-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT 1400 min. 4   Accessory Dwelling Unit 1 300   Tiny House 1 300 TWO-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT 1,200 MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING UNIT   Micro-Unit 1, 2, 3 350   Efficiency/Studio 500   One bedroom unit 650   One bedroom unit + Den 775   Two bedroom unit 900   Three bedroom unit 1,000   For additional bedroom in excess of three 150 1 Refer to Specific Use Regulations section 405. 
2 Allowed by-right in TND. MH. ML. SD districts 
3 Allowed in RM districts only if units meet the definitions of affordable attainable, or workforce housing 
4 Refer to Table 402-2  
TABLE 402-5 
ACCESSORY USES-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
AREA (square feet) SPECIFICATIONS SIDE SETBACK (feet) REAR SETBACK (feet) PROHIBITED DUMPSTER/COMPACTOR ENCLOSURE 1 100 square feet minimum Concrete slab; enclosed by a finished concrete block wall; landscaped 10 10 Within 25 feet of a residential structure CARPORT N/A N/A Same as structure N/A PVC PET SHELTER 15 Same as structure 6 6 In front yards or easements FENCE N/A 6' height for residential N/A N/A within front yards 2 or within easements 3 barbed wire or uncoated galvanized chain-link GAZEBO Up to 150 sq. ft. per 5,000 sq. ft. of lot area N/A 6 6 within front yards or easements PLAY EQUIPMENT N/A N/A N/A N/A Closer than 10 feet to any property line SCREEN ENCLOSURE N/A Screen roof Same as structure 5 4 within front yards or easements SCREEN ENCLOSURE N/A Solid roof Same as structure 15 4 within front yards or easements WALKWAYS N/A N/A 2 2 within easements UTILITY SHEDS 8 Up to 100 sq. ft. 6' in height 6 No more than 1 5 3 7 3 7 within front yards or easements PATIOS N/A N/A Same as structure 5 within front or side yards or easements PORTABLE STORAGE UNITS (TUP) Up to 130 sq. ft. 8' in height Placed in the driveway; refer to section 405.21 3 Not block any sidewalk. No more than 14 days POOL AND SPA N/A Required to have a safety barrier Structural plus 2' to water's edge 7' to water's edge within front yards or easements PERGOLA, TRELLIS Depends on lot size 9 N/A 6 6 within front yards or easements DRIVEWAY 16 ft. width x 18 ft. length asphalt, concrete or brick pavers 5 N/A N/A 1 Only in RM zoning districts 
2 Except in Rural and Estate districts 
3 An encroachment agreement shall be required 
4 Screen enclosures with a solid roof shall be 15' or the same as the structural setback, whichever is less 
5 Except for RL, E and RS1 zoning districts, a maximum of two sheds shall be permitted 
6 Except for RL, E and RS1 zoning districts, up to 240 sq. ft. of total combined and 10' in height 
7 Except for RL, E and RS1 zoning districts, setbacks a minimum of 25' 
8 Subject to landscape bufferyard requirements in RM districts 
9 Properties less than a % acre: 250 sq. ft.; greater than % acre up to 2 up to 500 sq. ft.; and greater than 2 acres up to 1,000 sq. ft.  
TABLE 402-6 
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
Parcel Min. Lot Size Max Height (feet) Min. lot width Plot Coverage Setback (feet) Accessory Uses Min. Floor Areas Ord- 
inance Attachments Front Side Rear Covered Patio Screen Enclosure Pool Utility Shed Driveway House Garage Interior Lot Btw. Bridges Corner Lot Dry Lot Water Front R/W Side Rear Silver Lakes 7,150 65 35 25 25 7.5 15.0 15 15 30 35 Same as structure 5' or structural setback for non-standard single family lots 5 Not permitted Min. 16' wide & 18' length. Only concrete or interlocking brick pavers 94-13 6,300 60 35 25 25 7.5 15.0 15 15 1 30 35 5,000 45 35 18 22 0/10 10.0 15 15 30 35 4,000 40 35 18 22 0/10 10.0 15 15 30 35 AA 18 22 10 2 15 15 30 Same as structure 10 5 Same as screen enclosure plus 2' to water's edge Not permitted 0' to side yard 95-10 BB 18 22 10 15 0/10 10' between driveways 96-29 CC 18 22 5 15 10 5' to side yard 2.5 on radial lots 95-11 DD 22 22 6 15 6 6' to side yard 95-12 EE 18 22 0/10 15 0/10 10' btw driveways 96-31 FF 22 22 6 15 15 6 6' to side yard 97-31 GG 22 22 6 15 6 6' to sideyard 96-30 HH 18 22 0/10 15 15 0/10 6' to sideyard 97-32 T 18 22 5 15 15 10 0' to sideyard 94-22 U 25 25 7.5 15 15 7.5 5' to side yard 2.5 on radial lots 94-23 V 22 22 6 15 15 6 6' to side yard 2.5 on radial lots 94-40 W 18 22 5 15 15 10 5' to side yard 94-38 X 18 22 0/10 15 15 0/10 1' to side yard 95-6 Y 18 22 0/10 15 15 10 0' side yard 94-39 Z 18 22 0/10 15 15 10 0' to side yard 94-24  
Parcel Min. Lot Size Max Height (feet) Min. lot width Plot Coverage Setback (feet) Accessory Uses Min. Floor Areas Ord- 
inance Attachments Front Side Rear Covered Patio Screen Enclosure Pool Utility Shed Driveway House Garage Interior Lot Btw. Bridges Corner Lot Dry Lot Water Front R/W Side Rear Renaissance Detached 7,700 70 35 24 24 7.5 15 20 30 Rear setback 15' Same as structure 5 Same as screen enclosure plus 2' to water's edge 18' in width and 18' in length 94-34 Detached 5,500 50 35 18 22 0/10 20 30 95-16 Townhouse 2,275 25 35 22 22 0/0 25 25 96-09 Windsor 
Palms Detached 8,800 80 35 20 20 7.5 15 20 30 Rear setback 5' 5 4 Same as screen enclosure plus 2' to waters 7.5' side lot and 25' corner lot 95-17 Detached 7,000 60 35 6 Mobile homes Mobile 4,000 50 10 5.0 - 10 Ord. 68-4 Travel 
trailers 1,500 30 5 Avalon Detached 5,364 72 35 20 20 6 15 13/24 33 97-24 5,244 46 20/15 5 20/15 5 7 15 15 35 Attached 1,981 26 Promenade at Miramar Phase 1 96-1 Huntington/Country Lakes 
Bristol Bay E 25 8 15 20 Rear:5' to patio. 7' to water's edge Rear: 5' to patio. 7' to water's edge See note 7 for commercial use in parcel A F 25 8 15 20 Huntington/County Lakes 
Biscayne (Shores @ Huntington) G 15 20 0/10 3 15 20 Side & rear: minimum 5' to patio; 7' to water's edge of pool on zero-side of house Note 4 Note 4 Side & rear: minimum 5' to patio; 7' to water's edge of pool on zero-side of house Note 4 Note 4 93-19 See note 7 for commercial use in Parcel A Huntington Bristol Isle H 25 8 15 20 Note 4 Note 4 Note 4 Note 4 Note 4 Note 4 96-16 Huntington Gardens J 3,435 15 24 0/10 15 0/15 15' to LME; 20' to water Same as structure 2' to structure side lot line; 10' to non-structure 5 Same as screen enclosure + 2' to water's edge Not permitted 5' where front lot line is at right angle to side lot line; 2.5' where front lot line is 94-17 The rear yard of all lots shall have a min. of one tree Huntington Claremont K 19 24 5 2 15 15 94-16 0/10 2 Foxcroft Miramar Fairway Gardens 20 92-01 Meadows of Miramar Phase 3 20 3' on one, 7; on the other 10 14 Rear: 5' Side: 3' Front 20' Rear: 5' Side: 3' Front 20' Meadows of Miramar Phase 4- 
Hampshire Homes 20 3' on one, 7' on the other 10 1 story 3'-8' 2 story: 10' 91-2 This Ord. is a revision to the approved master development plan by converting 5' of common open space along the rear of all lots to privately owned. River Run Garden Homes aka Encore 25 0 0 10 5 5 5 7' to waterline Permitted 88-36 25' min. to Palm Ave. r/w 5400 5 60 5 20 4/10 14 15 15 Rear: 5'. Side: same as house 5 Same as patio +2' to water's edge 20' long, 18' wide 85-17 Attached 30 End to end units: 15' (PUD book 2/4b) Back to back units: 30' (PUD book 2/4a) 88-36 Bluegrass Lakes Phase 1/Miramar Patio Homes Detached 5,000 50 35 15 20 5 10 15 15 35 25 S Screen roof; 5' or up to L.M.E. Solid roof: 15' or up to L.M.E. (See note 6) 5' to patio; 2' to water's edge Concrete with the availability of upgrade 95-08 Open space ratio; 1 & 2 story: 40%. Over 2 story: n/a Bluegrass Lakes Parcels 2 and 2A Somerset Townhomes Somerset IV Apartments 10 Side-oriented garages: 10'. Front-oriented garages: 20' 0/5 10 10 5 20 10 90-28 Ord. 68-4 Bluegrass Lakes Somerset II South 4,000 35 15 20 5 10 15 15 20' along 70' ROW and Honeyhill Road 97-20 Min: 1,200 SF of air conditioned space Flamingo Estates aka Trilogy 25 7.5 15 20 35 5 5 Rear: 5' to patio; 7' to water's edge n/a n/a 90-55 Refer to exhibits Sunset Lakes 15 25 ? University Park (multi-family) 35 35 16 25 25 15 or same as structural, whichever is least Same as structural 5 University Park St. Charles Place 8 88-18 73-19 rezoning from "R-1B" & "A" to "P" University Park Lakeview Townhomes 11&12 20 90-37 94-5 University Park Parcel II of Lakeshore at University Park 14 87-23 Relocation of bldg. 30, main- 
tenance of bike path, wood fence & landscaping 1 No wooden fence shall be permitted adjacent to the collector street or project boundaries 
2 Min. 10 btw. Structures 
3 Each lot adjacent to the zero side of another unit shall provide a maintenance easement of not less than four (4) feet in width 
4 All accessory structures not designated on the approved site plan shall be subject to the requirements of the LDC for single family dwellings 
5 Lots situated opposite the houses on Devonwood Avenue shall be a min. of 75' X 100' 
6 Screen enclosures with solid roofs shall be limited to screen walls 
7 Huntington/County Lakes-commercial use. Per Michael, resolutions did not provide regulations for commercial use. We could use the closest commercial property-a B2, which is also owned by The Liberty Property LTD.  
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 4(Exh. C), 11-1-17; Ord. No. 18-07, § 14, 3-7-18) 
Section 403. - Non-residential zoning districts 
    403.1. Civic and Recreational Districts. 
403.1.1. Conservation (CNS) Zoning District. 
Purpose of District. The Conservation (CNS) zoning district is intended to provide for only those uses compatible with the continuing conservation of the natural resources located within the district. The uses within this district shall be consistent with, but may be more restrictive than, the Conservation FLUE category's permitted uses. This zoning district shall only be applied to land designated Conservation on the city's FLUM. 
403.1.2. Recreation/Open Space (OS) Zoning District. 
Purpose of District. The Recreation/Open Space (OS) district is intended to provide for the recreation and open space needs of the city. The uses within this district shall be consistent with the Recreation and Open Space LUP category permitted uses. This zoning district may be applied to land designated Recreation and Open Space. Transit Oriented Corridor. Rural. Residential. Commercial. Regional Activity Center, and Commercial Recreation on the city's LUP map. Because of the nature of uses involved and the variety of arrangements of uses and facilities, broad general regulations for plot size, yards, setbacks and height must be adequate for any location at which an OS district may be established. 
403.1.3. Commercial Recreation (CR) Zoning District. 
Purpose of District. The Commercial Recreation (CR) district is intended to provide for major public and private commercial recreational activities, including civic and cultural facilities, which offer recreational opportunities to residents and tourists. Recreational activities may be of a spectator or participant type. CR includes, but is not limited to, sports arenas, racetracks, theme parks, amusement parks or golf courses, and may include movie theaters, bowling alleys, health clubs, pool halls, or video arcades, if they are accessory uses to the main recreational uses. The uses within this district shall be consistent with, but may be more restrictive than, the Commercial Recreation LUP category permitted uses. This zoning district may be applied to land designated Commercial Recreation. Commercial, or Regional Activity Center on the city's LUP map. 
403.1.4. Community Facilities (CF) Zoning District. 
Purpose of District. The community facilities (CF) district is intended to generally provide for institutional uses such as places of worship and public assembly, schools, government and cultural buildings, public facilities, hospitals, parks and other public facilities which benefit the community, provided that these uses may be further regulated and reviewed through conditional use approval in order to ensure that the location of such uses is compatible with surrounding development and infrastructure. The regulations of uses within this district shall be consistent with, but maybe more restrictive than, the Institutional and Public Facilities LUP category permitted uses. This zoning district may be applied to land designated Institutional and Public Facilities. Regional Activity Center. Transit Oriented Corridor. Rural. Estate. Residential, and Commercial on the city's LUP map. 

403.1.5. Utilities (U) Zoning District. 
Purpose of District. The Utilities district (U) is intended to provide for all public and private utility uses. The uses within this district shall be consistent with, but may be more restrictive than, the Utilities LUP category permitted uses. This zoning district may be applied to land designated Utilities. Rural. Estate. Residential. Commercial. Industrial. Regional Activity Center, and Transit Oriented Corridor on the city's LUP map. 
    403.2. Activity Centers (Commercial Zoning Districts). These commercial districts are intended to provide for commercial development in conformance with the comprehensive plan and allow for a variety of zoning districts to accommodate the city's business and commerce, entertainment, social and lifestyle enhancement needs. The uses within these districts shall be consistent with, but may be more restrictive than, the Commercial LUP category permitted uses. These zoning districts may be applied to land designated Commercial or Regional Activity Center on the LUP map or to land which qualifies for small-scale commercial uses pursuant to the LUP's commercial flexibility rules. 
403.2.1. Neighborhood Business (B1) District. 
Purpose of District. The primary function of this district is to provide small convenience shopping and service facilities to a surrounding neighborhood. It is intended that the uses within this district caters to and is compatible with the neighborhood it serves. The district is appropriate for location on a collector or an arterial roadway. 
403.2.2. Community Business (B2) District. 
Purpose of District. This district is intended primarily to provide for general commercial activity for a wide range of goods and services to the entire community. Such businesses generally require locations convenient for both vehicular and pedestrian traffic and would be expected to have orientation toward and direct access to arterial roadways. 
403.2.3. Heavy Business (B3) District. 
Purpose of District. This district is intended to provide locations for planned commercial centers, sharing a common identity, parking and other support facilities developed according to an overall development plan; and for a wide range of goods and services to serve a market beyond the community itself. Such commercial concentrations are expected to draw substantial patronage from outside areas and are not expected to serve the convenience needs of local residents. As such, these centers should be oriented towards, and have direct access to arterial roadways, particularly major arterials. 



    403.3. Workplace (Office and Industrial) Zoning Districts. 
    These workplace and industrial districts are intended to provide for light industrial and office park development in conformance with the comprehensive plan and allow for a variety of uses to accommodate the city's industrial and commercial needs. The uses within this district shall be consistent with, but may be more restrictive than, the Industrial LUP category permitted uses. This zoning district may be applied to land designated Industrial. Employment Center. Office Park or Regional Activity Center on the City's LUP map. 
403.3.1. Office Park (OP) District. 
Purpose of District. This district is intended to provide for high-quality, semi-professional and professional offices in a campus setting. The uses within this district shall be consistent with, but may be more restrictive than, the Office Park land use plan category permitted uses. This zoning district may be applied to land designated Office Park. Employment Center or Regional Activity Center on the city's land use plan map. 
403.3.2. Employment Center (EC) Zoning District. 
Purpose of District. The employment center CEO district is intended to provide for corporate and business park development geared to employment generating light industrial, research and development and complementary commercial and service uses. Properties in this district should be located in proximity to major transportation corridors. The uses within this district shall be consistent with, but may be more restrictive than, the Employment Center land use plan category permitted uses. This zoning district may be applied to land designated Employment Center or Regional Activity Center on the city's land use plan map. The minimum area for an EC district is forty (40) acres. 
403.3.3. Planned Industrial Development (PID). 
Purpose of District. This district is intended to provide a protective zone for campus-like environments that will encourage the development of nonpolluting light industry and compatible uses which support the economic base of the city. The development standards in this district are intended to provide a healthful operating environment for light industry and compatible uses, for the protection of light industry and compatible uses from the encroachment of other uses adverse to the operation of such district, to protect business within the district from the adverse effect of incompatible uses and to reduce to a minimum the impact of the district on surrounding noncommercial land use. The uses within this district shall be consistent with, but may be more restrictive than, the industrial land use plan category permitted uses. This zoning district may be applied to land designated Industrial. Employment Center or Regional Activity Center, on the city's land use plan map. The minimum area for a PID zoned property is forty (40) acres. 



    403-4. Civic and Recreational Districts Tables. 
TABLE 403-1-CIVIC AND RECREATIONAL PRINCIPAL USES TABLE 
LEGEND 
P - Permitted by Right 
C - Conditional Use Permit Required 
* - Subject to Specific Use Standards; Refer to LDC Section 405. 
" -" Prohibited Specific Use Standards Principal Uses CNS OS CR CF U Code Sec. Agricultural Uses 405.3.3 Community Gardens - P* - - - 405.3.2.2 Urban Gardens - P* - - - 405.3.2.2 Urban Farms - P* - - - 405.3.2.1 Greenhouses - P* - - - Code Sec. Civic/Governmental Uses N/A Cultural, civic and community centers - - - P - 405.12 Libraries - - - P* - N/A Police and fire protection facilities - - - P - N/A Municipal government, administration, services and maintenance facilities - - - P - N/A Non-municipal governmental buildings - - - P - Code Sec. Commercial Recreational Uses N/A Archery and pistol/gun shooting ranges - C P - - N/A Golf course - P P - - N/A Drive-in theater - - C - - N/A Baseball driving range P P - - N/A Bowling alley - - P - - N/A Jai alai frontons - - P - - N/A Live Theater - - P P - N/A Roller and ice skating rink - - P - - N/A Laser tag - - P - - N/A Miniature-golf - - P - - N/A Movie Theater - - P - - N/A Racetracks - - C - - N/A Sport-oriented outdoor uses: Baseball driving range, racquetball, soccer fields - P P - - N/A Sports stadium or arena - - C C - Code Sec. Schools/Educational Facilities 405.24 Charter - - - C* - 405.24 Colleges and Universities - - - P* - 405.24 Public and Private (K-12) - - - C* - 405.24 Vocational - - - P* - Code Sec. Utilities 405.28 Electrical utility substations (Municipal) - - - - P* 405.28 Electrical utility substations (Non-municipal) - - - - C* N/A Structures used for flood control, drainage and water storage P P - - P N/A Water and wastewater plants and pumping stations - - - - P N/A Wellfields - - - - P Code Sec. Parks & Open Space N/A Hunting, fishing, boating and camping facilities P P - - - N/A Nature centers and trails P P - - - N/A Outdoor research stations P P - - - N/A Parks P P - - - N/A Walkways/Greenways P P - - - N/A Wildlife sanctuaries and feeding stations P P - - - Code Sec. Religious Institutions 405.18/19 Sanctuary - - - P* - 405.18/19  w/ multi-purpose building to include a childcare center - - - P* - 405.18/19  w/ residential other than Pastor's home - - - C* - 405.18/19  w/School (K-12) - - - C* Code Sec. Medical & Healthcare Uses 405.5 Assisted Living Facilities - - - C* - 405.5.2 Adult day care - - - P* - 405.5.4 Group homes - - - P* - 405.5.3 Detoxification/Rehabilitation Centers - - - C* - N/A Hospitals - - - C - N/A Plasma/Blood donation center - - - P* - 405.15 Medical & Dental offices - - - P* - 405.15 Medical and Dental lab - - - P* - 405.5.1 Nursing Home - - - P* - N/A Urgent Care Center - - - P* - Code Sec. Miscellaneous Uses 405.7 Childcare Center - - - P* - 405.11.1 Hotels and Motels - - C* - - N/A Cemeteries, Crematoriums and Mausoleums - - - P - N/A Funeral Homes and Mortuaries - - - P - N/A State and Federal Native American Reservations P - - - - 405.3 Wetland Mitigation - P* - - -  
Table 403-2 
CIVIC AND RECREATIONAL DISTRICTS BULK REGULATIONS 
REGULATIONS CNS OS CR CF U Height  ¦ Maximum Height 1 35 60 100 60 80 Setbacks (minimums)  ¦ Front 75 25 30 25 25  ¦ Sides 50 25 30 25 25  ¦ Rear 50 25 30 20 25 Lot Area & Width  ¦ Minimum lot area (sq. ft.) - 10,000 10,000 20,000 10,000  ¦ Minimum lot width I 100 100 100 100 Maximum Building Lot Coverage (percentage) 10 2 60 2 3 60 2 60 2 60 2 1 Final determination based on use of structure: refer to the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
2 Except where applicable to specific land uses: refer to the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
3 Building Lot coverage applicable to ancillary buildings to the primary recreation use of the site.  
    403.5. Activity Center and workplace districts tables. 
TABLE 403-3 
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PRINCIPAL USES TABLE 
LEGEND 
P - Permitted by Right 
C - Conditional Use Permit Required 
*-Subject to Specific Use Standards; Refer to LDC Section 405. 
"-" Prohibited Specific Use Standards Principal Uses B1 B2 B3 OP EC PID Code Sec. Adult Entertainment 405.2 Casino/Gambling Establishment - - - - - P* 405.2 Sexually-oriented businesses - - - - - P* Code Sec. Agricultural Uses 405.3.3 Community Gardens P* P* P* - - P* 405.3.2.1 Indoor greenhouse nursery P* P* P* - - P* 405.3.2.2 Urban Garden P* P* P* - - P* 405.3.2.1 Urban Farm P* P* P* - - P* Code Sec. Animal Services 405.29 Veterinary Clinic/Hospital (domesticated animals; with boarding) - C* P* - P* C* 405.29 Veterinary Clinic/Hospital (domesticated animals; without boarding) P* P* P* - P* C* 405.29 Kennel - - C* - - C* 405.29 Grooming P* P* P* - P* C* 405.29 Pet daycare/hotel - C* P* - P* C* 405.29 Pet store - P* P* - - - Code Sec. Automobile-related Services 405.6.1 Automotive installation and repair - - C* - - C* 405.10 Car wash or auto detailing - C* P* - - P* 405.10 Gas/fuel service stations - C* C* - - - 405.6.2 New and used car sales/rental lots - - C* - - C* Code Sec. Clubs/Nightlife 405.4 Bars, Taverns, and Lounges - C P - - C 405.4 Cigar Bar - C P - - C 405.4 Hookah Lounge - C P - - C 405.4 Lodge - C C - - C 405.4 Night club - C C - - C Code Sec. Entertainment N/A Art Gallery - P P - - P 405.17 Game room arcade/Penny arcade P* P* P* - - P* N/A Live Theater - P P - - C N/A Indoor commercial recreation: e.g. roller rink, laser tag, bowling - P P - - P N/A Outdoor commercial recreation: e.g. tennis courts, soccer fields, mini-golf - P P - - C N/A Movie Theater C P P - - C N/A Museums - P P - - P Code Sec. General Business Services N/A Adult Daycare - P P - - - N/A Auction House - - C - - C N/A Barber/Beauty salon P P P - P - N/A Banks and Financial institutions (w/o drive through) P P P P P P N/A Banks and Financial institutions (w/ drive through) - C C - C C N/A Banquet Hall - P P - - C N/A Bail Bonds Agency - - C - - - N/A Body Art - P P - - - N/A Check cashing or pay day loan - - C - - - 405.7 Childcare Centers P* P* P* - P* P* N/A Catering Services - P P - P P N/A Consumer electronics and appliances repair P P P - - P N/A Dry cleaning P P P - P P 405.15 Drugstores - C* C* - - C* N/A Exterminating Services/Pest Control - - P - - P N/A Employment agency P P P P P P N/A Fortune-telling establishment P P P - - - N/A Fitness Studio: e.g. martial arts, dance and exercise studios/clubs P P P - P P N/A Laundromat P P P - - - N/A Massage establishment - P P - P - 405.13 Medical marijuana - - - - - - 405.15 Pain Management Clinic - C* C* C* - - 405.15 Pharmacy - C* C* C* - C* N/A Photography Studio P P P - P p N/A Print shop P P P - P p N/A Recycling Center - - - - C p N/A Spa services P P P - - - N/A Solar Energy System - - - - - p N/A Tailoring and alterations and shoe repairs P P P - P - N/A Travel agency P P P P P p N/A Tutoring/After school learning center P P P - - C Code Sec. Medical and Health Care Uses N/A Plasma/Blood facility - C C - - C 405.15 Medical and Dental offices P* P* P* P* P* P* 405.15 Medical and Dental lab - - P* - - P* N/A Urgent Care Center - P P - P p Code Sec. Multi-media uses N/A Radio and Television Studios with Receiving and Transmitting Towers - - P - P p N/A Production Studio - - P P P p N/A Software development - P P P P p Code Sec. Offices N/A Professional P P P P P p N/A Call centers - C C P P p 405.25.2 Research and Development - - - - P* P* Code Sec. Parking facilities, Commercial N/A Surface - - C - - p N/A Structured - P P P P p Code Sec. Public Uses N/A Civic facilities: e.g. post office, governmental administration offices P P P - P p N/A Municipal Facilities (maintenance, repair and storage) - - - - - C Code Sec. Religious Institutions 405.18/19 Sanctuary - P* P* - - - N/A w/ multi-purpose building (including a childcare center) - P* P* - - - N/A w/ residential other than Pastor's home - - - - - - N/A w/School (K-12) - - - - - - Code Sec. Resale Items N/A Antiques P P P - - - 405.16 Pawn Shop - - C* - - - N/A Second Hand Stores: e.g. Thrift Stores - P P - - - Code Sec. Restaurants N/A Singular Use with or without Beer and Wine License P P P - P p N/A w/ entertainment as accessory use: e.g. stage - P P - P p N/A w/ outdoor seating P P P - P p N/A w/ drive-through C C C - - - 405.4 w/ full bar/liquor license - P* P* - - P* 405.4 Beer Garden - P* P* - - - Code Sec. Retail Services N/A Arts and crafts P P P - - - N/A Automotive Parts (w/o installation) - P P - - - N/A Beauty supply store P P P - C - N/A Bookstores P P P - P - N/A Convenience store P P P - C - N/A Clothing store P P P - C - 405.26 Department store - P* P* - - - N/A Florist P P P - C - N/A Furniture and Mattresses - P P - - P 405.26 Grocery store P* P* P* - C - N/A Gun shop - - C - - - 405.26 Hardware/Home improvement store P* P* P* - - C N/A Jewelry - P P - - - 405.4 Liquor or package store - C* C* - - - N/A Plant nurseries - C C - - C N/A Small electronics P P P - C - N/A Specialty Food stores: e.g. Produce, Bakery, Poultry and Meat market P P P - - - 405.27 Swimming pools - P* P* - - C* N/A Tobacco retailer - C P - - - Code Sec. Schools/Educational Facilities 405.24 Charter - - - - - - 405.24 Colleges and Universities - - P* - P* C* 405.24 Public and Private (K-12) - - - - - - 405.24 Vocational - - P* - P* C* Code Sec. Miscellaneous Uses N/A Brewery - C P - P P N/A Cemeteries, Crematoriums and Mausoleums - - P - - - N/A Conference/Assembly: e.g. convention center - C P - - P N/A Funeral Homes and Mortuaries - - P - - - 405.11.1 Hotels and Motels - C* C* - C* C* 405.11.3 Live-work P* P* P* - - - 405.25.3 Light Manufacturing/Industrial uses - - P* - P* P* 405.25.3 Medium Manufacturing/Industrial uses - - - - P* P* 405.25.3 Heavy Manufacturing/Industrial uses - - - - - - 405.24 Warehouse/Storage/Rental Self-storage Facilities - - C* - - P*  
TABLE 403-4 
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS BULK REGULATIONS 
REGULATIONS B-1 B-2 B-3 OP EC PID Height (feet)  ¦ Minimum Height - - - 35 - -  ¦ Maximum Height 1 60 80 100 60 60 60 Setbacks (feet)  ¦ Front (minimum) - - 50 50 50 50  ¦ Front (maximum) 40 50 - - - -  ¦ Sides (minimum) 10 20 20 15 25 20  ¦ Rear (minimum) 20 20 20 25 25 20 Lot Area & Width  ¦ Minimum lot area - - - 1 acre 3 acres 5 acres 3  ¦ Minimum lot width (feet) - - - 75 150 300 Minimum open space - - - 25% 30% 25% Maximum Building Lot 
Coverage (percentage) Non-residential agricultural 10 10 10 - - 10 Non-residential uses other than agricultural 60 2 60 2 60 2 60 2 60 2 60 2 1 Final determination based on use of structure: refer to the City's Comprehensive Plan 
2 Except where applicable to specific land uses: refer to the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
3 Except for uses that are not warehouse distribution or light or medium industrial where a minimum of 1 acre is required.  
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 4(Exh. C), 11-1-17; Ord. No. 18-05, § 3, 11-27-17; Ord. No. 18-07, § 15, 3-7-18) 
Section 404. - Mixed-use districts 404.1 mixed-use districts 
    The purpose of the mixed-use districts is to provide flexibility for residential, retail, and workplace uses that encourage pedestrian-friendly site design, building mass, density, and circulation for properties. It is the intent of this LDC to further sustainability, energy efficiency, compact urban development patterns, and mass transit policies of the comprehensive plan. These zoning districts may be applied to the Transit Oriented Corridor and Regional Activity Center land use designations as well as other land use designations through flexibility or reserve unit allocation. 
    404.2. Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND) District. 
Purpose of District. The Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND) district is provided for the development of new neighborhoods and the revitalization or extension of existing neighborhoods, which are structured upon a network of interconnecting pedestrian oriented streets and other public spaces. These developments are intended to offer a mixture of housing types and prices, prominently sited civic or community buildings, and stores/offices/workplaces to provide a balanced mix of activities. A TND has a recognizable center and should be designed to integrate with the surrounding community; the optimum size of a TND is a garter mile from center to the edge. 
    404.3. Mixed-Use High and Mixed-Use Low Districts. 
    Purpose of Districts. Mixed-use High (MK) and Mixed-use Low (ML) categories encourage compact, first-rate projects based upon Smart Growth design principles, a variety of uses within developments, pedestrian-oriented streets, and public mobility options. The type of uses allowed and further detailed regulations such as the height, volume, and form of buildings and structures; the area of yards and other open spaces; and the density and intensity of these uses, are determined by the applicable mixed-use district. 
    404.4. Special District. 
    Purpose of District. The intent of the Special District (SD) is to promote art and entertainment within the city. This district is intended to serve as a venue for local artists and designers, and other artisans, to assemble and create, showcase, store and sell their works. It provides for a variety of uses to support the general welfare, education, and recreational pleasure of the public. 




    404.5. Tables. 
TABLE 403-5 
MIXED-USE PRINCIPAL USES TABLE 
LEGEND 
P - Permitted by Right 
C - Conditional Use Permit Required 
*-Subject to Specific Use Standards; Refer to LDC Section 405. 
"-" Prohibited Specific Use Standards Principal Uses TND ML MH SD Code Sec. Adult Entertainment 405.2 Casino/Gambling Establishment - - - - 405.2 Sexually-oriented businesses - - - - Code Sec. Agricultural Uses 405.3.3 Community Gardens P* P* P* P* 405.3.2.1 Indoor greenhouse nursery P* P* P* - 405.3.2.2 Urban Garden P* P* P* P* 405.3.2.1 Urban Farm - - - - Code Sec. Animal Services 405.29 Veterinary Clinic/Hospital (domesticated animals; with boarding) P* P* P* - 405.29 Veterinary Clinic/Hospital (domesticated animals; without boarding) P* P* P* - 405.29 Kennel - - C* - 405.29 Grooming P* P* P* - 405.29 Pet daycare/hotel P* P* P* - 405.29 Pet store P* P* P* - Code Sec. Automobile-related Services 405.6.1 Automotive installation and repair - - - - 405.10 Car wash or auto detailing - - - - 405.10 Gas/fuel service stations - - - - 405.6.2 New and used car sales/rental lots - - - - Code Sec. Clubs/Nightlife 405.4 Bars, Taverns, and Lounges P* P* P* P* 405.4 Cigar Bar P* P* P* P* 405.4 Hookah Lounge P* P* P* P* 405.4 Lodge - - - P* 405.4 Night club C* C* C* P* Code Sec. Entertainment N/A Art Gallery P P P P 405.17 Game room arcade/Penny arcade P* P* P* P* N/A Live Theater P P P P N/A Indoor commercial recreation: e.g. roller rink, laser tag, bowling P P P P N/A Outdoor commercial recreation: e.g. tennis courts, soccer fields, mini-golf P C C - N/A Movie Theater P P P P N/A Museums P P P P Code Sec. General Business Services N/A Adult Daycare P P P - N/A Auction House - - - - N/A Barber/Beauty salon P P P P N/A Banks and Financial institutions (w/o drive through) P P P - N/A Banks and Financial institutions (w/ drive through) - - - - N/A Banquet Hall P P P P N/A Bail Bonds Agency - - - - N/A Body Art - - - - N/A Check cashing or pay day loan - - - - 405.7 Childcare Centers P* P* P* - N/A Catering Services P P P - N/A Consumer electronics and appliances repair - - - - N/A Dry cleaning P P P P 405.15 Drugstores C* C* C* - N/A Exterminating Services/Pest Control - - - - N/A Employment agency P P P - N/A Fortune-telling establishment - - P - N/A Fitness Studio: e.g. martial arts, dance and exercise studios/clubs P P P P N/A Laundromat P P P - N/A Massage establishment P P P - 405.13 Medical marijuana - - - - 405.15 Pain Management Clinic - - - - 405.15 Pharmacy C* C* C* - N/A Photography Studio P P P P N/A Print shop P P P - N/A Recycling Center - - - - N/A Spa services P P P - N/A Solar Energy System - - - - N/A Tailoring and alterations and shoe repairs P P P - N/A Travel agency P P P - N/A Tutoring/After school learning center P P P - Code Sec. Medical and Health Care Uses N/A Plasma/Blood facility - - - - 405.15 Medical and Dental offices P P P - 405.15 Medical and Dental lab - - - - N/A Urgent Care Center P P P - Code Sec. Multi-media uses N/A Radio and Television Studios with Receiving and Transmitting Towers - - - - N/A Production Studio P P P P N/A Software development P P P P Code Sec. Offices N/A Professional P P P P N/A Call centers P P P - 405.25.2 Research and Development P* P* P* - Code Sec. Parking facilities, Commercial N/A Surface - - - - N/A Structured P P P P Code Sec. Public Uses N/A Civic facilities: e.g. post office, governmental administration offices P P P - N/A Municipal Facilities (maintenance, repair and storage) - - - - Code Sec. Residential N/A Single family detached dwelling unit - - - - N/A Duplex P - - - N/A Townhouse/rowhouse P P - - N/A Villa P P P - N/A Garden apartments P P P - N/A Mid-rise P P P P N/A High-rise P P P P 405.11.3 Live-work P - - P* Code Sec. Religious Institutions 405.19 Sanctuary - P* P* - N/A  w/ multi-purpose building (including a childcare center) - - - - N/A  w/ residential other than Pastor's home - - - - N/A  w/ school (K-12) - - - - Code Sec. Resale Items N/A Antiques P P P P 405.16 Pawn Shop - - - - N/A Second Hand Stores: e.g. Thrift Stores P P P - Code Sec. Restaurants 405.4 Singular Use with or without Beer and Wine License P* P* P* P* N/A  w/ entertainment as accessory use: e.g. stage P P P P N/A  w/ outdoor seating P P P P N/A  w/ drive-through C C C - 405.4  w/ full bar/liquor license P* P* P* P* 405.4 Beer Garden P* C P P* Code Sec. Retail Services N/A Arts and crafts P P P P N/A Automotive Parts (w/o installation) P P P - N/A Beauty supply store P P P - N/A Bookstores P P P P N/A Convenience store P P P P N/A Clothing store P P P P N/A Department store P P P - N/A Florist P P P - N/A Furniture and Mattresses P P P - N/A Grocery store P P P - N/A Gun shop - - C - N/A Hardware P P P - N/A Jewelry P P P - N/A Liquor or package store C C C - N/A Plant nurseries - - - - N/A Small electronics P P P - N/A Specialty Food stores: e.g. Produce, Bakery, Poultry and Meat market P P P - 405.27 Swimming pools - - - - N/A Tobacco retailer - - - - Code Sec. Schools/Educational Facilities 405.24 Charter - - - - 405.24 Colleges and Universities P* P* P* - 405.24 Public and Private (K-12) - - - - 405.24 Vocational P* P* P* - Code Sec. Miscellaneous Uses N/A Brewery P P P P N/A Cemeteries, Crematoriums and Mausoleums - - - - N/A Conference/Assembly: e.g. convention center P P P - N/A Funeral Homes and Mortuaries - - - - 405.5.1 Nursing homes P* P* P* - 405.11.1 Hotels and Motels C* C* P* P* 405.25.3 Light Manufacturing/Industrial uses - - - - 405.25.3 Medium Manufacturing/Industrial uses - - - - 405.25.3 Heavy Manufacturing/Industrial uses - - - - 405.24 Warehouse/Storage/Rental Self-storage Facilities - - - -  
TABLE 404-2 
MIXED-USE DISTRICTS BULK REGULATIONS 
STANDARDS TND ML MH SD Lot Dimension Lot Width (min. ft.) 100 50 50 50 Build-to-Lines: Duplex 5-15 Not Permitted Not Permitted Not Permitted Townhomes/Rowhouses 5-15 Not Permitted Not Permitted Not Permitted Apartment Building 5-15 5-15 5-15 Not Permitted Live/work 5-15 5-15 5-15 0-15 Office Building 5-15 0-15 0-15 Not Permitted Mixed-use Building 0-10 0-10 0-10 0-10 Non-residential Building 0-10 0-10 0-10 0-10 Civic 0-10 0-10 0-10 Not Permitted Minimum Setbacks: Sides Duplex 5 Not Permitted Not Permitted Not Permitted Townhomes/Rowhouses 0 Not Permitted Not Permitted Not Permitted Apartment Building 0 0 0 Not Permitted Live/work 0 0 Not Permitted 0 Office Building 0 0 0 Not Permitted Mixed-use Building 0 0 0 0 Non-residential Building 0 0 0 0 Civic 0 0 0 Not Permitted Minimum Setbacks: Rear Duplex 20 Not Permitted Not Permitted Not Permitted Townhomes/Rowhouses 15 Not Permitted Not Permitted Not Permitted Apartment Building 10 10 10 Not Permitted Live/work 20 20 Not Permitted 20 Office Building 5 5 5 Not Permitted Mixed-use Building 5 5 5 5 Non-residential Building 5 5 5 5 Civic 5 5 5 Not Permitted Height Height (min/max stories) 2/6 2/6 3/8 2/8 Ground story (min ft.) 12 12 2 12 2 12 2 Upper stories (min ft.) 9 9 9 9 Step back 1 (ft.) 10 10 10 10 A stepback is required for buildings taller than three (3) stories and adjacent to lower density residential development. 
2 Ground stories with a minimum of 16 feet within ML, MH, and SD districts may be considered as 2 stories.  
TABLE 404-3 
LEGEND ACCESSORY USES TABLE P - Permitted by Right C - Conditional Use "-" Prohibited ACCESSORY USES B1 B2 B3 OP EC PID CNS OS CR CF U TND ML MH SD Antennas, (Dish) - - - P P P - - - - P - - - - Antennas, (HAM radio) - - - P P P - - - - P - - - - Awnings P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Bank/ATM P P P P P P - - P P - P P P P Carwash, (Automated) - C P - - P - - - - P - - - - Carwash, (Attendant) - C P - - P - - - - P - - - - Carports/Porte-cochere P P P P P P - P P P P P P P P Community Gardens/Urban Farms/Indoor Greenhouse P P P - P P - P P P P P P P P Conference/Assembly - P P - P P - P P P - P P P P Childcare P P P P P P - P P P P P P P P Docks P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Dumpster enclosures/Trash handling areas P P P P P P - P P P P P P P P Farmer's Markets P P P - P P - P P P - P P P P Fences and Walls P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Fitness Centers P P P P P P - P P P P P P P P Flagpoles and Flags (non-telecommunication) P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Gazebos, Pergolas, and Trellises P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Parking Facilities, (Surface) P P P P P P - P P P - P P P P Parking Facilities, (Structured) P P P P P P - P P P - P P P P Play equipment P P P P P P - P P P - P P P P Restaurants and cafes/Beer Gardens P P P P P P - P P P - P P P P Rooftop gardens; green roofs P P P P P P - P P P - P P P P Rooftop photovoltaic solar systems P P P P P P - P P P P P P P P Swimming pools and spas - P P P P P - P P P - P P P P Utility/mechanical equipment P P P P P P - P P P P P P P P  
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 4(Exh. C), 11-1-17; Ord. No. 18-07, § 16, 3-7-18) 
ARTICLE III. - SPECIFIC STANDARDS AND NONCONFORMING USES 

Section 405. - Specific use regulations 
    The specific conditions set out below shall be applied to each proposed use during site plan and/or conditional use review (if applicable). 
    405.1 Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs). 
405.1.1 ADUs Considered to be Guest Quarters 
Accessory dwelling units, sometimes referred to as guest quarters or "mother-in-law suites", may be attached or detached from the principal single-family dwelling unit and shall be considered an accessory use to such dwelling unit and are subject to the following standards: 
¦ May not be rented separately from the principal dwelling unit: 
¦ May be utilized by family members, guests and/or persons employed on site by the resident family of the principal dwelling; 
¦ The owner(s) of the parcel shall file a binding lot agreement with a covenant recorded at the property owner's expense in the public records of Broward County, in a form approved by the city attorney, affirming and consenting that the primary dwelling unit shall be owner-occupied and the ADU or guest quarters shall not be rented; 
¦ Impact fees shall be assessed for the additional water and sewer capacity and additional park and recreation fees that are created by the additional sleeping rooms; 
¦ Must share utilities with the primary residence and separate utility meters are not permitted; 
¦ Shall be smaller in area than the principal home or dwelling structure on the property, may be a tiny home, and in no case greater than 750 square feet; 
¦ Shall be located in the rear yard of the property; 
¦ Shall be subject to the same front and side setbacks as the principal structure and have a minimum 10-foot wide setback from the rear property line; 
¦ Shall be lower in height than the principal structure and in no case greater than two (2) stories; 
¦ May have up to two (2) sleeping rooms (i.e. bedrooms); 
¦ May include one kitchen and one bathroom; 
¦ Shall be architecturally compatible with the house and may not become a non-conforming building or structure; 
¦ A manufactured home constructed pursuant to U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development standards or a mobile home may be used as an ADU; however, it must become architecturally compatible with the existing home; 
¦ An attached accessory dwelling unit may either share a common entrance with the primary dwelling unit or use a separate entrance. However, a separate entrance shall be located only to the side or rear of the structure; 
¦ Conversion of detached garages or other accessory buildings and structures for the purpose of creating an accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted only if the newly created dwelling unit is permitted and all code requirements are satisfied; 
¦ May not be constructed on an already nonconforming parcel or create a new non-conformity; 
¦ A minimum of one off-street parking space must be provided for the quarters on the same lot and it may be a tandem parking space. 
405.1.2 ADUs Considered to be Separate Dwelling Units. Accessory Dwelling Units that are permitted to be separate dwelling units on the same parcel per the density allowances permitted by the comprehensive plan may be attached or detached from the principal single- family dwelling unit and shall be considered a dwelling unit subject to the following standards: 
¦ May be rented separately from the principal dwelling unit; 
¦ May be utilized by tenants, family members, guests and/or persons employed on site by the resident family of the principal dwelling; 
¦ The owners of the parcel shall file a binding lot agreement with a covenant recorded at the property owner's expense in the public records of Broward County, in a form approved by the city attorney, affirming and consenting that the primary dwelling unit shall be owner-occupied and the ADU may be rented, if approved by the homeowner's or neighborhood association by-laws; 
¦ Impact fees shall be assessed for the police and fire protection, water and sewer capacity, and park and recreation fees that are created by the additional unit; 
¦ Shall be smaller in area than the principal home, may be a tiny home, and in no case greater than 1,000 square feet; 
¦ Shall be located in the rear yard of the property; 
¦ Shall be subject to the same front and side setbacks as the principal structure and have a minimum 10-foot wide setback from the rear property line; 
¦ Shall be lower in height to the principal structure and in no case greater than two (2) stories; 
¦ May include one kitchen and up to two (2) bathrooms; 
¦ Shall be architecturally compatible with the house and may not become a non-conforming building or structure; 
¦ A manufactured home constructed pursuant to U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development standards or a mobile home may be used as an ADU; however, it must become architecturally compatible with the existing home; 
¦ An attached accessory dwelling unit may either share a common entrance with the primary dwelling unit or use a separate entrance. However, a separate entrance shall be located only to the side or rear of the structure; 
¦ Conversion of detached garages or other accessory buildings and structures for the purpose of creating an accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted only if the newly created dwelling unit is permitted and all code requirements are satisfied; 
¦ May not be constructed on an already nonconforming parcel or create a new non-conformity; 
¦ A minimum of one off-street parking space must be provided on the same lot for each bedroom and these may be tandem parking spaces). 
    405.2. Adult Entertainment Uses and Establishments. 
    405.2.1. Intent. This subsection shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose to regulate and provide proper and adequate locations that would be compatible for proposed adult entertainment uses and establishments while keeping consistent with the city's comprehensive plan and vision. Adult entertainment uses as defined in section 201 shall be a permitted use within the PID district, subject to distance separation requirements as noted below. 
    It is the intent of the city commission, in adopting this subsection, to establish reasonable and uniform regulations that will reduce the adverse secondary effects that adult entertainment establishments have upon the residents of the city and protect the health, safety, aesthetics, morals and general welfare of the people of the city. It is further intended to provide for the proper location of adult entertainment uses in the city; to require a separation between such uses to avoid clustering; and to require separation from and thereby protect the integrity of incompatible uses in nearby neighborhoods, including residences, schools, places of worship, public parks and other commercial enterprises. Proper separation of adult entertainment uses prevents the creation of skid row areas in the city, which otherwise result from the concentration of these establishments and their patrons. This subsection has neither the purpose, nor the effect, of limiting or restricting access by adults to sexually-oriented, non-obscene materials protected by the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, or denying access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. It is instead the intent to limit the secondary effects of regulated uses through content-neutral regulation as set out in this subsection. Furthermore, the commission has found that the location of residential uses within viable, un-blighted and desirable areas supports the preservation of property values and promotes the health, safety, aesthetics, and welfare of the city and the public at large. 
405.2.2. Conflicts with Other Laws. Whenever the regulations and requirements are in conflict or at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully enacted and adopted rules, regulations, ordinances or laws, the most restrictive shall apply. 
405.2.3. Penalty for Violation of Subsection. Any person violating the provisions shall, upon conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction of any offense involving moral turpitude in connection with the operation of such adult entertainment establishment, be subject to the penalties of the LDC, city code, or by any other means authorized by law including, but not limited to, the revocation of a zoning certificate of use. The city code compliance officer shall immediately issue a written notice of intent to revoke the local business licenses and permits. 
405.2.4. District and Distance Separation Regulations. See Tables 405-1 and 405-2. 
TABLE 405-1 
DISTRICT REGULATIONS*. 
District Type All Residential Zoning Districts as described in section 401.1 Not Permitted Commercial Recreation, Community Facilities, and Recreation/Open Space districts Not Permitted Mixed Use Districts as described in section 401.1 Not Permitted Planned Industrial Development (PID) Permitted All other Nonresidential Zoning Districts as described in section 401.1 Not Permitted *Variances to the locational standards of this subsection shall not be allowed.  
TABLE 405-2 
DISTANCE REGULATIONS* 
  ¦ The operation of any regulated use (proposed or existing) must meet the following minimum distances from any existing uses. 
  ¦ The subsequent establishment of the uses listed in this table within these distances of an existing adult entertainment use shall not change the status of the adult entertainment use to that of a nonconforming use. 
  ¦ For the purposes of this subsection, all measurements of distances shall be along a straight airline route from the nearest point on the property line of the subject property to the nearest point on the property line of any other property or use. If the property is one of multiple, separate but attached bays designed for separate businesses, the property line of the parcel that contains the multiple-bay structure shall be considered the property line for purposes of this measurement. Therefore, no more than one adult entertainment use may be located in any one structure, even if that structure contains multiple, separate but attached bays designed for separate businesses. 
  ¦ The applicant shall furnish a survey certified to the city by and from a Florida registered and licensed surveyor and mapper. Such survey shall indicate the distance from the adult entertainment use to any other adult entertainment use and any other use as described in the table below. In case of any dispute, the measurement scaled by the city's geographic information system (GIS) database shall govern. Any costs related to such disputes, including the cost of the city hiring a surveyor, shall be paid by the applicant. Existing Use Distance (feet) Places of worship 1,500 Child Care Centers, Nursery Schools, Pre-Kindergartens, Kindergartens, Public or Private Elementary/Middle/High Schools, and Public Libraries 2,500 Public Parks 1,500 Commercial Recreation, Community Facilities, Recreation/Open Space, or residential zoning district boundaries 1,500 Another adult entertainment establishment 1,500 Any establishments licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises: pawnshops: pool or billiard halls: penny arcade or other business establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its business the operation of coin-operated amusement devices 1,500 *Variances to the locational standards of this subsection shall not be allowed.  
    405.3. Agricultural Activities, Farm Animals and Food Production. 
405.3.1. Rural Farms. Agricultural activities including: field, commercial and non-commercial crops; horticulture; silviculture; fruit and nut production; beekeeping; farm animals; horse and cattle ranching; groves; tree and plant nurseries; poultry and egg production; milk production; animal breeding, raising, training, stabling or kenneling; and all associated activities, shall be permitted on parcels designated Rural or Estate on the LUP map, consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies of the comprehensive plan. Such activity shall not be conducted so as to become a nuisance to adjacent properties or the neighborhood. Any structure within RL, E, and RS1 districts shall be located at least 50 feet from any lot line. 
TABLE 405-3 
DISTRICT REGULATIONS. 
Land Use Designation District type Permitted Agricultural Activities Farm Animal Provisions Rural/Estate RL = 20 acres Rural farms, urban farms, urban gardens, community gardens, mobile produce vending (TUP), farmer's markets (TUP) No limitation Rural/Estate RL < 20 acres; E; RS1 Rural farms, urban farms, urban gardens, community gardens, mobile produce vending (TUP), farmer's markets (TUP) ¦ Four-legged animals: 3 head per acre: 
¦ Two-legged animals: 10 head per acre All other 
residential land uses All residential zoning districts Urban farms (CU), urban gardens, community gardens, mobile produce vending (TUP), farmer's markets Not Permitted Commercial; Industrial; RAC; TOC B1, B2 and B3; PID; TND; MH; ML; SD; OS; CF Urban farms, urban gardens, community gardens, mobile produce, vending (TUP), farmer's markets (TUP) Not permitted All other land uses All other nonresidential zoning districts, as defined in section 401.1 Not Permitted Not Permitted  
405.3.2. Urban Agriculture. 
405.3.2.1 Operating Standards for Urban Farms. Urban Farm definition. An establishment where edible or ornamental crops are grown or processed to be sold or donated that includes, but is not limited to, outdoor growing operations, indoor growing operations, vertical farms, aquaponics, aquaculture, hydroponics and rooftop farms. 
Urban Farms are permitted on property zoned B1, B2, B3, PID, TND, MH, ML, SD, RL, E, RS1 and by conditional use on RS2, RS3, RS4, RS5, RS6, RS7, RM1, RM2, RM3, RM4, PUD, T, and shall be subject to the following operational standards: 
a.  All urban farms and their owners, lessees, employees, volunteers, and visitors must comply with all federal, state and local laws and regulations relating to the operation, use, and enjoyment of the farm premises. Growing and harvesting agricultural non-animal products is permitted. 
b.  Site users may not use materials such as inappropriate fill that introduces heavy metals or other harmful contaminants to garden or farm sites. Site users may use pesticides only to the extent permitted by law. 
c.  Greenhouses are permitted. 
d.  Parking requirements shall comply with Section 808. 
e.  The irrigation source must be from a non-potable water supply. 
f.  Emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter shall not be permitted in such quantities as to be offensive to owners or occupants of adjoining property or in such a manner as to create a nuisance or hazard beyond the property lines. 
g.  Compost materials shall be stored at least ten (10) feet from adjacent property and in a manner that is not visible from adjacent property (shielded from view by shrubbery or an enclosure), controls odor, prevents infestation, and minimizes runoff into waterways and onto adjacent properties. 
h.  No emission shall be permitted that can cause damage to health, animals, vegetation, or other forms of property or that can cause any excessive air pollution. 
i.  Illumination of buildings and open areas shall be located and directed so as to eliminate glare toward streets and adjoining properties and shall comply with the requirements of section 805. 
j.  No waste shall be discarded into the streets, drainage ways, or on property that may potentially create a danger to the public health and safety, and no waste shall be discharged in the public sewage system that might endanger the normal operation of the public sewage system. 
k.  The sound level of any individual operation shall not exceed the levels permitted in the city's excessive noise code provisions, sections 10-111 through 10-117 and section 13-4 of this city Code of Ordinances. 
l.  No vibration shall be permitted that is discernible beyond the property lines of the urban garden to the human sense or feeling for a duration of 180 seconds or more in any sixty (60) consecutive minute period of the day between the hours of 7:00 am and 7:00 pm or for a duration of 30 consecutive seconds or more in any sixty (60) consecutive minute period between the hours of 7:00 pm and 7:00 am. 
m.  The use of heavy machinery ( e.g., tractors, plows, and similar types of agricultural similar devices) is permitted in rural residential and non-residential directs only, but is restricted to use between 7:00 am and 7:00 pm, and must be in compliance with the other nuisance mitigation requirements, as applicable. 
n.  Any equipment or supplies needed for operations shall be fully stored out of sight from the street and any adjacent residential uses. 
o.  The keeping of animals is prohibited. 
p.  Accessory retail sales of edible or ornamental crops grown on-site or products that are made from produce grown on-site in rural residential and non-residential districts only, may occur in accordance with a city issued business tax receipt. 
q.  During an on-site sales event, a temporary booth or display may be located within the front yard setback of the property, in rural residential and non-residential districts only, between the hours of 7:00 am and 7:00 pm provided that site visibility is maintained. 
405.3.2.2 Operating Standards for Urban Gardens: 
Urban Garden definition. An establishment where edible or ornamental crops are grown as an accessory use on the ground, or a rooftop or inside a building, to be sold or donated. 
Urban Gardens are permitted on property zoned commercial and residential as an accessory use, and shall be subject to the following operational standards: 
a.  Parking requirements shall comply with Section 808. 
b.  The irrigation source must be from a non-potable water supply. 
c.  Compost materials shall be stored at least ten (10) feet from adjacent property and in a manner that is not visible from adjacent property (shielded from view by shrubbery or an enclosure), controls odor, prevents infestation with insects, and minimizes runoff into waterways and onto adjacent properties. 
d.  Mechanized equipment similar in scale to that designed for household use shall be permitted. Use of larger mechanized farm equipment is prohibited. 
e.  Accessory retail sales of edible or ornamental crops grown on-site or products that are made from produce grown on-site. 
f.  Shipment and delivery of products or supplies shall be limited to between dawn and dusk and shall occur only in single axle straight trucks or smaller vehicles normally used to serve residential neighborhoods. 
g.  Overhead lighting shall be prohibited. 
405.3.3. Operating Standards for Community Gardens: Community garden definition. A use in which land managed by a group of individual is used to grow food or ornamental crops for donation or for use by those cultivating the land and their households. Community gardens may include separate plots for cultivation by one (1) or more individuals or may be farmed collectively by members of the group and may include common areas maintained and used by group members. 
Community Gardens are permitted by right as either a principal or as an accessory use (per the tables pertaining to each district) on property zoned RL, E, RS1, RS2, RS3, RS4, RS5, RS6, RS7, RS8, RM1, RM2, RM3, RM4, PUD, T, TND, MH, ML, SD, B1, B2, B3, CF, and OS, (with respect to residentially-zoned property, as defined in section 401.1, on communal property, school sites, and places of public assembly sites only), and shall be subject to the following operational standards: 
a.  All community gardens and their users must comply with all federal, state, and local laws and regulations relating to the operation, use, and enjoyment of the garden premises. 
b.  The primary use is for growing and harvesting of agricultural products. 
c.  Prior to establishment, applicants shall inquire into the historical use of the property and undertake proper soil testing to measure nutrients, heavy metals, and any other harmful contaminants that may be present. The soil testing results and proposed remediation methodology (if needed) shall be provided to and kept on file with the department. All environmental testing must be conducted by an "environmental professional" as defined by 40 CFR §312.10(b), as amended from time to time. Any environmental testing shall be accomplished pursuant to the standards and requirements set forth in in 40 CFR Part 312, as amended from time to time. 
d.  Site users must have an established set of operating rules addressing the governance structure of the garden, hours of operation, maintenance, and security requirements; must have a garden coordinator to perform the coordinating role for the management of the community gardens and to liaise with the city; and must assign garden plots in a fair and impartial manner according to the operating rules established for that garden. The name and contact information of the garden coordinator and a copy of the operating rules shall be kept on file with the department and the lead community garden nonprofit organization, as appropriate. 
e.  To the extent permitted under federal and state law, site users must use organic and sustainable growing practices. 
f.  The irrigation source must be from a non-potable water supply. 
g.  The site must be designed and maintained so that water and fertilizer will not drain onto adjacent property. 
h.  Compost materials and garden supplies shall be located at least ten (10) feet away from adjacent property and screened from view by hedges and shrubs, using best practices to control odors, prevent infestation, and minimize runoff into waterways and onto adjacent properties. 
i.  Structures to support urban agriculture, such as storage sheds, hoop-houses, and greenhouses, are permitted, subject to provisions from this chapter. 
j.  Retail sales, including donation, of plants and produce grown on-site or products that are processed off-site but made from products grown on-site may occur between dawn and dusk every day of the week. 
k.  The site shall comply with CPTED design standards. 
l.  Keeping of animals is not permitted. 
m.  A perimeter fence is encouraged. 
n.  Accessory retail sales of edible or ornamental crops grown on-site or products that are made from produce grown on-site may occur with a city-issued business tax receipt. 
405.3.4. Bees. In Florida, the regulating authority for beekeeping is granted to the state. Florida Statute 586.055 stipulates that apiaries are allowed to be located on agricultural land that is integral to beekeeping operations. Chapter 586 includes requirements regarding "Florida Honey Certification and Honeybee Law." Beekeepers shall be in compliance with state statutory regulations and shall be required to post signs on the property within 100 feet of the beekeeping activities advising the public of the activities. Beehives shall not be located closer than 150 feet from a property line. 
405.3.5. Farmers' Markets. Farmers' Markets definition. An open-air establishment that allows the selling of agricultural products such as fruits, vegetables, herbs, nuts, flowers, animal food products such as eggs, honey, meat, milk, cheese and fish. The predominant sales area is for food and associated farm products. 
Open-air farmers' markets are a permitted, temporary use in the following zoning districts: RL, E, RS1, B1, B2, B3, PID, TND, MH. ML, SD, OS, CF, and all of the RM districts (on communal property, school sites, and places of public assembly sites only), provided that the property owner has granted written permission and that the applicant has the proper licensing and TUP issued by the City. A tent permit will also be required. Vendors shall be subject to the following operational standards: 
a.  All farmers' markets and their vendors shall comply with all federal, state, and local laws and regulations relating to the operation, use, and enjoyment of the market premises; 
b.  All farmers' markets and their vendors must obtain all required operating and health permits, licenses, and certificates of insurance, and copies of these documents shall be in the possession of the farmers' market manager or the vendor, as applicable, on site during all hours of operation; 
c.  The predominant sales area must be for agriculture-related products. 
d.  All farmers' markets and their vendors are encouraged to accept forms of payment for eligible goods or products sold, or shall allow a legitimate and duly authorized third party to occupy space within the farmers' market area to operate a redemption program, by participants of federal, state, or local food assistance programs, including, but not limited to the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) 7 USC ss. 2011 et seq; the Women. Infants, and Children (WIC) Farmers' Market Nutrition Program 42 USC s. 1786(m) and 7 CFR part 248; and the Senior Farmers' Market Nutrition Program 7 USC s. 3007 and 7 CFR part 249; all in a manner allowed by, and in conformance with, both federal and state laws and regulations as those laws and regulations may be amended from time to time. 
e.  All farmers' markets must have an established set of operating rules addressing the governance structure of the farmers' market, hours of operation, maintenance, insurance, and security requirements and responsibilities; and appointment of a market manager, including the following: 
i.  Refuse disposal and sufficient trash and recycling receptacles within the area of the approved farmers' market; and 
ii.  Litter removal within the boundaries of the approved farmers' market; and 
iii.  Access to adequate sanitary facilities, including restrooms and/or portable sinks and toilets. 
f.  Compliance with city's noise ordinance must be observed. 
g.  All farmers' markets shall provide for a minimum of one vehicle parking space for each vendor stall; and three parking spaces for shoppers per number of vendor stalls. Where the farmers' market is located within one-half mile of any transit stop for a bus route, or a fixed rail or bus rapid transit system, the number of parking spaces required shall be reduced by twenty-five (25%) percent. Farmers' markets must also provide secure bicycle storage for their patrons. 
405.3.6. Mobile Produce Vending. Mobile Produce Vending definition. A mobile produce vendor is a self-contained produce service operation (e.g. trucks, carts, trailers and kiosks), located in a readily movable motorized wheeled or towed vehicle, used to store, prepare, display and sell produce. 
Mobile produce vending is permitted as a temporary use only on property zoned RL, E, RS1, B1, B2, B3, PID, TNP, MH, ML, SP, OS, CF, and all of the RM districts (on communal property, school sites, and places of public assembly sites only), provided that the property owner has granted written permission and that the vendors have the proper licensing and TUP issued by the city. Vendors shall be subject to the following operational standards: 
¦ All operations shall fully comply with all federal, state and local laws, regulations and guidelines including without limitation those applicable to the vending of fresh fruits and vegetables, including without limitation the Florida Food Safety Act s. 500.01 et seq., Florida Statute, and all regulations and guidelines promulgated by the state and the county, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
• All activities, and the duration of those activities, shall first have been approved and authorized in writing by the owner of the real property on which those activities are planned to occur. The vendor shall have this written authorization available on-site and shall present it to the city upon the city's request. 
¦ Produce cart vendors shall keep the sidewalks, right-of-ways, roadways, and other space immediately adjoining and adjacent to their produce carts clean and free from paper, peelings, and refuse of any kind generated from the operation of their businesses. Vendors shall affix to their produce carts a marked litter receptacle, which shall be maintained and emptied regularly. 
¦ The vending facility shall be placed or operated only on paved surfaces and not on landscaped areas, nor shall the vending facility adversely impact any landscaping or landscaped areas. 
¦ Vendors shall not: 
• Offer for sale or otherwise distribute any products other than whole, uncut, fresh fruit and vegetables; 
• Be located in a right-of-way; 
• Conduct business in such a way as to restrict or interfere with the ingress or egress of the abutting property owner or tenant, or in such a way as would create or become a nuisance or hazard to public health, safety, aesthetics, or welfare, or increase traffic congestion or delay, or constitute an obstruction to adequate access to fire, police, or sanitation vehicles; 
• Conduct business within ten (10) feet of a crosswalk, fire hydrant, or the outer edge of any entranceway to any building or facility used by the public, including doors, driveways, and emergency exits; 
• Leave any produce cart unattended at a sidewalk at any time; 
• Conduct business between 10:00 p.m. and 5:30 a.m.; 
• Use amplified sound for any purpose. 
405.3.7. Greenhouses. Greenhouses are permitted as accessory buildings or structures as follows: 
a.  Greenhouses are prohibited in a front yard and must meet structural setbacks. 
b.  The maximum permitted height of a greenhouse is 12 feet in a residential zone. The maximum size in a non-residential or mixed-use zone is the structural height standards to the corresponding zoning location. 
c.  Mechanical greenhouses with heating plants or cooling fans associated with greenhouses shall be located to meet all of the setbacks from every property line. 
d.  Compliance with the city's noise ordinance must be observed. 
    405.4. Alcoholic Beverages Sales. 
405.4.1 Conditional Use Requirement. Alcoholic beverage sales licenses for Consumption on Premises (C.O.P.) for beer, wine and liquor, and Alcoholic Beverage Package Sales (A.P.S.) for beer, wine and liquor shall be required to obtain conditional use approval, except that this requirement shall not apply to temporary events. 
405.4.2 Alcoholic Beverage Consumption For Temporary Events. For temporary events (1-3 day) held on city-owned properties and/or public rights-of-way, such temporary events shall be required to comply with the applicable regulations of section 4-3 of the city's code of ordinances regarding public alcohol consumption. For temporary events (1-3 day) held on private properties, approval shall be granted in conjunction with the TUP issued by the city for the event. 
405.4.3 Requirements for Licenses. Alcoholic beverages sales licenses for A.P.S. and C.O.P. for beer and wine only shall be subject to the approval procedures required for the specific business selling the alcoholic beverages pursuant to the standards established in this code. 
405.4.4 Distance Requirements. 
(a)  Vendors shall be permitted to sell alcoholic beverages including liquor for consumption on or off the premises provided that there are at least 2,500 feet by straight air-line measurement from any established school or child care center or library measured from the main entrance point of the vendor's establishment to the nearest property line of a school or child care center or library grounds used as part of the school or child care center facility, except as provided in Chapter 563, Florida Statutes, as may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  Vendors shall be permitted to sell alcoholic beverages including liquor for consumption on or off the premises in any place of business provided that it is located at least 1,000 feet by straight air-line measurement, measured from the main entrance to main entrance of another place of business in which there is already in existence a vendor selling alcoholic or intoxicating beverages for consumption on or off the premises. 
(c)  The foregoing requirements for both cases shall not apply to vendors of Consumption On Premise (C.O.P.) alcoholic beverages, when such beverages are served in duly licensed restaurants, nor shall they apply to C.O.P. vendors located within the TND, MH, ML, or SD districts. 
(d)  Alcoholic beverage consumption on premises shall not be permitted to be located within 1,500 feet of an adult entertainment use. All measurements of distances shall be along a straight airline route from the nearest point on the property line of the alcoholic beverage consumption on premises property to the nearest point on the property line of the adult entertainment use. 
  
405.4.5 Bottle Club. Any bottle club as defined by chapter 561, Florida Statutes, and operating as the primary use shall be required to obtain conditional use approval. The foregoing requirement does not apply to establishments that apply for a bottle club license as an accessory use. Bottle club conditional use approvals are only valid in the specific location on a specific property granted by the conditional use permit. Bottle clubs may be permitted as a primary use or as an accessory use in any nonresidential or mixed-use district, other than the CNS, OS, or U districts, as described in section 401.1. 
TABLE 405-4 
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES AND CONSUMPTION REGULATIONS 
Use Type Permitted Approval Process Distance Requirement Liquor Store Conditional Use Permit Conditional Use for beer, wine, and liquor; C.O.P is not permitted. Applies Convenience Store Permitted Conditional Use for beer, wine, and liquor; C.O.P is not permitted. N/A Bars/Nightclubs Conditional Use Permit Conditional Use for beer, wine, and liquor Applies except in Mixed Use districts Hotels Permitted Zoning approval for State license N/A Bottle Clubs Conditional Use for beer, wine, and liquor if primary use: Bottle Club license Conditional Use for beer, wine, and liquor if primary use; Bottle Club license Applies except in Mixed Use districts Restaurants Permitted Zoning approval for State license N/A Temporary events Permitted TAC or TUP and temporary alcoholic beverage license for temporary events N/A Residential Clubhouse Permitted TUP/Zoning approval for State license N/A  
    405.5. Assisted Living Facilities, and other Residential Care Facilities and Social Service Facilities. All types of Social Service Facilities. Substance Abuse and Rehabilitation Centers, and Special Residential Facilities (Categories 1, 2, 3,) not specifically permitted in residential zones by state and/or federal statutes or specifically addressed below, shall be permitted in Community Facilities (CF) zones as a conditional use. 
405.5.1. Adult Congregate Living Facility (ACLF). Nursing Homes and Skilled Nursing Facilities. The establishment of these facilities in Community Facilities (CF) zones as a conditional use shall be as regulated in chapter 429, Florida Statutes. 
405.5.2 Adult Day Care Centers. The establishment of these facilities in commercial (B1, B2, and B3) and Community Facilities (CF) zones shall be as regulated in chapter 429, Florida Statutes. 
405.5.3 Detoxification/Rehabilitation/Substance Abuse Centers. The establishment of these facilities in Community Facilities (CF) zones as a conditional use shall be as regulated in chapter 429, Florida Statutes. Detoxification centers and/or rehabilitation centers shall not be established within 1,500 feet of an existing detoxification or rehabilitation center, as measured from the edge of the parcel containing the existing facility. 
405.5.4. Adult Family Care Homes. Assisted Living Facilities, and Group homes. The establishment of Adult Family Care Homes (AFCH). Assisted Living Facilities (ALF) and Group Homes (GH) in single-family or multi-family residential zones shall be as regulated in chapters 419 and 429, Florida Statutes. A proposed group home of six (6) or fewer residents within 1,000 feet of an existing group home shall be required to obtain conditional use approval. The establishment of community residential homes in multi-family residential zones shall also be as regulated in chapter 419, Florida Statutes. A proposed community residential home of seven (7) to fourteen (14) residents within 1,200 feet of another community residential home shall be required to obtain conditional use approval. 
    405.6. Automobile-Related Uses. 
405.6.1 Automobile Repair. Automobile Paint and Tire Stores. Motor vehicle repair and service garages, vehicle paint shops and tire stores are permitted as a conditional use in B3 and PID zones, subject to the following standards: 
(a)  All service, including major repairs, and accessory services such as alignments, balancing, batteries, brakes, and suspension system repair, window tinting, as well as preventative maintenance such as oil and fluid changes, hose and wiper repair and similar types of service, must be performed entirely within an enclosed building; and 
(b)  Outdoor display and storage of merchandise and equipment, including new or used tires, is prohibited; and 
(c)  Tow trucks may not be parked on the premises; and 
(d)  Outdoor overnight parking of vehicles is prohibited; and 
(e)  Where the use is located within 500 feet of residentially-zoned property (measured by straight air-line measurement form property line to property line), the hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.; and 
(f)  A minimum six-foot (6') high decorative masonry wall must be installed, separating the property from any abutting residentially-zoned property, with a minimum ten-foot (10') wide landscape buffer planted outside the wall consisting of at least three (3) tiers of plant material (ground cover, continuous hedge and fourteen-foot (14') shade trees planted on-center). 
(g)  Where automotive repair business is allowed, such use may also be conducted under a roof located to the rear or side of the principal building and within the principal building setbacks; provided, that the area is screened and buffered by a wall, fence or hedge at least six (6) feet in height. This screen and buffer requirement shall not apply to buildings/structures enclosed on three (3) sides. 
Additionally, auto repair business uses with their primary frontage on State Road 7 and located in the Transit Oriented Corridor land use designation, may conduct such use under an existing, permanent canopy or roof structure located in front of the building; provided, that: (i) no equipment, parts or vehicles are kept under said canopy or roof structure after business hours; (ii) the area is kept clean and visually uncluttered; and (iii) all signs comply with the current sign code provisions then in effect. 
405.6.2 Automobile Sales and Rental. Sale or rental of new or used automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorhomes and boats shall be a conditional use in B3 and PID zones. In PID, sales and display of vehicles and boats must be entirely within an enclosed building. In B3, sales and display of vehicles and boats must be behind an eight-foot (8') wall and automobile lifts may not be used to raise display vehicles. 
    405.7. Child Care Centers. Child care centers and nursery schools, as defined in Section 402.302 Florida Statutes, shall be subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Building shall be located at least 30 feet from any residentially-zoned property, as defined in section 401.1. The front, side and rear setbacks shall be at least 50, 15 and 25 feet, respectively. 
(2)  At least one completely fenced and secure play lot shall be established, maintained and used for children at play. All outdoor play areas shall be landscaped, grassed, mulched or covered by an artificial rubberized surface, and shall not be paved. The fence shall not be less than five feet in height. Fencing must be picket or chain-link with coating and without vinyl slats at a minimum. 
(3)  Play lots located closer than 50 feet to the plot line shall be screened by a wall or an opaque fence or hedge not less than five feet in height and such fences and hedges shall be protected by bollards. 
(4)  Indoor usable play space shall be at least 35 square feet per child, excluding any support space, such as kitchens, restrooms, office, storage, and corridors. 
(5)  Outdoor play space shall be at least 45 square feet per child. Open space shall be shaded, pervious area with an outdoor drinking fountain. All playground equipment shall be identified on the site plan and shall not be permitted within the required setback areas. Required setbacks are not to be counted as required open space. 
(6)  All centers shall have a minimum of one shade tree per 100 square feet of pervious open space. 
(7)  Each child care center shall operate the outdoor play areas only from the hours of 8:00 am to 6:00 pm. 
(8)  Vehicle impact protection devices (VIPDs) are required to be installed and maintained for exposed areas in order to protect the center, its patrons, and associated play areas from vehicle intrusions from out-of-control vehicles, except for home-based child care centers, family day care homes, and indoor recreational facilities, as defined in section 402.302, Florida Statutes. 
(a)  Applicability: except for the exceptions noted above, centers shall install VIPDs prior to opening a new center after the adoption of this ordinance; prior to the expansion, modification or relocation of an existing center, including the installation, repair, creation, establishment, re/development of play areas and/or exposed areas and/or head-in parking areas: 
(b)  Elements of VIPDs: VIPDS shall be a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches in height; shall be designed to achieve an impact resistance level of 5,000 pounds traveling at thirty (30) miles per hour; shall be installed at least three (3) feet above finished grade within the exposed area, parallel to the edge of the roadway or drive aisle; shall not be plain concrete barriers, such as "K Rails" or "Jersey" barriers: shall be space no less than forty-eight (48) inches and no more than fifty-six (56) inches from outside edge to outside edge; VIPDs shall comply with the American Disabilities Act (ADA) and all applicable local, state and federal codes and regulations; the color and design shall be approved by the CAB and be consistent throughout the site; shall be properly maintained, including no visible rust or corrosion and be kept in uniform alignment; and shall be replaced or repaired within ninety (90) days after being destroyed, damaged or removed. 
(9)  Distance separation requirements: 
(a)  2,500 feet from an adult entertainment use; 
(b)  1,500 feet from any established facility selling alcoholic beverages for consumption on or off premises: measurement of this distance shall be by straight air-line measurement from any the alcoholic beverage sale location's main entrance point to the nearest property line of the child care center; 
(c)  1,000 feet from any pain management clinic; 
(d)  All measurements of distances, except as set forth in sub-section (b), shall be along a straight airline route from the nearest point on the property line of the child care center to the nearest point on the property line of the use from which the child care center is to be separated. 
    405.8. Textile Recycling Bins. 
405.8.1. Limitation on Textile Recycling Bins. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section shall be to provide rules, regulations and standards for the limited placement and use of textile recycling bins in the city in order to promote the public health, safety, aesthetics, and welfare of the city. City-owned recycling bins are not subject to the limitations set forth herein. 
(b)  Definitions. 
Charitable organization means any person determined by the federal Internal Revenue Service to be a tax-exempt organization pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) that is established for any benevolent, philanthropic, humane, social welfare, public health, or other eleemosynary purpose. 
Franchisee means a person or entity who has been awarded or granted an Exclusive Franchise Agreement for the provision and operation of Textile Recycling Program Services, including the ownership of all textile recycling bins, as well as all cost associated with providing the necessary labor and equipment for the maintenance, collection, and transportation of textile recycling bins within the City. 
Shopping center means five (5) or more commercial establishments, planned, developed, owned and managed as an integral unit, with off-street parking provided on the property, and related in its location, size and type of shops to the trade area that the unit serves. 
Textile recycling bin or " bins "means a receptacle or container made of metal or other fire-resistant material designed or intended for the collection and temporary storage of textile items such as, but not limited to; shoes, clothes, backpacks, soft covered books, linens and draperies deposited by the general public. 
(c)  Requirements for Use of Textile Recycling Bins. Textile recycling bins ("bins") shall be permitted on a limited basis only, and only in compliance with all of the provisions of this section, including the following requirements: 
(1)  The person/entity operating the bin has obtained a franchise agreement from the city; 
(2)  A bin shall only be owned and operated by a city franchisee; 
(3)  The information required in sub-section (e)(6) below is clearly and conspicuously displayed, in weather resistant lettering no smaller than one (1) inch high, on a sign no greater than 2' x 2' in size fastened to the exterior of the bin; 
(4)  The materials contributed shall be for re-sale, re-use or other purposes provided in the franchise agreement; 
(5)  The contents of the bin shall be textile items only and shall be regularly emptied at least every fourteen (14) consecutive days, and at all times not permitted to overflow to the point where the contents are visible from the outside, and the ground area immediately adjacent to the bin (within three (3) feet of the bin on all sides) shall be kept free of donated items or other debris; the Franchisee shall be responsible for all costs related to the collection and removal of items placed in the area surrounding a Bin within 24 hours of notification by the City; 
(6)  The bin shall be kept free of signs, advertising (except as specifically permitted or required herein), graffiti and other markings and shall be maintained in a structurally sound, clean and sanitary condition; and 
(7)  All other conditions of this ordinance are satisfied and there is continuing compliance with the provisions of this LDC. 
(d)  Placement of and Restrictions for Textile Recycling Bins. The following criteria shall be applied in granting a permit and in determining if a bin is placed in conformity with this ordinance: 
(1)  The location of the bins must be reviewed and approved by the city. Such review shall evaluate the placement of the bin and ensure the location does not impair pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including emergency service vehicle movement, within the property, does not negatively affect protected trees or utility services, and does not otherwise constitute a safety hazard to pedestrians or vehicles or otherwise interfere with vehicular or pedestrian circulation. Such approval will not be unreasonably withheld. 
(2)  Bins shall not be placed within any required parking space for the property. If a bin is proposed for location in a surplus parking space, it is the responsibility of the franchisee to provide documentation, to the satisfaction of the City, that the bins are not utilizing spaces which are required parking spaces for any use on the property. 
(3)  Bins shall not be placed in landscaped areas. 
(4)  No more than one bin may be located on a property less than one acre; for properties over one acre, no more than one bin per acre up to a maximum of four bins per parcel. 
(5)  Where more than one bin is permitted on a property, up to 3 bins may be placed immediately adjacent to each other. If not placed immediately adjacent to each other, then no bin shall be placed within 300 feet of any other bin. 
(6)  Bins shall not be located within twenty-five (25) feet of any public street or right-of-way. 
(7)  Bins shall be secured or removed in such a manner as to minimize the danger of such units causing damage to persons or property from high winds or severe weather conditions. 
(8)  It shall be the responsibility of the franchisee to remove the bin in the event of any hurricane warning in effect for the city. If such action is not taken, the city reserves the right to remove the bin and to charge the franchisee for all costs incurred by the City to remove, transport and store the bins. The City shall not be obligated to remove Textile Recycling bins from any location within the City. In no event shall the city be responsible or liable for any damages as a result of securing or removing, or omitting to secure or remove the bin. 
(9)  Bins shall not be located in rights-of-way. 
(10)  Bins shall not be permitted in a single family residentially zoned district, or district that receives curb-side collection services, or within 25 feet of a single-family residentially zoned district, as described in section 401.1 of this LDC. 
(11)  Bins shall not be located on a vacant lot. 
(12)  Bins may be located on city-owned property, excluding public right-of-ways or on private property with written permission from the property owner, and/or their designee. Permission of a tenant is not sufficient; or 
(e)  Bin structure. 
(1)  The bin(s) shall be of the type that are enclosed by use of a one-way receiving door so that the contents may not be accessed by anyone other than those responsible for the retrieval of the contents. 
(2)  Bins shall be fire resistant and constructed of steel with a rust inhibitor. 
(3)  Each bin shall not cover a ground surface area in excess of six (6) feet by six (6) feet, nor be more than seven (7) feet in height. The primary color of the bin(s) shall be determined by the city. 
(4)  Electrical connections to the bins shall be prohibited. 
(5)  Bins shall not contain any advertising, logos and lettering except as approved by the City. The City reserves the right to promote and/or advertise City events and or functions as it deems in the best interest of the City. 
(6)  The following information shall be clearly and conspicuously displayed on the exterior of each bin: 
(a)  The contact information of the franchisee who owns the bin; and 
(b)  Such other information as the City directs or deems acceptable. 
(7)  Bins shall not be repaired or overhauled on the property on which the bin is located, (or any other work performed thereon which would constitute a nuisance under existing ordinances); 
(f)  Property owner responsibility. The owner of the property upon which the bin(s) are located shall share joint and several responsibility for compliance with all conditions set forth in this LDC with the entity that owns or is in custody of the bin(s). The failure of the person who owns or is in custody of the bin to comply with the provisions of this LDC shall not be a defense by the property owner should a violation be found to exist. 
The registered owner or legal entity of the bin shall report to the city any change of entity or entities that may share or profit from any clothing collected from the bin no later than thirty (30) consecutive days from any changes. Failure to provide the city with such report within the 30-day period shall result in a daily fine of $50.00. 
(g)  Exemptions: 
1.  Bins that are placed on school property with the consent of the Broward County School Board of Broward County, Florida, are exempt from the requirements of this chapter. 
2.  Any Charitable Organization that had obtained a proper permit prior to September 17, 2018, shall be permitted to continue to keep its previously approved donation bin at the location approved under the permit. 
    405.9. Developer Service Agreements. 
(a)  To the extent not prohibited by applicable law, if a provider of services enters into an agreement with a developer, or with a homeowners' association (HOA) or a condominium/cooperative association (CA) under the control of a developer, to provide services to individual units in a homeowners' association or a condominium/cooperative association consisting often (10) or more units, and the agreement expressly requires payment for services that are paid through mandatory assessments, the agreement shall include, and shall be deemed to include if not expressly set forth therein, a clause that allows the HOA or CA to terminate the agreement any time within 365 days after the developer turns over majority control of the HOA or CA board of directors to the resident members. As used herein, a "condominium" includes a cooperative, as described in chapter 719, Florida Statutes. 
(b)  An HOA and CA may terminate such agreements pursuant to the procedures specified in the declarations, articles of incorporation, bylaws or other documents governing the association's actions, or as provided by state law. 
(c)  If an HOA or CA exercises its rights herein, the association, homeowners, resident members, unit owners and occupants shall not incur discontinuation fees, penalties, or subsequent service charges pursuant to the agreement. This section does not affect the ability of an association, homeowner, resident members, or an occupant to enter into an agreement for services independent of any agreement for services entered into by a developer. 
(d)  Upon assumption of control of an HOA or CA by the resident members, the developer shall provide notice, in a form approved by the city attorney, to the representative body that becomes responsible for administration of the association of the existence of any and all agreements for services and their terms and conditions, and inform the representative body of their rights under this section. 
(e)  This section does not affect pre-existing agreements for services entered into by a developer or an HOA or CA under the control of a developer before September 21, 2005, or agreements that have been entered or may in the future be entered into by an HOA or CA under the control of the resident members. 
    405.10. Fuel Service Stations and Convenience Stores and Car Washes. 
(a)  Location criteria: 
(1)  One station is permitted per intersection area, defined as a one-quarter mile radius (measured from the street centerlines) for the following road intersections: 
TABLE 405-5 
FUEL SERVICE STATION LOCATIONS 
East-West Roads North-South Roads Countyline Road State Road 7 
University Drive Honey Hill Road Red Road 
Flamingo Road Miramar Parkway State Road 7 
University Drive 
Douglas Road 
Palm Avenue 
Red Road 
Flamingo Road 
SW 145 Avenue 
SW 160 Avenue (Dykes Road) 
SW 172 Avenue 
SW 184 Avenue Pembroke Road State Road 7 
University Drive 
Douglas Road 
Palm Avenue 
Hiatus Road 
Flamingo Road  
(2)  Minimum separation distance from a residentially-zoned property as described in section 401.1 (measured from the nearest property line to property line of the fuel service station): 200 feet. Where the pump service area is screened by the principal building, this distance may be reduced to 150 feet. 
(b)  Intensity standards: Development shall be in accordance with the following standards: 
TABLE 405-6 
FUEL SERVICE STATION INTENSITY REGULATIONS 
Minimum Gross Lot Area Permitted Development Intensity Number of Gas Pumps 1 Maximum Convenience Store Size (gross so. ft.) Number of Accessory Uses 1.0 acres-1.499 acres 8 2.500 1 1.5 acres-1.999 acres 10 3.500 2 2.0 acres and greater 12 5,000 3  
Permitted maximum number of service positions = number of pumps × 2. 
(c)  Minimum street frontage : 200 feet. 
(d)  Minimum setbacks: 
(1)  Principal building: 50 feet 
(2)  Accessory building: 50 feet 
(3)  Gas pumps canopy (required): 50 feet 
(4)  Sides and rear: 20 feet 
(e)  Hours of operation: Where the use is located 500 feet or closer to a residentially-zoned property (measured from property line to property line), the hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 am to 11:00 pm. 
(f)  Parcel access from the adjacent rights-of-way: The following provisions are intended to minimize potential traffic access and circulation conflicts and to facilitate the efficient coordination of traffic flows between the fuel service use, adjacent roads, and adjacent/nearby developments. All access drives must comply with the driveway separation standards of this LDC. 
(1)  Facility located on a shopping center outparcel : Access shall be provided in accordance with the following hierarchy of alternatives. Where the highest ranked alternative is used (i.e. main shopping center drive), it shall be the only access provided. Where the lower ranked alternative is proposed, the applicant must demonstrate why the highest ranked alternative is not feasible. 
(A)  Main shopping center drive; 
(B)  Shared access drive with adjacent outparcel; where the site is adjacent to more than one other outparcel, only one shared access shall be permitted; 
(C)  Shared internal access drives between the outparcel and other outparcels are encouraged. 
(2)  Other locations: A maximum of one full access drive (for all vehicular turning movements) is permitted. Corner properties may provide a second access drive: provided, that it is limited to right-turn only and is located on the street not containing the full access drive. 
(g)  Gasoline vent stacks: Vent stacks are to be placed either in the rear half of the fuel service station property or away from the street and enclosed within a decorative structure or painted an inconspicuous color (CAB approved). 
(h)  Maintenance stations : Automotive maintenance stations are permitted, including the following items: air hose, water hose, vacuum and charging stations. These stations shall be physically separated from other uses on the site and a minimum of one parking space provided for each station in addition to that required for any other on-site uses. 
(i)  Accessory use standards: 
(1)  Automatic car wash. 
(A)  Location : The facility shall be located either to the side or rear of the principal building. 
(B)  Function : The facility shall be fully automatic, with no employees conducting any related functions or services. 
(C)  Maximum capacity : One vehicle per wash cycle. Vehicular stacking must comply with section 808.6. 
(D)  Drainage: The facility must have a working oil/sand interceptor to which all drainage from the car wash must flow. 
(E)  Hours of operation: Same as or less than the principal use. 
(F)  Screening of vehicle opening: A wall, berm or similar opaque visual buffer shall be provided for the facility opening when it is oriented toward the street side of the lot. 
(2)  Attendant (hand) car wash. 
(A)  Location: The facility shall be located either to the side or rear of the principal building and shall be architecturally compatible with the principal building as a permanent structure. Temporary structures shall not be permitted. 
(B)  Drainage: The facility must have a working oil/sand interceptor to which all drainage from the car wash must flow. 
(C)  Hours of operation: The hours of operation shall be the same as or less than the principal use, but in no event 24 hours, or after 9:00 pm or before 7:00 am. 
(D)  Vehicle stacking and parking: 
1.  Drive-thru facility: as provided for in Section 808.6. 
2.  Non-drive-thru facility: Two (2) per service position, separated from access drives and internal drive aisles. 
(E)  Screening of service area: A wall, berm, or similar opaque visual buffer shall be provided for the service area when it is oriented toward the street side of the lot. 
(F)  Existing stations that currently have a nonconforming attendant car wash may be permitted to have one through the conditional use process of section 305. 
(3)  Food service (prepared on-site by staff per customer order from a menu) 
(A)  Function: Drive-through facilities are prohibited. 
(B)  Hours of operation: The hours of operation same as or less than the principal use. 
(C)  Number: A maximum of two (2) food service operations are permitted, which shall count as one accessory use: provided, that there is sufficient parking on-site. 
(D)  Parking: Where an outdoor seating area is provided, additional parking shall be provided for the portion of floor area used, based on the parking ratio for a restaurant use. 
(4)  Oil change/lube facility. 
(A)  Function : The use shall only be conducted within an enclosed building. 
(B)  Location : The facility shall be located either to the side or rear of the principal building. 
(C)  Screening of vehicle opening : A wall, berm, or similar opaque visual buffer shall be provided for the facility opening when it is oriented toward the street side of the lot. 
(D)  Stacking : Vehicular stacking shall be provided at the rate required by this LDC for the fuel service. 
(E)  Hours of operation: The hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 
(F)  Function: Outdoor overnight parking of vehicles is prohibited. 
(G)  Function: Automotive repair is prohibited. 
(j)  Parking requirement: for the net usable floor area of the convenience store and any food service provision: 1:250. All maintenance stations require one space per service position. 
(k)  Underground tank loading zone requirement: The loading zone may be provided over the underground tank area of the site or in front of the dumpster enclosure. 
(l)  Fuel pump station stacking requirement: The fuel pump stations, automatic or attendant car wash, and lubrication facilities shall meet the vehicular stacking requirement of section 808.6. 
(m)  Site circulation requirement: The site must meet adequate fuel truck, solid waste truck and fire-rescue emergency vehicle internal circulation. 
(n)  Security requirement: All fuel service stations must be in compliance with the Convenience Store Security Act, section 812.1701 Florida Statutes, and are subject to compliance with CPTED design principles. 
(o)  Freestanding car wash facilities permitted by-right as a principal use in B3 zones or by conditional use in B2 zones, and convenience stores, permitted by-right in B1, B2, and B3 zones, are subject to the same requirements above, as applicable, except for 405.10(a)(1). 
    405.11. Hotels, Motels, Timeshares, Bed & Breakfast, Vacation Rentals, Short Term Rentals, Live-Work, Micro-units. 
405.11.1 Hotels and Motels and Time Share units, shall be subject to the following standards: 
(a)  The minimum plot area shall be two acres, except in mixed-use districts, as defined in section 401.1, provided that a parking plan demonstrates acceptable capacity. 
(b)  Any outdoor recreation areas including swimming pools shall be located at least 25 feet from the plot line of any adjacent residentially-zoned property, as defined in section 401.1, unless the adjacent property is being utilized for business related parking. 
(c)  The following amenities shall be included: 
1.  Interior corridors or hallways leading to and from rooms except emergency exits. "Catwalk" exterior hallways shall not be permitted. 
2.  An office or lobby containing a registration desk that is staffed by at least one hotel/motel employee 24 hours a day, and that is located in an area where the path between entrances/exits and guest room corridors and public elevators is visible to the employee. 
3.  Any bar, lounge, or nightclub facility may be permitted as accessory to a restaurant, and, as a permitted accessory use, shall be exempt from the provisions of Land Development Code Section 405.4, requirement to obtain separate conditional use approval and distance requirements for sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  If a hotel were to provide at least 5,250 square feet of meeting and/or conference room space, then the following incentives shall apply: 
1.  All perimeter landscape bufferyards may be a minimum of 10' wide, regardless of the adjacent land uses and zoning districts. If the bufferyards overlap with utility and/or drainage easements, where plantings would not be permitted, then only ground cover shall be required for these easements and bufferyards. 
2.  All pedestrian landscape zones will only be required to be 10' wide, regardless of the height of the building. 
3.  The minimum setback from any property line shall be 20' or the width of any easements, provided that proper internal traffic circulation is provided. 
4.  The building may exceed the height requirement of the zoning district by one floor. 
405.11.2 Bed & Breakfast Short-Term Rentals. Vacation Rentals, shall be subject to the following rules and standards: 
(a)  bed and breakfast units must be owner-occupied; a local responsible party must be registered with the city's police department for bed and breakfast, short-term rentals, and vacation rentals, and be available on call 24 hours per day, seven days per week; 
(b)  requires a city-issued zoning certificate of use and a business tax receipt; 
(c)  units must be properly inspected to meet Florida Building Code (FBC) requirements. Fair Housing laws, and minimum construction, design, health, and maintenance standards; 
(d)  property owners and occupants must abide by any HOA or CA rules or contracts; 
(e)  units must have commercial general liability insurance coverage. Coverage shall include, as a minimum: (i) premises operations, (ii) personal injury liability, (iii) property damage, and (iv) expanded definition of property damage. The minimum limits acceptable shall be not less than $2,000,000 per occurrence for bodily injury or death of one or more persons and not less than $300,000 per occurrence for property damage in the aggregate. The use of an excess/umbrella liability policy to achieve the limits required by this paragraph will be acceptable as long as the terms and conditions of the excess/umbrella policy are no less restrictive than the underlying commercial general liability policy. No primary policy shall have a deductible of more than $25,000, and the excess/umbrella policy shall provide insurance for any loss or damage over the maximum limits of the primary policy. Insurance shall not be claims made insurance. Insurance shall be rated as A or better with a financial quality rating of at least VI or better according to Best's Rating Guide. All insurance policies shall be issued by insurance companies licensed to do business by the Florida Insurance Commissioner. Copies of the policies must be presented upon demand to the city to assure compliance with this section; 
(f)  units must have a working smoke and carbon monoxide detector; 
(g)  signs advertising the business are not permitted on or off the property; 
(h)  sufficient parking must be available on the property of the individual unit; guests or their guests may not park vehicles on neighboring properties; on clubhouse or common areas; or on the streets; 
(i)  rentals/renters/guests must be in compliance with all city parking, noise and property maintenance regulations; 
(j)  may be subject to local hotel taxes and permit fees. 
405.11.3 Live/Work units, shall be subject to the following standards: 
(a)  Live/work units may be provided in any of the mixed-use zoning districts, as defined by section 401.1, provided that the homeowner's property provides at least one CD and a maximum of two (2) parking spaces on the property of the unit available for use by customers beyond the required parking for the unit itself. 
(b)  Live/work units may be provided in any of the RM zoning districts, as defined in section 401.1, provided that the property was specifically approved by the city to include live/work units or that the homeowner has obtained homeowners' association and city approval, and provided that the homeowner's property provides at least one CD and a maximum of two (2) parking spaces on the property of the unit available for use by customers beyond the required parking for the unit itself. 
(c)  Live/work units may be provided in any of the RS zoning districts, as defined in section 401.1, on corner lots only, in non-gated communities, and provided that the property was specifically approved by the city to include live/work units or that the homeowner has obtained homeowners' association and city approval, and provided that the homeowner's property provides at least one CD and a maximum of two (2) parking spaces on the property of the unit available for use by customers beyond the required parking for the unit itself. 
(d)  Businesses permitted within live/work units include businesses that qualify as a home business, as well as those that are deemed to be professional consulting offices where no more than one CD client/customer is served at a time by appointment. Outdoor sales and storage and overnight commercial and customer vehicle parking are prohibited. 
405.11.4 Micro-Units shall be permitted in the following cases: 
(a)  where they are located in any of the mixed use districts, as defined by section 401.1; or 
(b)  when they are offered in a proposed multi-family residential project that meets the County's definition of affordable, attainable and/or workforce housing within any of the RM districts. 
(c)  micro-units are required to have the same amount of parking as normal sized units in the respective zoning districts in which they are located. 
(d)  when they are not offered as affordable, attainable and/or workforce housing as defined in subsection (b) above within any of the RM districts, micro-units may be proposed up to a maximum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the dwelling units on a subject property. 
    405.12. Libraries (Public) and Public Parks. Public libraries shall not be permitted to be located within 2,500 feet of an adult entertainment use. Public parks shall not be permitted within 1,500 feet of an adult entertainment use. All measurements of distances shall be along a straight airline route from the nearest point on the property line of the library or public park property to the nearest point on the property line of the adult entertainment use. 
    405.13. Reserved. 
    405.14 Outdoor Activities and Displays. 
405.14.1 All activities of permitted uses, including sale, display, preparation and storage, shall be conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building, with the following exceptions: 
• automobile parking lots 
• car washes 
• community gardens 
• drive-thru businesses 
• farmers' markets 
• motor vehicles sales or rental, for existing legal, nonconforming businesses, prior to 2017 
• outdoor play areas of child care centers and nursery schools 
• outdoor recreation uses, such as amphitheaters, cinemas and theaters 
• outdoor seating/dining area 
• plant nurseries, with open-air sales of plant materials grown on-site 
• recreational uses, i.e. athletic fields/courts and appurtenant outdoor seating areas (tennis, racquetball, squash and handball courts, swimming pools, and running tracks, and so forth) 
• refueling areas and recharging/maintenance stations of vehicle service stations 
• any activity which is enclosed by a decorative masonry wall at least eight feet in height, effectively screening such use from outside direct view at ground levels, with a minimum five- foot (5') wide planted area in front of the wall. Machinery, supplies, inventory, products, equipment and materials other than landscaping exceeding eight feet in height shall be completely screened by the wall and landscaping. 
405.14.2 Accessory Garden Shops. Open-air retail sales of plant materials not grown on-site, home garden supplies and related merchandise (garden shop) are permitted as an accessory use to a retail business subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The garden shop must be accessory to and operating as a part of a retail business. 
(2)  Total square footage of the garden shop shall not exceed the total square footage of floor space within the principal retail business. 
(3)  An accessory garden shop shall be enclosed by at least an eight-foot wall; the wall on the side contiguous to the main structure must be solid concrete or masonry; however, the three noncontiguous walls may be constructed with up to 50 percent of the eight-foot height in these locations consisting of decorative or ornamental fencing. Additionally, only living plant materials, and the pots in which they are planted, may be displayed in the openings in the wall. No machinery, supplies, inventory, products, equipment or other materials other than living plant materials and the pots in which they are planted, shall be visible through the openings in the wall from the property line of the development boundary. One side of the garden center shall be contiguous to the principal use to which it is accessory. 
(4)  Stocking of the garden shop shall be done internally or through a single gate at the rear of the premises. 
(5)  No more than one other gate in addition to the gate described above, at the rear of premises shall be provided to allow bulky items to be carried out for customer pickup. 
405.14.3 Overhead Doors. Overhead doors or other openings larger than eight (8) feet in width and ten (10) feet in height shall not be located on the front or immediate street side elevations of buildings, unless they are utilized in a manner to enhance the design intent of the property subject to CAB approval. If oriented toward contiguous residentially-zoned land, as defined in section 401.1, the opening shall be screened with a decorative masonry wall and landscaping in accordance with the requirements contained in this LDC. 
405.14.4 Special Provisions for Shopping Center Outparcels. Where an out parcel has been subdivided from the parent shopping center tract in accordance with the provisions of the Code, or in separate ownership from the shopping center or subject to a lease, license, or easement in favor of a person or legal entity separate from the shopping center, no more than 50 percent of the frontage of any shopping center may be obstructed by out parcel development consisting of walls, buildings or other visual obstruction except for landscaping materials and freestanding signs. 
    405.15. Pain Management Clinics, Medical Offices and Clinics, Drugstores and Pharmacies. 
(a)  Dispensing by pain management clinics, and medical offices and clinics. On-site dispensing of controlled substances that are identified in schedule II, III, or IV in ss. 893.03, 893.035 or 893.0355, Florida Statutes, by a medical office or clinic, including a pain management clinic, is prohibited, unless such facility is staffed by a dispensing practitioner authorized to dispense controlled substances pursuant to ss. 465.0276, Florida Statutes, as amended. 
(b)  Conditional use approval required for drugstores, pain management clinics and pharmacies. 
(1)  All drugstores, pain management clinics and pharmacies, as defined in section 201, where permitted by this LDC, shall require conditional use approval regardless of the underlying zoning designation. 
(2)  The applicant for a conditional use approval for a drugstore, pain management clinic or pharmacy shall provide a survey certified to the city prepared by a Florida state licensed surveyor and mapper and submitted to the department, indicating the distance in linear feet between the nearest point of the structure of the proposed pain management clinic or pharmacy, and the nearest point of the structure of any existing pain management clinic or pharmacy. The survey shall be no older than sixty (60) days as of the date that a permit application is filed with the department. 
(3)  Each drugstore, pain management clinic and pharmacy location shall be approved through the conditional use approval process separately regardless of whether the drugstore, pain management clinic or pharmacy is operated under the same business name or management as another pain management clinic or pharmacy. 
(4)  The application for a conditional use for a pain management clinic shall disclose, in detail, the owners and operators of the facility. 
(5)  In addition to the conditional use review criteria contained in section 305, the consideration of a conditional use approval for a pain management clinic may include consideration of the specific registration criteria for pain management clinics provided in ss. 458.3265 and 459.0137, Florida Statutes, as amended. 
(c)  Supplemental requirements for pain management clinics. 
(1)  Prior to issuance of a zoning certificate of use in accordance with section 321, a pain management clinic shall provide to the director proof of registration with the Florida Department of Health, as required by §§ 458.3265 and 459.0137, Florida Statutes, as amended. 
(2)  A pain management clinic approved by conditional use shall, at the time of annual renewal of its business tax receipt, update its disclosure of the owners and operators of the facility and the clinic's designated physician in accordance with s. 458.3265, Florida Statutes. The pain management clinic shall immediately report any change to these disclosures. 
(3)  A pain management clinic shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. 
(4)  Pain management clinics shall be prohibited from operating any outdoor seating areas, queues or exterior customer waiting areas. Activities shall not be conducted outside of a completely enclosed structure. 
(d)  Supplemental requirements for pharmacies, as defined in section 201. Prior to issuance of a certificate of use in accordance with section 321, a pharmacy shall provide to the director proof of registration with the Florida Department of Health, as required by ss. 458.3265 and 459.0137, Florida Statutes, as amended. 
(e)  Location restrictions : Drugstores, pain management clinics and pharmacies, as defined in section 201, shall also be subject to the following additional location restrictions: 
TABLE 405-8 
MINIMUM DISTANCE SEPARATION (FEET) 
Existing Use Pain Management Clinic Pharmacy Drugstore Pain Management Clinic 1,000 1,000 1,000 Pharmacy 1,000 1,000 1,000 Drugstore 1,000 1,000 1,000 Child Care Centers, Nursery Schools, Pre-schools, Pre-Kindergartens 1,000 - - Places of worship 1,000 - - Kindergartens, Public or Private Elementary/Middle/High Schools, and Public Libraries 1,000 - -  
The distances provided herein shall be measured from the nearest point of the property line of the structure of one facility to the nearest point of the structure of the other facility using a straight line. The foregoing location restrictions shall not apply to pharmacies or pain management clinics for which an application for a business tax receipt has been submitted prior to September 21, 2011, the effective date of Ordinance No. 11-10. 
(f)  State and federal law. All medical offices or clinics, pain management clinics and pharmacies shall be subject to all applicable requirements of state and federal law. 
    405.16. Pawnshops. 
(a)  Pawnshops shall only be permitted by conditional use approval in the B3 district and may not operate within 1,500 feet of another pawnshop. This measurement shall include pawnshops operating within and outside of the city's municipal boundaries and shall be measured by a straight airline measurement from the closest point of the lots upon which the structures are located. 
(b)  No pawnshop shall be permitted to be located within 2,000 feet of an adult entertainment use. All measurements of distances shall be along a straight airline route from the nearest point on the property line of the pawnshop property to the nearest point on the property line of the adult entertainment use. 
    405.17 Penny arcades. Penny arcade facility shall not be permitted to be located within 2,000 feet of an adult entertainment use. All measurements of distances shall be along a straight airline route from the nearest point on the property line of the penny arcade facility property to the nearest point on the property line of the adult entertainment use. 
    405.18. Requirements for Places of Public Assembly/Places of Worship/Religious Institutions. 
TABLE 405-9 
REQUIREMENTS FOR PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY 
Square Footage Lot Acreage Number permitted* Parking to exclude incidental, accessory uses Freestanding N/A 2 minimum ¦ One per commercial or community facility property ¦ Meeting rooms and educational classrooms: child-care centers: elementary/middle/senior high schools: offices: indoor or outdoor recreational and entertainment facilities 
¦ Incidental to the public assembly use 
¦ Not used for commercial purposes 
¦ Of a size appropriate to the scale of the public assembly use; 
¦ Not larger than the public assembly use Attached 5,000 maximum N/A ¦ One per commercial or community facility property Same as above Within TOC N/A 10 ¦ One per MH, ML, SD, or Same as above Land Use maximum CF-zoned property *One place of public assembly shall be permitted per commercial property (i.e., shopping center). Up to one additional place of public assembly may be permitted in a commercial center that is at least 100,000 square feet in size, if the director and city engineer review the applicant's traffic and parking study, and finds that the center has adequate parking and the access points and traffic flow will be sufficient to accommodate the additional place of public assembly.  
    405.19. Place of worship. 
(a)  Places of worship shall not be permitted to be located within 1,500 feet of an adult entertainment use. All measurements of distances shall be along a straight airline route from the nearest point on the property line of the place of worship property to the nearest point on the property line of the adult entertainment use. 
(b)  Places of worship shall be located within 1,000 feet of any pain management clinic. Distances shall be measured using a straight an airline measurement from the property line of the property on which the place of worship is located to the nearest property line of the pain management clinic. 
    405.20. Pool or Billiard Hall. Pool or billiard halls shall not be permitted to be located within 1,500 feet of an adult entertainment use. All measurements of distances shall be along a straight airline route from the nearest point on the property line of the pool or billiard hall property to the nearest point on the property line of the adult entertainment use. 
    405.21. Portable Storage Units. 
405.21.1. Location. 
(a)  Portable storage units may be located in single-family residential zoning districts, as defined in section 401.1. Portable storage units in single-family districts shall be placed in the driveway, be set back a minimum of three (3) feet from the front property line and may not block any sidewalk. 
(b)  Portable storage units may be allowed in multi-family districts only upon the applicant demonstrating, to the satisfaction of city staff, that the specific location/complex has sufficient space to place a portable storage unit and continue to provide adequate parking, public safety access and comply with all health, safety and welfare concerns. 
(c)  Portable storage units are expressly prohibited in all other zoning districts, except those districts which specifically permit outdoor storage use. 
405.21.2. Number, Duration, and Removal. 
(a)  There shall not be more than one portable storage unit on site. The portable storage unit shall be no larger than 130 square feet in area and no higher than eight (8) feet from grade. A site permit, as required in this section below, for a portable storage unit to remain at a site shall be valid for a maximum of fourteen (14) consecutive days. If, during the 14-day period, the portable storage unit is removed, it may be replaced by a different portable storage unit so long as there is never more than one on the property at any time and the total time such units are on the property does not exceed fourteen (14) days. All sites are limited to a maximum of three site permits within a calendar year with a minimum of thirty (30) consecutive days between permits. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the time limitations set forth herein, all portable storage units shall be removed immediately upon the issuance of a hurricane watch by a government agency. The removal of a portable storage unit during such hurricane watch is the responsibility of the owner/operator of the portable storage unit. 
405.21.3. Permits. 
(a)  Prior to commencing business in the city, the portable storage company must obtain an annual permit outlining the obligations and requirements for conducting business in the city. The fee for such permit shall be set and amended by resolution of the city commission. 
(b)  Prior to placing a portable storage unit on site, the owner/operator of the portable storage unit must apply for a site permit. Application for the site permit shall be made to the city on a form provided by the city. The application shall include the signature of the site property owner in order to ensure that the site owner has full knowledge of, and consents to the placement of the portable storage unit on site and the provisions of this section. A site permittee shall accompany the completed application, payable by the portable storage company. 
(c)  Portable storage unit permits will not be granted to any portable storage unit company, or customer of any portable storage unit company, which is found to be in violation of the regulations of this section, until such violation is brought into compliance. 
405.21.4. Standards. 
(a)  The exterior of the portable storage unit shall have a weather-proof clear pouch which must display the site permit at all times. A portable storage unit shall have no signage other than the name, email address, and telephone number of the person or firm engaged in the business of renting or otherwise placing the portable storage unit. The sign must be permanently adhered to or painted on the portable storage unit. 
(b)  The owner of the portable storage unit shall be responsible to ensure that the portable storage unit is in good condition, free from evidence of deterioration, weathering, discoloration, rust, ripping, tearing or other holes or breaks. When not in use, the portable storage unit shall be kept locked. The owner and operator of any site on which a portable storage unit is placed shall also be responsible that no hazardous substances are stored or kept within the portable storage units. 
405.21.5. Violation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit the placement of a portable storage unit on property which he or she owns, rents, occupies or controls without first obtaining a site permit and approval from the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any owner/operator of a portable storage unit to place, or permit the placement of, a portable storage unit on a site within the city without first obtaining a site permit and approval from the city. 
(c)  Persons who place, or permit the placement of, a portable storage unit without first obtaining a site permit shall be provided a grace period of one business day from delivery to remove the portable storage unit or obtain a site permit. Should the person not obtain a permit or not remove the portable storage unit at the termination of the grace period, the person shall be considered in violation of the code. After the issuance of a summons to appear, the violator will be subject to the penalties as provided in chapter 2 of the city code of ordinances. Each day that any such portable storage unit remains at a site in violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate violation against the portable storage company, and against any person who owns, rents, occupies, or otherwise controls the site. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a portable storage unit to remain at a site in excess of the time periods permitted under this section. Each day that any such portable storage unit remains at a site in violation of the provisions of this section, shall constitute as a violation against the portable storage company, and against any person who owns 
    405.22. Propane Gas Storage Tanks. Except as provided below, all propane gas storage tanks, other than propane gas storage tanks owned by the city, shall be required to obtain conditional use approval pursuant to section 305, prior to issuance of a building permit. This subsection shall apply to propane gas storage tanks which are installed on a lot or parcel for the purpose of serving users, including domestic household users, which users are located off of the lot or parcel upon which such propane gas storage tank is located. This provision does not apply to propane gas storage tanks which are maintained upon residential lots or parcels for customary accessory use by homeowners, including use for barbecue grills and swimming pool or spa heating purposes and similar accessory uses. This provision does not apply within the Utilities zoning district provided by section 403. 
    405.23 Residential Communities. 
405.23.1 Minimum Useable Open Space and Locational Criteria. 
(a)  Developments in RS6 and RS7 districts of five (5) acres or more in size shall provide a play area lot with play equipment designed for children. At least fifty percent (50%) of said play lot and at least three (3) units of said play equipment shall be designed for children ages two (2) through six (6). The balance shall include improved land and facility improvements to include basketball courts, tennis courts, open play fields and the like as determined by the DRC. The play lot shall have at least thirty (30) square feet of area for each dwelling unit with two (2) or more bedrooms. The minimum size for any play lot shall be 1,500 square feet. The play lot shall be located in an area convenient to the majority of units within the development, as determined by the director. All or a portion of usable open space may be used to provide the play lot; however, the requirements for a play lot will not be applied to developments restricted by deed which in the opinion of the city attorney creates said restrictions to adults. 
(b)  Within RM districts, as defined by section 401.1, plots of one (1) acre or more in these districts shall contain a minimum useable open space of six percent of the plot area. Developments of five (5) acres or more in size shall provide a play area lot with play equipment designed for children. At least fifty percent (50%) of said play lot and at least three (3) units of said play equipment shall be designed for children ages two (2) through six (6). The balance shall include improved land and facility improvements to include basketball courts, tennis courts, open play fields and the like as determined by the DRC. For multifamily developments, the play lot shall have at least thirty (30) square feet of area for each dwelling unit with two (2) or more bedrooms; for single-family detached developments, the play lot shall have at least 500 square feet of area for each dwelling unit with two (2) or more bedrooms. The minimum size for any play lot shall be 1,500 square feet. The play lot shall be located in an area not directly adjoining or across a water body from any single-family zoned lot unless it is impractical, as determined by the director. All or a portion of usable open space may be used to provide the play lot; however, the requirements for a play lot will not be applied to multi-family residential developments restricted by deed which in the opinion of the city attorney creates said restriction to adults. 
(c)  Land utilized for this play area shall be an acceptable dimension, topography and general character to support the appropriate fall zone required by and the playground equipment conforming to the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission standards. 
405.23.2 Accessibility. All multi-family development projects within the RM zoning district shall provide a walkway system that links buildings and parking areas to onsite amenities. 
405.23.3 Home-Based and Common Area-Based Assembly Uses. 
(a)  These standards shall apply to any proposed or existing home-based or common-area based assembly use located in the following residential zoning districts: rural district (RL, estate residential districts (E and RS1), single-family residential districts (RS2, RS3, RS4, RS5, RS6, RS7 and RS8), multi-family residential districts (RM1, RM2, RM3 and RM4) and Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND). 
(b)  Home-based and common-area based assemblies are permitted, whether for social, religious, or other reasons, as an incidental accessory use to the principal residential use. 
(c)  Frequency of home-based and common-area based assembly uses. Assemblies that occur four (4) or more times per month for two (2) consecutive months will be deemed to be beyond the scope of the accessory use and shall not be permitted. 
(d)  Parking standard: 
(1)  Home-based assembly uses. A home-based assembly use which results in an additional eleven (11) vehicles being parked near the dwelling unit at each assembly will be deemed to be beyond the scope of the accessory use and shall not be permitted. Vehicles parked legally on the site of the home-based assembly shall not be counted toward the eleven (11) vehicles. 
(2)  Common-area based assembly use. A common area-based assembly use which results in an additional six (6) vehicles being parked near the common-area based assembly use will be deemed to be beyond the scope of the accessory use and shall not be permitted. Additionally, the parking demand created by such assemblies shall not exceed the supply of parking spaces provided within the shared guest or visitor parking areas allocated to common-area functions. 
405.23.4 Locational standards. 
(a)  Residentially-zoned property must be located at least thirty (30) feet from a pre-existing child care center. 
(b)  Residentially-zoned property must be located at least 200 feet from a pre-existing fuel service station. 
(c)  All measurements of distances shall be along a straight airline route from the nearest point on the property line of the residentially-zoned property to the nearest point on the property line of the use from which the residentially-zoned property is to be separated. 
(d)  As used in this section, the term "residentially-zoned property" refers to property residential zoned as set forth in section 401.1. 
    405.24. Schools: Development Standards for Kindergarten through Twelfth (12th) Grades. The following supplemental development standards shall apply to kindergarten through twelfth (12th) grade schools. Such schools, whether public or private, are only permitted as a conditional use in community facilities (CF) and single-family (RS2-8) and multi-family (RM1-4) residential districts. The conditional use, site plan, and CAB applications (and any other applications that may be necessary, e.g. plat, rezoning, variance) shall be processed through the city's cost recovery procedures in accordance with Ordinance 00-46, as amended. 
(a)  Fencing. Decorative fencing, subject to CAB approval, and not to exceed six (6) feet in height, shall be provided around the perimeter of the school site, around any exposed mechanical or electrical equipment, and surrounding exterior child care and kindergarten play areas. Prohibited fencing materials include chain link, razor wire, barbed wire, and electrically charged systems. 
(b)  Paving, Marking and Accessibility. All internal walks, roads, driveways, and parking areas shall be paved, and shall be marked and striped in accordance with the code. Parking areas shall comply with the Americans With Disabilities Act. 23 U.S.C. s. 12101 et. seq. Chapter 11 of the Florida Building Code, and s. 316.1955, Florida Statutes. Accessible walkways shall be provided, and shall connect building entrance(s) to accessible parking areas, public streets, sidewalks, loading and drop-off zones, playgrounds and other facilities within the school site. 
(c)  Covered Walkways. All buildings shall be connected by paved walks and accessible under continuous roof cover. The design of the roof cover shall be compatible with the architecture of the buildings, and shall comply with the city's architectural design standards. 
(d)  A master sign plan indicating the location and dimensions of all signs (i.e. directional, identification, traffic-related signs) shall be submitted as part of the application for site plan and CAB approval. 
(e)  Drainage. Soil, grass and planting beds shall provide positive drainage away from sidewalks and internal walkways. The location of all drainage elements and curb cuts shall be separated from the main flow of pedestrian traffic. All paved areas shall have positive drainage. 
(f)  Site Access. Site access shall consist of a primary access road and a secondary means of access to be used at a minimum in the event that the primary road is blocked. The following requirements shall apply to site access design: 
(1)  Driveways shall not completely encircle a school building, in order to allow student access to recreational areas without crossing vehicle traffic. Vehicular and pedestrian traffic shall not cross each other within the site, unless approved safety devices are provided where vehicular and pedestrian traffic cross. Driveways should be designed so that bus driveways and parent vehicle pick-up areas are separated. 
(2)  Decorative bollards, subject to CAB approval, shall be used for the protection of pedestrians and structures from vehicles. Illuminated decorative bollards may be used for pedestrian walkways, provided that minimum levels of illumination are met. 
(g)  Bus Driveways. Bus driveways shall be designed to ensure that buses are not required to back up. The minimum width of any internal drive which accommodates buses shall be twenty-four (24) feet. 
(h)  Lighting. 
(1)  Exterior security lighting shall be provided for the following areas of the school site, to ensure safety when the facility is occupied after dark: vehicle, bus and service drives; loading areas; parking areas; building perimeters; and covered and connector walks between buildings and parking areas. 
(2)  Parking areas, covered and connector walks, and parking area entrances/exits shall be illuminated to the minimum number of average maintained horizontal foot-candles, measured at the surface with a uniformity ratio of 2:1 as follows: 
(A)  Parking areas: 1 foot-candle 
(B)  Covered and connector walks: 1 foot-candle 
(C)  Parking area entrances/exits: 2 foot-candles 
(3)  Building exteriors, perimeters, and entrances shall be illuminated to the minimum number of average maintained horizontal foot-candles, measured at the surface with a uniformity ratio of 2:1, as follows: 
(A)  Building entrances: 5 foot-candles 
(B)  Building perimeters: 1 foot-candle. 
Exterior lighting shall be shielded from adjacent properties zoned or used for residential use. Fixture designs and light poles shall be subject to CAB approval. 
(i)  Setbacks. Building setbacks from the property line shall, at a minimum, be twenty-five (25) feet. When a school site abuts a property zoned for residential use, the minimum building setback from the property line adjacent to the residentially-zoned parcel shall be seventy-five (75) feet. 
(j)  Recreational and Play Areas. Playgrounds, play equipment and athletic fields shall be accessible, compatible with the educational facility served, and shall comply with the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Kindergarten play areas shall be separated from other play areas, fenced in accordance with subsection (a), and shall be directly accessed from the kindergarten classrooms. 
(2)  Direct access from the related school buildings shall be provided to play areas and athletic fields without crossing vehicular traffic on public roads, on-site driveways or traffic lanes or parking areas. 
(k)  Locational Standards. 
(1)  Buildings, recreational areas, playgrounds and other areas used by students shall not be located within a high-voltage power transmission line right-of-way. 
(2)  Public or private nursery schools or schools containing any of the following grades: kindergarten through 12 th grade, shall not be permitted to be located within 2,500 feet of an adult entertainment use. All measurements of distances shall be along a straight airline route from the nearest point on the property line of the school property to the nearest point on the property line of the adult entertainment use. 
(3)  Public or private schools containing any of the following grades: kindergarten through 12 th grade, shall not be permitted to be located within 1,500 feet by straight airline measurement from any established facility selling alcoholic beverages for consumption on or off premises. The distance shall be measured from the main entrance point of the alcoholic beverage vendor's establishment to the nearest property line point of the public or private school containing any of the following grades: kindergarten through 12 th grade, used as a part of the school facility, except as provided in chapter 563, Florida Statutes, as may be amended from time to time. 
(4)  Public or private schools containing any of the following grades: kindergarten through 12 th grade shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any pain management clinic. Distances shall be measured using a straight an airline measurement from the property line of the property on which the school is located to the nearest property line of the pain management clinic. 
(l)  Traffic Review Required. In addition to the application requirements for conditional use review provided in Section 305 of the LDC, the applicant shall submit a traffic study for the proposed school which shall include, at a minimum: an analysis of school traffic on the surrounding neighborhood during the AM and PM peak hours; site ingress and egress; school bus drop-off and pick-up locations; parent drop-off and pick-up locations and timing; the need for traffic control devices and school zones. The scope and methodology of the required traffic study shall be pre-approved by the director. 
    405.25 Self-Storage/Warehouse/Industrial Uses/Research and Development. 
405.25.1 Self-Storage. Self-storage facilities and warehouses shall not be permitted to contain businesses which require a business tax receipt for the premises. 
405.25.2 Educational, scientific, industrial and manufacturing research and development. Automobile equipment, Artificial intelligence, Bio-chemical, Chemical, Coils, Communications, Computer software development, Data processing, Film and photography, Graphics, Medical or dental technology, Metallurgy, Metering instruments, Navigation, Optical devices, Pharmaceutical, Semi-conductors, Testing equipment and laboratory, Tubes, X-ray. 
405.25.3 Warehousing and Industrial Uses. Permitted Light industrial and Medium industrial uses shall include the manufacture, fabricating, processing, converting, warehousing, distribution, wholesaling, altering and assembling of products, repairing, packaging or treatment of goods listed in Table 405-9. 
405.25.3.1 Limitations of uses and structures. All permitted uses in this district shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building except as follows: 
(a)  Overhead doors or other openings larger than eight feet in width shall not be located on the immediate street side elevations of buildings. However, on corner and double frontage lots said doors shall be permitted behind a six-foot decorative masonry wall with doors fronting properties of like zoning. If oriented toward contiguous residentially zoned land said opening shall be screened in accordance with the requirements contained in this LDC. 
(b)  Building facades facing roadways shall be designed to appear to be the fronts of buildings. This provision shall apply to corner and double frontage lots. 
(c)  No building or roofed structure shall be located less than 150 feet from any residentially-zoned property. 
(d)  No more than one-half of the depth of any required setback area measured from a street line or a plot line may be used for parking and such parking shall be located on the half of the required setback furthest from the street or front plot line. The balance of the minimum required setback area shall be landscaped. 
(e)  Should more than one building or structure be erected on the same lot, there shall be a minimum separation of 30 feet between them. 
(f)  No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be erected or used, in whole or in part, in any manner that is obnoxious, objectionable, a nuisance or a hazard to adjoining properties, as it relates to sound, vibrations, odors, glare, radioactive materials, smoke and particular matters. 
(g)  All necessary exterior lighting on the plot shall be installed as not to cause any nuisance to adjacent properties. 
(h)  There shall be no open outside storage of materials, supplies, products, equipment or machinery, except automotive vehicles, unless area used for such outside storage is effectively screened from the direct view at ground level from any street or from adjacent property. Said screening shall form a complete opaque screen up to eight feet in vertical height. Said screening may include fencing up to a height of eight feet, provided that said fence is surrounded by trees and/or hedges of a height not less than three feet at time of planting and maintained at the height of the fence. Outdoor storage shall be meant to include parking of all company owned and operated vehicles with the exception of passenger vehicles. No storage shall be permitted between a frontage street and the building line unless behind an eight-foot decorative masonry wall. 
(i)  Fuel storage tanks may be above ground for emergency generators if fully screened by a masonry or concrete wall, finished in a manner consistent with the structure and landscaped with a continuous hedge and tree on each elevation of the wall. All other fuel tanks, regardless of type will be located underground. There will be no bulk storage of any fuels permitted other than fuels stored for the purpose of servicing vehicles used in the regular course of business and for backup generator day tanks. 
(j)  All improved land shall be well graded and free from underbrush and objectionable plant growth. All unimproved land shall be kept free of debris and shall not be used for storage of any materials. The road right-of-way landscaped areas shall be mowed at least every two weeks by the adjoining property owner. 
(k)  All property shall be kept free from rubbish or debris. All buildings shall be kept painted and protected from deterioration and shall not be permitted to become dilapidated. 
(l)  All driveways, walkways, parking areas, storage and loading areas of developed property shall be well graded and surfaced with at least asphaltic concrete or other equivalent hard, dustless materials. 
(m)  The nature of any light or medium industrial use shall not be dangerous to the comfort, peace, enjoyment, health or safety of the community or the abutting areas or create a disturbance or annoyance. 
(n)  Open air storage in bulk of asphalt, brick, building materials, butane, cement, clay products, concrete products, contractors equipment. fuel, gravel, hay, grease, lime, plaster, pipe, lumber, machinery, roofing, sand, stone, tar or creosoted products, timber or wood is prohibited. 
405.25.3.2 Trip generation standards. The applicable trip generation for standards for uses and buildings which are a combination of office and industrial and other office uses identified below shall be determined as follows: 
(a)  Any combination of office and industrial use shall be treated as industrial use so long as: 
• The office use is accessory to permitted light industrial use as defined in Section Table 405-9. Such accessory use shall be considered industrial use for the purposes of trip generation calculation and shall not be included in calculating the 25 percent limitation below. 
• The office use is not accessory to permitted light industrial use, but, when aggregated with other such uses does not exceed 25 percent of the total gross square footage of building area permitted within the overall PID. 
(b)  Office uses which are not accessory to permitted light industrial use and which in the aggregate exceed 25 percent of the total gross square footage of building area permitted within the overall PID, shall be assessed at the office rate for the area exceeding the 25 percent. However, within a previously approved development of regional impact, only office uses which exceed 35 percent of the total square footage of building area permitted within the overall PID shall be assessed at the office rate for the area exceeding the 35 percent. 
(c)  Multi-story office buildings, including banks and those uses of a medical and professional nature shall be assessed at the office rate. Such office uses are independent of any industrial use and would not be included in the 25 percent limit. 
TABLE 405-10 
INDUSTRIAL USES 
PERMITTED PROHIBITED Light Manufacturing Medium Manufacturing Heavy Manufacturing Artificial flowers, feathers, or plumes Aircraft components Foundry Bags Automobile parts Drop forging Buttons or novelties Bottled gas storage, filling and distribution Paint or varnish manufacture Bakery Cabinet or carpentry Oil compounding or barreling Brooms and brushes Ceramic products Die casting Candles Clocks and watches Meat processing, slaughtering Candy Clothing Fish smoking, curing and canning Canvas products Crating, packing, distribution, shipping, and bottling, including warehouse and storage Bus storage or repair facilities Ceramic products, electrically fired Electrical appliances Asphalt, brick, tile, glues, cement, lime plaster, concrete or products thereof, acids, carbon, plastics, disinfectants, poison, insecticides and batteries Cigars, cigarettes or snuff Food products, except fish and meat products or similar substances commonly recognized as creating offensive conditions in the handling thereof Institution for the housing of sick, indigent, aged or minor persons Clothing and hats Heating equipment Explosives Cosmetics and toiletries, except soap Machinery and machine tools Automobile/truck sales or salvage yard Cutting or blending of liquor Musical instruments Pulp or paper mills Cheese making Novelties Carpenter and cabinet shop Optical devices Dairy products Pharmaceuticals Electrical fixtures and Electronic devices Plastics Electroplating Plumbing and sheet metal shops Egg storage, candling or processing Publishing and bookbinding Food products, chewing gum, syrups, fruit juices, extracts, drugs or medicines Silk screens Hardware and cutlery Sporting goods Hydroponic garden Toys Ice cream Moving, storage and van lines Jewelry Construction and building materials Leather goods and luggage Freight consolidators Optical equipment Television, radio and phonograph Orthopedic and medical appliances Transformer and electrical switching station Musical instruments Pharmaceutical products Pattern making Hatchery, fish or fowl Paper products and cardboard products Perfume Plastic products, except pyroxylin Plumbing Pottery, electrically fired Powder blends, potting compounds and plastisols Printing, publishing, lithography and engraving Shoes Silverware Spices and spice packing Stationary Stamping, dying, shearing or punching of metal not over eight-inch in thickness Tool, die and gauge shop Water-based and/or epoxy-based coatings, adhesives, sealants and paints  
    405.26 Shopping Carts. Grocery stores, department stores, pharmacies and drugstores and other commercial establishments that provide shopping carts to their customers must provide an outdoor cart corral, constructed with a painted finish subject to CAB approval, in the parking lot for every 50 parking spaces. 
    Such stores located within mixed-use districts, as defined by section 401.1 may provide some or all of the exterior shopping cart storage behind a decorative wall adjacent to the building, in lieu of or supplemental to, the corrals provided in the parking lot. 
    405.27 Swimming Pool Supply Stores. Retail sales of swimming pool supplies shall be subject to the following conditions and limitations: 
(1)  All swimming pool supplies, including pre-packaged chemicals, except bulk quantities of sodium hypochlorite, shall be dispensed strictly through retail sales and shall be stored and sold within a completely enclosed structure. 
(2)  Bulk quantities shall mean any quantity stored in any container, which Quantity is to be removed for repackaging. Bulk storage shall mean any storage of any material, which material is to be removed for repackaging. 
(3)  Wholesale or bulk-non-packaged storage or sale of calcium hypochlorite or muriatic acid shall not be permitted. Muriatic acid shall be sold only if pre-packaged. 
(4)  The sale and storage of all swimming pool related chemicals and other such supplies shall be regulated by the standards set forth in the Florida Building Code, the Florida Fire Prevention Code, the provisions of the National Fire Protection Association relating to storage of liquid and solid oxidizing materials and storage of gaseous oxidizing materials, and applicable regulations established by Broward County, as such standards may be amended from time to time. 
    405.28 Utility Substations. All non-municipal utility facilities shall be required to obtain conditional use approval prior to a building permit being issued. Such facilities shall be substantially buffered by an opaque vegetative perimeter landscape buffer of at least eight (8) feet in height. 
    405.29 Veterinary and Animal Hospitals/Dog Grooming/Pet Daycare/Hotel. Veterinary and animal hospitals, subject to the following conditions and limitations: 
(1)  All facilities shall be contained within completely enclosed structures without windows in any area where animals are contained or treated. 
(2)  Adequate soundproofing in any area where animals are contained or treated, such that animal noises, such as for example barking, cannot be heard outside of the facility. 
(3)  Exterior cages shall not be permitted. 
(4)  Animals may not be exercised outdoors before 7:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. 
(5)  Shall contain an approved air-handling system for disinfection and odor control. 
(6)  Shall contain adequate waste control facilities, such as a flush system or equal. 
(7)  Shall contain no crematory facilities. 
(8)  Such facility shall contain a minimum of 1,500 square feet. 
(9)  All boarding activities shall be ancillary to the primary use. 
    405.30. Wetland Mitigation Banks. Wetland mitigation banks shall be a permitted use in land designated conservation on the land use plan and shall require conditional use approval in land designated rural on the land use plan. On-site mitigation for a development project is a permitted use. 
    405.31 Workshops/Contractor shops Near Residentially-Zoned Properties. The following specific uses shall be permitted only when the entire site so utilized is not closer than 300 feet from any residentially-zoned district, as defined in section 401.1: 
(1)  CD Cabinet and carpenter shop 
(2)  Heating and air conditioning contractor shop 
(3)  Sign shop 
(4)  Tinsmith shop 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 4(Exh. C), 11-27-17; Ord. No. 18-05, § 3, 11-27-17; Ord. No. 18-07, §§ 17, 18, 3-7-18; Ord. No. 18-14 , § 2(Exh. A), 9-17-18) 
Section 406. - Nonconforming uses and structures. 
    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate and limit the development and continued existence of uses, structures, and lawful lots established prior to the effective date of this LDC which do not conform to the requirements of this LDC. Many non-conformities may continue, but the provisions of this chapter are designed to curtail substantial investment in nonconformities and to bring about their eventual improvement or elimination in order to preserve the integrity of this LDC and the character of the city. Any nonconforming use, structure, or lot which lawfully existed as of the effective date of this LDC and which remains nonconforming, and any use, structure, or lot which has become nonconforming as a result of the adoption of this LDC or any subsequent amendment to this LDC may be continued or maintained only in accordance with the terms of this chapter. Where a licensed business establishment is located in conformity with the provisions of their distance separations requirement, the subsequent locating of a place of worship, school or child care center within these distance zones shall be prohibited. 
    406.1. Expansion of Nonconforming Use. A nonconforming use shall not be expanded or extended beyond the floor area or lot area that it occupied on the effective date of this LDC or the effective date of any amendment to this LDC rendering such use nonconforming. 
    406.2. Discontinuation of a Nonconforming Use. If a nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of ninety (90) consecutive days, including any period of discontinuation before the effective date of this LDC, then that use shall not be renewed or re-established and any subsequent use of the lot or structure shall conform to the use regulations of the land use district in which it is located. 
    406.3. Change of Use. A nonconforming use may be changed to a permitted use or conditional use for the zoning district in which the property is located subject to the review and approval requirements of the appropriate zoning district and conditional uses regulations contained in this LDC. 
    406.4. Repair or Reconstruction of Nonconforming Structure. 
406.4.1. Ordinary repairs and maintenance may be made to a nonconforming structure. The director shall determine what constitutes "ordinary repairs and maintenance." 
406.4.2. If a nonconforming structure is destroyed or damaged by a fire, flood, windstorm, or similar abnormal and identifiable event, and the cost of restoring the structure to its condition immediately prior to the event does not exceed fifty (50%) percent of the cost of replacing the entire structure, then the structure may be restored to its original nonconforming condition; provided, that a building permit is secured and reconstruction is started within 180 days from the date of the damage, and such reconstruction is diligently prosecuted to completion without the expiration of building permits. 
406.4.3. If a nonconforming structure is destroyed or damaged by a fire, flood, windstorm, or similar abnormal and identifiable event, and the cost of restoring the structure to its condition immediately prior to the event exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the cost of replacing the entire structure, then the structure shall not be restored unless the structure as restored, and the use thereof, will thereafter conform to all requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. 
    406.5. Alteration or Enlargement of Nonconforming Structure. Except as provided in this section, a nonconforming structure shall not be enlarged in any manner or undergo any structural alteration unless to make it a conforming structure. Such alteration or enlargement may be permitted; provided, that: 
(1)  The property owner or developer secures conditional use approval for the enlargement or addition in accordance with the procedures in section 305; or the structure is an existing legal nonconforming detached single-family or duplex home and the alteration or enlargement will meet the requirements of paragraphs (2) through (4) below; and 
(2)  In the case of a nonconforming setback, the enlargement or alteration follows the established line of the home and does not increase the extent of the existing non-conformity; no new nonconforming condition is created; or the enlargement or alteration itself conforms to the requirements of this LDC; 
(3)  The total structure as enlarged or altered does not exceed the maximum density or intensity limit for the applicable district; and 
(4)  The use of the structure is conforming. 
    406.6. Moving of Nonconforming Structure. A nonconforming structure shall not be moved in whole or in part to any other location, unless every portion of such structure and the use thereof is made to conform with all requirements for the district to which such structure is moved. The moving of the structure also shall comply with the requirements of applicable city regulations. 
    406.7. Nonconforming Lots of Record. 
406.7.1. Use as permitted. Notwithstanding limitations imposed by other sections of this LDC, any nonconforming lot of record which was and continues to be in single and separate ownership on the date of adoption of this. LDC may be used as permitted by the district regulations for the district in which the lot is located. This section shall apply even though such lot of record fails to meet the requirements for width or area or both that are generally applicable to it; provided, that all yards and other requirements not involving lot width or area shall conform to the regulations for the district in which the lot is located. 
406.7.2. Subdivision of nonconforming lots. When two or more contiguous, vacant, nonconforming lots of record are in a single ownership, such lots shall be subdivided in such manner as will make them conforming. If this is impossible or impractical, the city commission may grant such variance from this requirement in conformance with the requirements of this LDC. 
Properties that were previously considered to be conforming lots of record that have subsequently been granted permission to become subdivided by the Broward County property appraiser's office but prior to and without formal approval by the city, may not necessarily be granted variances. 
    406.8. TOC Land Use (Pre-Existing Conditions) 
406.8.1. The provisions of this section of the LDC shall apply, except as expressly stated in this section. Unless otherwise permitted as an exception or allowed to continue as a nonconforming use, all existing, proposed and new development and uses of land in the TOC land use designation shall conform strictly to the provisions of this LDC. 
406.8.2. All non-conforming commercial properties existing as of November 1, 2017, [the effective date of this provision in Ordinance No. 18-01 within the TOC at the time a building permit is issued for substantial improvement must be improved, to the extent reasonably practical, to minimize site and building non-conformities in accordance with the compliance plan procedures provided for in section 312. 
406.8.4. The issuance of any permit, certificate or approval in accordance with the standards and requirements of this section 406.8 shall not relieve the recipient from complying with all other applicable requirements of any city, county, state or federal agency having jurisdiction over the structures or land functions for which the permit, certificate or approval was issued. 
406.8.5. Where buildings exist on adjacent lots within a TOC, the director may require that a proposed building match one or the other of the adjacent setbacks and heights, to the extent reasonably practical, rather than those provided for the property under the specific provisions of this LDC. 
406.8.6. Existing Parking Areas that provide parking in excess of the requirements of this LDC may be reduced in accordance with sections 715.3.1 and/or 808. 
(Ord. No. 18-01, § 4(Exh. C), 11-1-17) 
Chapter 7 - USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 701. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-01, § 5(Exh. D), adopted November 1, 2017, repealed § 701. Former § 701 pertained to zoning districts. 
Sec. 702. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-07, § 10, adopted November 14, 2016, repealed § 702. Former § 702 pertained to the master zoning plan and derived from Ord. No. 16-04, adopted Jan. 27, 2016. 
Sec. 703. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-01, § 5(Exh. D), adopted November 1, 2017, repealed § 703. Former § 703 pertained to conservation zoning districts. 
Sec. 704. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-01, § 5(Exh. D), adopted November 1, 2017, repealed § 704. Former § 704 pertained to residential zoning districts and derived from Ord. No. 01-29, adopted April 18, 2001; Ord. No. 07-07, adopted November 29, 2006; and Ord. No. 12-07, adopted November 30, 2011. 
Sec. 705. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-01, § 5(Exh. D), adopted November 1, 2017, repealed § 705. Former § 705 pertained to commercial zoning districts and derived from Ord. No. 01-03, adopted November 15, 2000; Ord. No. 03-20, adopted September 17, 2003; Ord. No. 04-03, adopted November 19, 2003; Ord. No. 05-02, adopted October 20, 2004; Ord. No. 07-04, adopted November 29, 2006; Ord. No. 07-07, adopted November 29, 2006; Ord. No. 07-15, adopted July 3, 2007; Ord. No. 11-10, adopted September 21, 2011; Ord. No. 12-07, adopted November 30, 2011; Ord. No. 15-05, adopted November 24, 2014; Ord. No. 15-10, adopted February 4, 2015; and Ord. No. 16-05, adopted January 27, 2016. 
Sec. 706. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-01, § 5(Exh. D), adopted November 1, 2017, repealed § 706. Former § 706 pertained to industrial zoning districts and derived from Ord. No. 07-06, adopted November 29, 2006; Ord. No. 07-07, adopted November 29, 2006; Ord. No. 11-10, adopted September 21, 2011; Ord. No. 12-07, adopted November 30, 2011; Ord. No. 15-10, adopted February 4, 2015; and Ord. No. 16-05, adopted January 27, 2016. 
Sec. 707. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-01, § 5(Exh. D), adopted November 1, 2017, repealed § 707. Former § 707 pertained to employment center zoning districts and derived from Ord. No. 07-15, adopted July 3, 2007; Ord. No. 11-10, adopted September 21, 2011; and Ord. No. 12-07, adopted November 30, 2011. 
Sec. 708. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-01, § 5(Exh. D), adopted November 1, 2017, repealed § 708. Former § 708 pertained to commercial recreation zoning districts and derived from Ord. No. 07-15, adopted July 3, 2007. 
Sec. 709. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-01, § 5(Exh. D), adopted November 1, 2017, repealed § 709. Former § 709 pertained to community facilities zoning districts and derived from Ord. No. 07-07, adopted November 29, 2006; and Ord. No. 12-07, adopted November 30, 2011. 
Sec. 710. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-01, § 5(Exh. D), adopted November 1, 2017, repealed § 710. Former § 710 pertained to recreation/open space zoning districts. 
Sec. 711. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-01, § 5(Exh. D), adopted November 1, 2017, repealed § 711. Former § 711 pertained to utilities zoning districts. 
Sec. 712. - Overlay districts. 
    712.1. Overlay districts. These districts are intended to provide for detailed regulations not addressed by the underlying district which are raised by specific concerns such as neighborhood conservation, environmental and natural resource protection, floodplain protection, airport safety and community revitalization. The uses within these overlay districts and their geographic boundaries shall be as provided for by the specific district. These districts may be applied to any land use plan category on the city's land use plan map, however; the application of these districts shall not be in conflict with the underlying land use plan permitted uses. 
    712.2. State Road 7 Corridor Overlay District design regulations purpose and intent. The purpose of these regulations is to promote the redevelopment of the overlay area along the State Road 7 (SR-7) Corridor into a quality, mixed-use district. These provisions offer development intensity bonuses that are specifically intended to promote the assembly of land and to serve as measured incentives to help assure the feasibility of converting the current development pattern along the Corridor into modern commercial, retail, office, or residential uses. Minimum land areas that exceed existing lot sizes are required to ensure that all new development contributes to a growth pattern that attracts high-quality tenants. A wide range of uses is permitted to encourage the market to create mixed-use buildings and to offer developers the flexibility to meet various market needs. Design standards, as well as the lot and bulk standards of these provisions apply to all uses in the SR-7 Overlay District except as noted in Section 712.4 Existing commercial properties. These provisions are added to the underlying zoning district requirements. Application of these provisions does not rezone residential uses to commercial uses. 
    712.3. SR-7 Overlay District Boundaries. The SR-7 Overlay District is bounded by Pembroke Road to the north, SR-7 to the east, County Line Road to the south and SW 62 Avenue to the west. The SR-7 Overlay District contains two sub-districts, the commercially-zoned properties and the remainder of the district or the residentially-zoned properties. Commercial properties fronting on primary and secondary streets within the district may be developed at the minimum front yard and lot area and at the base land use density listed in Table 1. The remainder of the SR-7 Overlay District is constrained to modest density residential use. 
    712.4. Existing commercial properties. All non-conforming commercial properties existing as of the enactment of this ordinance within the State Road 7 Corridor Overlay District must be improved to minimize site and building non-conformities. The process by which the non-conforming properties will be brought into compliance is detailed in the provisions below. 
712.4.1. Compliance measures for existing commercial properties. All commercial properties of record as of the date of adoption of this ordinance shall be exempt from complying with the requirements of the SR-7 Corridor Overlay District Design Regulations provided that the building footprint is not increased by no more than 50 percent, or no improvement is made to the structure that exceeds 50 percent of the costs of replacing the entire structure. Current commercial property owners and/or business owners shall be responsible for compliance with the requirements listed in Section 712.4.2.2 within the implementation period as provided for in Section 712.4.3 of this ordinance. 
712.4.2. State Road 7 Corridor Overlay District compliance plan approval process. 
712.4.2.1. Application requirements and processing procedure. All existing commercial properties, as of the enactment of this ordinance, will be required to submit a Compliance Plan application to address site and building non-conformities. 
All applications must be submitted as per Section 310 Site Plans and Section 311 Community Appearance Board. All compliance plan must be submitted to the department and reviewed by the development review committee (DRC) and community appearance board (CAB). 
Upon approval, all compliance plans must then be submitted to the city commission for review and approval prior to the issuance of a building permit. Building permit application procedures are per Section 318 of Building Permits. 
712.4.2.2. Review criteria. All existing commercial properties must meet the minimum standards as identified below in accordance with the time frame set forth in Section 712.4.3. The compliance plan application shall be prepared to minimize all non-conformities to the greatest extent feasible recognizing the following criteria, in order of priority: lot functionality and unsafe site and/or structural conditions; physical site limitations; lot functionality for intended use; negative impact to adjacent properties with respect to traffic, noise, pedestrian movement, appearance or intended operations; and, economic impact to the applicant. 
The principal site and building design elements to be reviewed are outlined below. The elements of the site that will be reviewed and the minimum standards necessary to reduce non-conformities, in order of priority, include: 
712.4.2.2.1. Site design elements. All sites shall comply with the minimum standards as cited below; 
Parking existing parking shall be vested and no additional parking shall be required. 
Fences. All existing fencing shall be replaced with metal picket or black or green vinyl coated chain link fences up to a maximum height of eight feet. New fencing shall also be metal picket or black or green vinyl coated chain link up to a maximum height of eight feet. Security measures including motion sensors and surveillance cameras may be used, but no barbed or razor wire shall be permitted. 
Landscaping and irrigation-Minimum five-foot landscape buffer from nearest edge of sidewalk to fence shall be required. Low shrubs between sidewalk and hedge on street front shall be provided. Hedges in front of fences shall be maintained at a minimum of 42 inches in height. A minimum three feet side yard landscape buffer inside of fence with hedge is required. Duplication of side yard fences and hedge is not required for adjacent property. All unnecessary paving on-site shall be converted to green space. Shade trees shall be required in all landscape areas with a dimension of six by six feet or greater, otherwise small trees shall be provided. All landscaping shall have 100 percent coverage for irrigation. 
712.4.2.2.2. Building design standards. All buildings shall comply with community appearance board design standards Section 813, as it relates to roof, roofline and materials; building color and materials; architectural details and entrance treatments; signage; and accessory structures. 
The city commission may approve variances in conjunction with a development review applications when the variance(s) contribute to minimizing non-conformities for the entire property. 
712.4.3. Implementation. Compliance plans will be in effect for a period of two years from date of approval, with an option for one extension of six months with commission approval. Improvements can be phased during this term with site design elements being undertaken in the first year and building design elements in the second year. Once all the improvements have been completed, the property owner and/or business owner (tenant) will be issued a letter of compliance from the community development department for recordation with Broward County. 
All non-conforming buildings and sites within the SR-7 Corridor Overlay District must perform the work necessary to receive a letter of compliance no later than ten years from the date of the adoption of the SR-7 Overlay District Design Regulations. 
If it can be demonstrated to the city's satisfaction that a building is less than 20 years old at the date of the adoption of these overlay district provisions, the period allowed for compliance shall be ten years plus the difference between the established age of the building and 20 years. 
If, within the period allowed for compliance, the property owner and/or business owner (tenant) is unable to alter the building to comply with the requirements of the overlay district, it can request an extension of compliance. The property owner and/or business owner (tenant) must demonstrate to the city commission's satisfaction that it has made all reasonable effort to comply with the requirements of the district. If the city commission finds that an extension is warranted, it may grant an increase in the period of compliance by up to three years from the date that compliance would otherwise have been required. 
    712.5. Land assembly. Land in the SR-7 Overlay District is largely developed on lots platted prior to the adoption of these regulations. The lots within the district are typically too small to accommodate the dimensional demands of current commercial, office, or residential development. Therefore, these regulations require that all new development have a minimum lot area that entails the assembly of land. The allowable range of permitted uses and the intensity of development may be increased in proportion to the assembly of land, in excess of base lot size. The following provisions define the minimum lot area for a development permit and the extent of assembly required. 
712.5.1. State Road 7 Frontage Lots. Lots created within existing blocks that have four, six or eight lots shall have a minimum frontage on SR-7 of one-half of the block, or 225 feet, whichever is less. Lots created within existing blocks that have five lots shall have a minimum frontage on SR-7 of 2/5 of the block, or 225 feet, whichever is less. Lots created within existing blocks that have 12 lots shall have a minimum frontage on SR-7 of 1/3 the block, or 225 feet, whichever is less. An exception shall be made where more than half a block has previously been assembled, provided that at least two lots with a minimum of 150 feet of frontage on SR-7 remains (see Lot Assembly figure). This section shall also be applied to the commercially-zoned properties not fronting on SR-7 and located within the SR-7 Overlay District. 
Lot Assembly 
    712.6. Land use intensity. As shown in Table 1 and 2, the intensity of land use within the district is dependent upon two variables: the type of land use proposed, and the extent of assembly involved. The highest land use intensity bonuses are permitted for mixed-use development that contains a residential component. Similarly, land use intensity may be increased in accordance with the extent of land assembly. The tallest buildings and the maximum floor area bonuses may be permitted where the maximum assembly is achieved. Sites with minimum frontage on State Road 7 and other commercial-zoned properties within the SR-7 Overlay District are limited to the second lowest land-use intensity. 
    712.7. Building design. 
Table 1 
SR-7 OVERLAY DISTRICT LAND USE INTENSITIES 
Density Bonus Category Minimum Landscape 

Surface Ratio Maximum Floor 

Area Ratio Minimum Height 

(stories/feet) Maximum Height 

(stories/feet) All Uses Base Density 0.30 0.34 2/30 1.5/36 Bonus 1 0.25 0.40 2/30 2.5/45 Bonus 2 0.25 0.56 2/30 2.5/45 Bonus 3 Retail/Residential mixed use 0.25 0.6 2/30 4/64 Retail/Office mixed use 0.25 0.65 3/50 4/64 Bonus 4 Retail/Residential mixed use 0.25 0.75 3/50 5/80 Retail/Office mixed use 0.25 1 3/50 6/90  
Table 2 
ASSEMBLY TABLE 
No. of Frontage Lot Assembly Lot Assembly Lot Assembly Lot Assembly Lots in Block Bonus 1 Bonus 2 Bonus 3 Bonus 4 4 1/2 Block Whole Block Developments that involve a mix of retail and residential uses or a mix of retail and office uses and that involve Bonus 1 lot assembly Developments that involve a mix of retail and residential uses or a mix of retail and office uses and that involve Bonus 2 lot assembly 5 2/5 Block 3/5 Block/225 1 6 1/2 Block/225 2/3 Block/225 8 1/2 Block/225 5/8 Block 12 1/3 Block 1/2 Block  
1 Whichever is less 
712.7.1. Building design principles. 
712.7.1.1. Buildings shall be designed to be compatible with the surrounding environment, both built and natural and in accordance with the City's Mediterranean Revival Architectural Theme and Community Design Plan (CDP). 
712.7.1.2. Buildings shall define the streetscape through the use of uniform setbacks along the build-to line for each block. 
712.7.1.3. Exterior public and semi-public spaces, such as courtyards or plazas, shall be designed to enhance the surrounding buildings and to provide community amenities. 
712.7.1.4. Buildings at street corners, having at least two facades exposed to a primary street, defined as State Road 7, Miramar Parkway, Pembroke Road, County Line Road, SW 25th Street and SW 33rd Street, shall be considered significant structures and shall be designed with additional height and architectural embellishments such as corner towers to emphasize their location. 
712.7.1.5. Buildings shall reinforce and revitalize streets and public spaces, by providing an ordered variety of entries, windows, bays, and balconies along public ways. Ground floors shall have a high degree of transparency to encourage interaction between sidewalk activity and uses within the building. Buildings shall have human scale in details and massing. 
712.7.1.6. Building exteriors shall provide shelter from the sun and rain. Porticos, awnings, arcades, and overhanging eaves are particularly appropriate at pedestrian pathways (see building projections figure). 
Building Projections 
712.7.2. Building massing. 
712.7.2.1. Vary massing of large buildings. A single, dominant building mass shall be avoided. Substantial variations in massing shall include changes in height and horizontal plane. Horizontal masses shall not exceed a height to width ratio of one to three without a substantial architectural element that either projects up or away from the building, such as a tower, bay, lattice, or other architectural feature. False fronts or parapets create an insubstantial appearance and shall be avoided. Stepping the building can also reduce the apparent scale of the building and establish a "base" and a "top." Changes in mass shall relate to structural system(s) and the organization of interior space (see building massing figure). 
Building Massing 
712.7.2.2. Highlight building entries. Building massing, architectural details, entry details or changes in materials shall be used to highlight the location of building entries. For example, greater height can be used to accentuate entries in the form of tower elements, tall voids, or a central mass at an entry plaza (see clearly defined building entry figure). 
Clearly Defined Building Entries 
712.7.3. Unity of character and design. Buildings or structures, which are part of an existing or future complex, shall have a unity of character and design. The design character of buildings shall be such that it is aesthetically pleasing and without cluttered forms having no apparent system of organization (see unity of character figure). 
Unity of Character 
712.7.4. Building elevations. Although the primary aesthetic emphasis shall be on the main facade(s), all building elevations shall receive architectural treatment. Stories at sidewalk level shall be no less than 12 feet in height from finished floor to finished ceiling. To provide variety to the skyline, the number of stories, not the overall height shall limit building elevation. Commercial and residential buildings shall not exceed 25-foot floor-to-floor heights (see building elevations figure). 
Building Elevations 
712.7.5. Base and top treatment. All facades shall have: 
712.7.5.1. A recognizable "base" consisting of (but not limited to): (a) thicker walls, (b) richly textured materials (e.g. stucco, tile or masonry treatments), (c) special materials such as ceramic tile, granite and marble, or (d) contrasting colored materials, mullions, and/or panels. 
712.7.5.2. A recognizable "top" consisting of (but not limited to): (a) cornice treatments, (b) roof overhangs with brackets, (c) stepped parapets, (d) richly textured materials (e.g. stucco, tile or masonry treatments), and/or (e) differently colored materials; colored "stripes" are not acceptable. (See-Base and Top Treatment figure) 
Base and Top Treatment 
712.7.6. Transparency. Ground floor windows, in all non-residential buildings within the SR-7 Corridor, shall be framed by the surrounding wall and shall encompass a minimum of 65 percent of the total ground-level facade area. Transparency shall be measured from a point not higher than 18 inches above grade (see storefront transparency figure). 
Storefront Transparency 
712.7.7. Covered walkways. Buildings along the SR-7 Corridor shall provide covered walkways along the side of the building facing the corridor. Covered walkways shall conform to the following provisions (see Covered Walkways figure): 
Covered Walkways 
712.7.7.1. All covered walkways shall have a clear width of at least six feet for pedestrian movement. 
712.7.7.2. Full building height covered walkways shall be detailed so as to have architectural interest in the columns with bases and capital details, the spandrels, cornice, or interior wall to provide interest and character. 
712.7.7.3. Partial height covered walkways, second floor detail-covered walkways shall appear to provide a second floor above the covered walkways, whether it is real or simply decorative. Requirements for second floor detail shall be similar to Section 712.7.7.2, except more emphasis will be placed on the relationship between the second floor detailing and the covered walkway. 
712.7.7.4. Partial height covered walkways, shed roof detail. This type of covered walkways shall have second floor architecture that terminates the shed roof with a tower or other architectural feature that gives emphasis to the building corners. 
712.7.7.5. All covered walkways shall be lighted to illumination levels equal to those on surrounding sidewalks. 
712.7.8. Roof form. 
712.7.8.1. Roof types Roof types shall be front or side-gable, hipped, and flat with parapet or a combination thereof. The principal roof pitch shall be a minimum of 3:12. Mansard roofs are prohibited (see roof types figure). 
Roof Types 
712.7.8.2. Roof overhangs. Unless specifically designed otherwise, roof overhangs shall wrap around all four sides of the building so that there is visual continuity around the entire building (see side details figure). 
Side Details 
712.7.8.3. Roof treatments. Variations in rooflines shall be used to add interest to, and reduce the mass of buildings. Roof features shall be in scale with the building's mass and complement the character of adjoining and or adjacent buildings and neighborhoods. Roofing material shall be constructed of durable high quality material in order to enhance the appearance and attractiveness of the community (see roof features figure). 
Roof Features 
712.7.8.4. Permitted roof materials. Permitted roof materials for pitched roofs include: 
1.  Spanish "S"; 
2.  Barrel Tile. 
712.7.9. Floor articulation. In buildings in excess of three stories, the first floor or first two floors shall have distinctive material changes and/or colors that are different from the upper floors. Often there is a cap or bottom detail. A change of plane of at least six inches and cap or support detail will also achieve this result. The floor articulation figure illustrates acceptable forms of floor articulation. 
Floor Articulation 
712.7.10. Windows and door detailing. 
1.  The windows and doors should be in vertical and horizontal alignment and have a harmonious aesthetic appeal. (See Window-Door Alignment figure) 

Window-Door Alignment 
2.  Windows shall be vertical or square in proportion. 
3.  Windows shall be inset a minimum of two inches from the exterior wall surface. (See Window Treatment Figure) 

Window Treatment 
4.  Mirrored glass is prohibited. 
5.  Glass curtain walls are prohibited. 
6.  Clear glass shall be used for storefront windows and doors. 
7.  Exterior mounted security gates or solid roll down metal windows shall not be permitted. 
8.  Link or grill type security devices shall be permitted only if installed from the inside, within the window or doorframes. 
9.  Other types of security devices fastened to the exterior walls are not permitted. 
    712.8. Site design. 
712.8.1. Site design principles. 
712.8.1.1. Streets and other public outdoor spaces shall be functional, attractive, and designed to enhance the pedestrian life of the community. Development shall be designed to achieve a balanced transportation system that invites pedestrians, bicyclists, and transit riders, as well as motor vehicles. 
712.8.1.2. Development shall be sited to enable direct local street access from surrounding neighborhoods so visitors do not need to use arterial streets to access the commercial area. 
712.8.1.3. Landscaping shall be designed to frame primary public spaces, to provide shade and enhance the pedestrian environment. 
712.8.2. Building orientation/location. The primary facades of all buildings shall contain the primary entry and face a public street. Frontage on a primary street shall receive the highest priority for building placement and facade enhancement. Primary streets shall be defined as State Road 7, Miramar Parkway, Pembroke Road, County Line Road, SW 25th Street and SW 33rd Street. All other streets shall be considered as secondary streets. The building orientation figure illustrates the required placement and enhancement for street frontages. The following rules shall apply for determining the primary street frontage for building placement and facade transparency: 
Building Orientation 
712.8.2.1. Sites with frontage only on one street shall be located on the build-to line of the street frontage. 
712.8.2.2. Sites with frontage on a primary and a secondary street shall build to the corner of the two streets, allowing for the City of Miramar's sight line requirements, and provide the majority of the transparency on the facade facing the primary street. 
712.8.2.3. Sites with frontage on two primary streets shall build to the corner of the two streets. The majority of the transparency on the facade shall face the street with the higher classification. If both streets have the same classification, the developer may choose on which primary street frontage to provide facade transparency. 
712.8.3. Building frontage. Building frontages along all primary streets shall occupy no less than 80 percent of a lot's street-facing frontage, except as provided in Section 712.8.8. Buildings with multiple storefronts shall be unified through the use of architecturally compatible materials, colors, details, awnings, signage and light fixtures. 
712.8.4. Corner lots. Corner lots shall be designed to emphasize their location. Buildings and structures on corner lots at the intersection of SR-7 and any other primary street (listed in Section 712.8.2 above) shall be designed with additional architectural embellishments such as towers, or other design features, to emphasize their locations as gateways and transition points within the community (see corner lots figure). Once a design is applied at one corner, the building on the opposite corner shall use the same type of articulation in an effort to assure design compatibility. The designs do not have to be identical; however they should generally have the same height and shape. 
Corner Lots 
712.8.5. Build-to lines. In the SR-7 Overlay District, buildings shall constructed at the build-to line, generally defined as 20 feet from the property line on SR-7. Non-residential uses on all other streets within the district shall have a build to line at the back of the sidewalk, while residential structures have a build-to line that is 20 feet from the front property line. These setbacks are illustrated in the build-to lines figure and shall be followed except as indicated in Section 712.8.6 below. 
Build-To Lines 
712.8.6. Exceptions to build-to line requirement. The following exceptions to the build-to line requirement shall be permitted: 
712.8.6.1. Articulated building street face. A portion of the building may be set back from the build-to line to create interest in the building facade. These standards, shown in the build-to exceptions figure, vary as follows: 
Build-To Exceptions 
712.8.6.1.1. Along SR-7, the total area of the space created by the setback shall be less than the area that is 60 percent of the frontage times six feet. 
712.8.6.1.2. Where the street frontage is the build-to line, the total area of the space created by the setback shall be less than the area that is 25 percent of the frontage times four feet. 
712.8.7. Parking. The number of parking spaces shall be based on the underlying district or use requirements. The following standards shall apply to on- or off-street parking in the SR-7 Overlay District Area: 
712.8.7.1. Parking in rear. On-site parking shall be located behind the building. Parking areas shall be accessed from side and back streets and from adjacent properties. Access from SR-7 shall be avoided unless no other access is available. 
712.8.7.2. Shared and off-site parking. Where a mix of uses creates staggered peak periods of parking demand, shared parking calculations may reflect a reduction in the total amount of required parking. Retail, office, and entertainment uses shall share parking areas and quantities. On- and off-site parking may be used to meet minimum parking requirements as long as reasonable pedestrian access is provided from the parking space to the use. Cross access easements or similar mechanisms shall be used to provide joint access between the parking areas of adjacent properties. 
712.8.7.3. On-street parking. Adjacent on-street parking shall be counted towards a land uses' parking requirement. The amount of on-street parking shall be maximized. 
712.8.7.4. Reduce scale of lots. Large surface parking lots shall be visually and functionally segmented into several smaller lots through the use of structures and/or landscaping (see Reduce Scale of Lots figure). Designs that reduce visibility, especially between parking areas and business entrances, shall be discouraged. Land devoted to surface parking lots shall be reduced, over time, through redevelopment and/or construction of structured parking facilities. 
Reduce Scale of Lots 
712.8.7.5. Loading facilities. 
712.8.7.5.1. When required, loading docks, solid waste facilities, recycling facilities and other service areas shall be placed to the rear or side of a building in visually unobtrusive locations. 
712.8.7.5.2. Screening and landscaping shall prevent direct views of loading areas and their driveways from adjacent properties or from the public right-of-way. Screening and landscaping shall also prevent spillover glare, noise, or exhaust fumes. Screening and buffering shall be achieved through walls, fences and landscaping and shall be visually impervious and completely obscure the contents and facilities. Recesses in the building, or depressed access ramps may be used. 
712.8.7.6. Parking landscaping. These provisions are intended to achieve enhanced visual quality of parking areas, encourage the creation and protection of open space, avoid expansive development of impervious surfaces, and ensure that landscaping is an integral part of development (see Parking Landscaping figure). 
Parking Landscaping 
712.8.7.6.1. Buffer strips. A landscaped buffer strip shall be provided separating all parking areas, vehicular circulation facilities, or similar improvements from the right-of-way line of any public street. The landscaped buffer strip shall be continuous except for required vehicular access points and pedestrian circulation facilities. Signs shall be integrated into the landscaping. Buffer strips shall not prevent connections among adjacent parking areas. 
712.8.7.6.2. Interior landscaping requirements. The interior of all parking lots shall be landscaped to provide shade and visual relief from large expanses of impervious surfaces. This is best achieved by installing protected planting islands within the parking lot. Landscaped areas shall comprise a minimum of 15 percent of the total area of parking lots with more than six spaces. 
712.8.7.6.2.1. At least one landscaped divider island shall be provided for every four parallel rows of parking. A minimum of one deciduous shade tree shall be planted for every four parking spaces. Trees shall be spaced not more than 30 feet on center. 
712.8.7.6.2.2. Terminal islands shall be used either to separate parking spaces from driveways and other vehicular travel lanes, or to break up large numbers of parking spaces in a single row of spaces. Landscaped terminal islands shall be provided at the ends of rows of parking where such rows are adjacent to driveways or vehicular travel lanes. In addition, terminal islands shall separate groups of parking spaces in a row, such that no continuous line of adjoining spaces contains more than 25 parking spaces. Terminal islands shall extend the entire length of the parking space and include at least one tree for every 100 square feet, or portion thereof, of said island. 
712.8.7.6.2.3. Interior islands shall be eight feet in width (excluding curbing) and not less than 90 square feet and shall be placed within individual rows of contiguous parking spaces so that either is not less than one island for every eight parking spaces, or any portion thereof. Interior islands should be designed to create a no regimented appearance that relieves monotony and increases a tree canopy. 
712.8.7.6.2.4. Additional landscaped area may be provided as an alternative to separating groups of parking spaces with small internal terminal-islands. Such additional landscaped area shall be provided as additional depth in the buffer strip, terminal and divider islands adjacent to rows exceeding ten spaces. However, no more than 20 adjoining parking spaces may be provided in a row of spaces, regardless of the size of the landscaped islands at the ends of the row. 
712.8.7.7. Pedestrian circulation in parking facilities. 
712.8.7.7.1. Parking facilities and appurtenant driveways shall be designed so as to gather pedestrians out of vehicle travel lanes and to maximize the safety and convenience of pedestrians walking between parked cars and business entrances as well as between external points and locations on-site. 
712.8.7.7.2. Pedestrian walkways shall be integrated, to the extent possible, into the interior and/or perimeter landscaping of parking lots; constructed with brick pavers, a paved or similarly firm surface, at least six feet in width; and separated from vehicular and parking areas by grade, curbing and/or vegetation, except for necessary ramps. 
712.8.8. Parking screening. The intent of Section 712.8.3 and Section 712.8.4 is to create a continuous street facade with parking located to the rear of buildings. However, the city may grant exceptions to this requirement if it finds that the depth of a lot is insufficient or where uses require more parking than building area. In these circumstances the following standards shall apply: 
712.8.8.1. If a building occupies 60 percent to 79 percent of the frontage or parking exceeds 100 feet in length the remaining frontage shall meet one of the alternatives shown in the Alternative Street Frontage Treatments figure, Alternative 1. 
Alternative Street Frontage Treatment-Alternative 1 
712.8.8.2. If a building occupies 45 percent to 59 percent of the frontage or parking exceeds 150 feet in length the remaining frontage shall meet one of the alternatives shown in the Alternative Street Frontage Treatments figure, Alternative 2. 
Alternative Street Frontage Treatment-Alternative 2 
712.8.8.3. If a building occupies 44 percent or less or parking exceeds 200 feet in length the remaining frontage shall meet one of the alternatives shown in the Alternative Street Frontage Treatments figure, Alternative 3. 
Alternative Street Frontage Treatment-Alternative 3 
712.8.8.4. All the remaining frontage of the site on all streets shall be improved except where entry on to the site is required. 
712.8.9. Street trees. 
712.8.9.1. Specifications. Street trees shall be planted within the front yard, and along any yard facing SR-7, along all lots, at a minimum average spacing of 24 feet on center, with the exact spacing to be evaluated on a site-specific basis. All street trees shall have a clear trunk of six feet and a minimum caliper of three inches at the time of planting. Street trees shall not obscure sign and window displays with the district. 
712.8.9.2. Materials. All trees, plants and any other associated landscape or outdoor material shall be of Florida No. 1 or better, as classified by the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services. Landscaping shall be free form design using the following plant list: Shade trees: live oak or as approved; Palm trees: washingtonia, sabal palm, foxtail, or royal palm and other materials approved by the city. 
712.8.9.3. Replacement. The owner shall replace any site tree that dies within the first two years after initial transplant into the district. 
712.8.10. Signs. 
712.8.10.1. Design guidelines for signs. 
712.8.10.1.1. Signs affixed to the exterior of a building shall be architecturally compatible with the style, composition, materials, colors, and details of the building, as well as with other signs used on the building or its vicinity (see Sign Placement figure). 
Sign Placement 
712.8.10.1.2. Signs shall fit within the existing facade features, shall be confined to signable areas, and shall not interfere with door and window openings, conceal architectural details or obscure the composition of the facade where they are located. Signs shall be placed on a facade only in a manner historically appropriate to the style of the building. 
712.8.10.1.3. Whenever possible, signs located on buildings within the same block-face shall be placed at the same height in order to create a unified sign band. Lighting that follows the form of a building, structure, or sign is prohibited. 
712.8.10.1.4. Signs may be internally illuminated in a channel-letter system or a box that is compatible with the architecture of the building. Wood signs may be used for under-canopy (hanging) signs. 
712.8.10.1.5. Sign background colors shall be compatible with the colors of the building facade. Sign lettering may use dark, contrasting colors. A dull or matte finish is recommended for reduction of glare and enhancement of legibility. 
712.8.10.1.6. Signs shall be either spot or backlit with a diffused light source. Ground lighting may illuminate a monument sign, but in an aesthetically pleasing manner. Window signs may be internally illuminated but must be within enclosed boxes. Window signs shall not clutter the window area. Neon signs are prohibited. 
712.8.10.1.7. Signs shall be mounted so that the method of installation is concealed. Signs applied to masonry surfaces should be mechanically fastened to mortar joints only and not directly into brick or stone. Drilling to provide electrical service should also follow the same rule. 
712.8.10.2. Billboards. New and/or replacement billboards shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 01-23, § 3, 3-7-01; Ord. No. 18-01, § 2(Exh. D), 11-1-17) 
Sec. 713. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-01, § 5(Exh. D), adopted November 1, 2017, repealed § 713. Former § 713 pertained to specific use regulations and derived from Ord. No. 01-03, adopted November 15, 2000; Ord. No. 05-22, adopted September 21, 2005; Ord. No. 07-04, adopted November 29, 2006; Ord. No. 07-07, adopted November 29, 2006; Ord. No. 11-10, adopted September 21, 2011; Ord. No. 12-07, adopted November 30, 2011; Ord. No. 13-10, adopted May 15, 2013; Ord. No. 14-01, adopted November 6, 2013; Ord. No. 15-05, adopted November 24, 2014; Ord. No. 16-05, adopted January 17, 2016. 
Sec. 714. - Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND) District. 
    The illustrative drawings contained in this section shall serve as guidance to the development review committee (DRC) with regard to the city's intent for land development within the TND. All illustrative drawings and images contained in this section are meant to demonstrate the character intended for a Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND), but are for illustrative purposes only. The accompanying text and numbers are the rules that govern permitted development. The following regulations shall apply to the TND: 
    714.1. Purpose of district. The Traditional Neighborhood Development District is provided for the development of new neighborhoods and the revitalization or extension of existing neighborhoods, which are structured upon a network of interconnecting pedestrian oriented streets and other public spaces. These developments are intended to offer a mixture of housing types and prices, prominently sited civic or community buildings, and stores/offices/workplaces to provide a balanced mix of activities. A TND Neighborhood has a recognizable center and should be designed to integrate with the surrounding community; the optimum size of a TND Neighborhood is a quarter mile from center to the edge. 
    714.2. Conflicts. In the event that a conflict arises between language contained in this Section and language contained elsewhere in the City Code or Land Development Code, the language contained in this section shall take precedence. 
    714.3. Reserved. 
    714.4. Comprehensive plan. In conformance with the City of Miramar Comprehensive Plan, TNDs may be located in the regional activity center or in other areas of the city through the allocation of "reserve units" or application of the city's "flexibility" provisions, if necessary. 
    Comprehensive plan rules regarding the placement of residential uses in non-residential property as designated by the comprehensive plan, and the placement of non-residential uses in residential property as designated by the comprehensive plan, take precedence over the regulations contained in this section. 
    714.5. Procedure. TNDs require rezoning and site plan approval. Applicants are encouraged to submit TND rezoning applications together with a proposed site plan. Prior to the preparation of a TND rezoning application, each applicant shall meet with the community development director. The general outlines of the proposal should be discussed and a conceptual site plan and written description of the intended plan of development should be provided by the applicant for consideration at such meeting(s). The community development director may also suggest that the applicant meet with state, regional, or county agencies, and affected civic and neighborhood groups, in connection with the preparation of the rezoning application. The purpose of the preapplication conference is to assist in bringing the overall application, as consistently as possible, into conformity with these and other regulations; to define specifically those variations from the usual application of the provisions of the Land Development Code; and to furnish the applicant with recommendations that would inform and assist with the preparation of the components of a TND rezoning application. Submission of the conceptual site plan in no way vests any development rights with respect to the subject property. 
    714.6. Elements of a TND. 
(a)  Size. In order to ensure the development of a cohesive neighborhood that contains all the necessary features of a TND, but not to preclude the possibility of the extension of an existing development in this manner, the minimum size of a TND Neighborhood shall be ten acres. In order to ensure that a TND Neighborhood's central focus is within walking distance for all residents, a TND Neighborhood should not exceed one-half mile at its widest point. 
(b)  Categories of use allocation. There are five categories of uses that make up a TND: Public, civic, shopfront, rowhouse, and house. All property within a TND must be allocated to one of these five categories of uses. Categories of uses should not be concentrated in a particular area; they should be mixed together in a pedestrian friendly and compact manner. The following are the minimum percentages of land area to be allocated per category of use in a TND. In the event that a space is intended to be utilized for more than one use (i.e., live/work unit), only the primary use should be utilized for this and all calculations contained in this section. 
(1)  Civic use -Minimum of two percent. 
(2)  Public use -Minimum of five percent, excluding streets, rights-of-way, and accessways. 
(3)  Shopfront use -Minimum of 25 percent. 
(4)  Rowhouse use and house use -Minimum of 25 percent. 

Traditional Neighborhood Development Map 
(c)  Architectural design and general standards. The purpose of these requirements is to ensure design continuity in the neighborhood as a whole, without forcing monotonous design indicative of many modern subdivisions. The community appearance board will review prospective TNDs with respect to these criteria. 
(1)  A Mediterranean architectural theme, as defined in Section 813 of the Land Development Code, is required for all structures and shall be outlined in a pattern book. The pattern book must demonstrate the types of Mediterranean styles used and define their principles; define the principles for placing structures on their sites; define the layout of the structures in relationship to neighboring uses, adjacent streets, public spaces, and the TND Neighborhood; demonstrate general facade detailing; demonstrate planting details, their interrelationship between the public and private landscaping, and mechanism of maintaining the landscaping; and demonstrate light pole types and generalized locations. 
(2)  Colonnades shall have, at and/or over the sidewalk, a minimum clear height of ten feet (excluding signage or lighting) and a minimum clear width of eight feet (from building facade to inside column face). Colonnades may be built over sidewalks for all uses except house uses. Colonnades shall not cause roof drainage into a right-of-way without proper positive drainage design. 

Colonnade 
(3)  Porches shall have a minimum depth of six feet on the front facade and a minimum width of eight feet on the front facade. Porches are encouraged to extend to other house elevations as well. 

Porches 
(4)  Awnings shall have a minimum clear height of eight feet and a maximum length of six feet. 

Awnings 
(5)  Balconies shall have a minimum depth of four feet. Balconies with a minimum of ten feet of clearance above grade shall be permitted to extend over the sidewalk for all categories of use except house uses. 

Balconies 
(6)  Streetwalls shall be comprised of a masonry wall, black aluminum fence, wrought iron fence, or landscaped hedge, and shall be six feet in height, no less than 75 percent opaque, and built along the frontage line. Openings along the streetwall should be gated. (The percent opacity is calculated including all openings). 

Streetwalls 
(7)  Streetedges shall be comprised of a masonry wall, black aluminum fence, wrought iron fence, white picket fence, or landscaped hedge, and shall be two and one-half feet to four feet in height, at least 50 percent transparent, and built along the frontage line. Openings along the streetedge are encouraged to be gated. (The percent opacity shall be calculated including all openings). 

Streetedges 
(8)  Residential garages shall be located in the rear-half (farthest from a non-lane street) of the building(s) that they intend to serve. 

Garages 
(9)  Except for requirements contained in this section, structures shall not be required to be setback to any street or right-of-way either within or outside of the TND. 
(d)  Phasing. In order to provide residents with employment and recreational opportunities and non-residential uses with a solid customer base, residential and non-residential uses must be built concurrently. A phasing plan must be submitted with a site plan for development of a TND that demonstrates the following: 
(1)  It is recommended that at least 25 percent of the non-residential uses be constructed prior to the construction of the initial 50 percent of the residential uses and at least 25 percent of the residential uses be constructed prior to the construction of the initial 50 percent of the non-residential uses. 
(2)  At a minimum, at least 20 percent of the non-residential uses shall be constructed prior to the construction of the initial 90 percent of the residential uses and at least 20 percent of the residential uses shall be built prior to the construction of the initial 90 percent of the non-residential uses. 
(3)  Gross square feet shall be used when calculating these percentages for non-residential uses and number of dwelling units shall be used when calculating these percentages for residential uses. 
(e)  Streets. Streets in a TND are to be inviting public space and integral components of community design. A hierarchical street network should provide for a rich variety of transportation options. In descending order of importance, the hierarchy shall consider pedestrians as the most important, followed by cyclists, mass transit, and automobiles. This system shall be designed to connect and provide access between uses within a TND and adjacent uses within surrounding communities. In order for this street network to be safe for motorists, pedestrians, and cyclists, all design elements must consistently be applied to calm automobile traffic and to facilitate pedestrian use. 
(1)  Streets shall be classified into the following four categories: 
a.  Boulevard. 
b.  Commercial street. 
c.  Residential street. 
d.  Lane. 
(2)  Streets shall, wherever practicable, terminate at other streets within the TND and connect to existing and projected streets outside the TND. Street stubs shall be provided within the development adjacent to open land to provide for future connections. Culs-de-sac and other dead-end streets are discouraged. In the event a cul-de-sac must be used, it shall not exceed 250 feet in length, must be accessed from a street providing internal or external connectivity, and shall be permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround. In most instances, a close or eyebrow is preferred to a cul-de-sac. Vehicular turnarounds of various configurations are acceptable so long as emergency access is adequately provided, as determined by the city's fire department. 

Close-Eyebrow Streets 
(3)  The average perimeter of all blocks within a TND Neighborhood shall not exceed 1,500 feet. The maximum perimeter of any block within a TND Neighborhood shall not exceed 2,000 feet. No Block Face within a TND Neighborhood shall have a length greater than 500 feet without a publicly dedicated pedestrian pathway or street providing through access to another street. No Block Face within a TND Neighborhood shall have a length greater than 800 feet without a publicly dedicated street providing through access to another street. These requirements may be exceeded due to superior project design as determined by the community development director. 
(4)  A continuous network of rear and side lanes is encouraged to be provided for all buildings in a TND. Where provided, lanes shall serve as the primary means of vehicular ingress and egress for residential uses. Lanes may not provide access to the front of buildings. 
(5)  In order to facilitate pedestrian movement and inhibit reckless drivers from turning corners at high speeds, curb return radii shall be nine to 15 feet on all streets. A clear area of sufficient radius, as outlined in the South Florida Building Code (SFBC) or amendments thereto, shall be established for streets designated as a fire access road, as defined by the SFBC or amendments thereto. Streets designated as a fire access road, as defined by the SFBC or amendments thereto, shall be constructed in conformance with SFBC regulations regarding fire access roads. 
(6)  In order to distinguish pedestrian areas from vehicular areas, specialty paving is encouraged. Specialty paving is encouraged in order to indicate the entrance to the TND or TND Neighborhood. 
(7)  Streets may be comprised of segments. Each segment should have the characteristic of one street type. 
(8)  Utilities shall be placed underground and should be located along lanes in order to minimize the disruption caused by their placement and maintenance. In the event that utilities must be placed in streets other than lanes, they should be located in a manner that does not conflict with plantings. 
(9)  TND streets shall be organized according to a hierarchy based on function, size, capacity, and design speed; street right-of-ways are therefore expected to differ in dimension. The proposed hierarchy of streets shall be indicated on the submitted site plan with each street type being separately detailed. The elements that comprise streets are as follows: sidewalk, street tree/planting area/optional utility allocation, curb and gutter, on-street parking, bicycle lanes, travel lanes, and landscaped medians. 
a.  Sidewalks are required on both sides of streets, except for lanes or a street straddling the undeveloped edge of a TND or TND neighborhood. Sidewalk width shall be a minimum of four feet for residential streets, six feet for boulevards, and eight feet for commercial streets. 
b.  Street trees shall be planted approximately every 20 feet on both sides of all streets per Chapter 9 of the Land Development Code. Street trees shall not be required in lanes. The planting area for street trees shall be a minimum of five feet in width for boulevards and residential streets and be a minimum of four feet in width for commercial streets. The planting area may contain other landscaping in addition to the required street trees. A planting area for landscaping shall be a minimum of three feet in width for lanes. The required planting area width may be combined with the required sidewalk width to expand the sidewalk beyond the required width, as long as the street trees are preserved and tree grates or sufficient landscaped area is provided around the base of the trees; this provides for the flexibility of allowing planting areas in any area within the combined area. Provisions should be made to accommodate the proper root zone below finished grade. 
c.  On-street parking is required on both sides of the street for commercial streets. On-street parking is required on at least one side of the street for boulevards and residential streets. Parallel on-street parking areas (including area of adjacent paved gutter) shall be seven feet wide for residential streets and seven to eight feet wide for commercial streets and boulevards, and 22 feet long for all streets. In order to ensure that pedestrian crossing distance is minimized, angled on-street parking is not encouraged, but may be provided only along commercial streets and boulevards as long as wheel stops are provided. Angled parking dimensions shall be as provided for in Figure 808-1 of the Land Development Code. A two-foot overhang past the wheel stop is permitted and shall count toward meeting the angled parking stall depth requirements. On-street parking width shall include the adjacent paved gutter area. Curbed bulb-outs containing streets trees and/or other plantings are encouraged to be built at regular intervals and at all intersections within a dedicated on-street parking area. 
d.  Where provided, bicycle lanes shall be between three and four feet in width and be placed between on-street parking areas and travel lanes, or between the curb and gutter and the travel lanes in the absence of on-street parking areas. Bicycle lanes are required on streets with design speeds over 35 miles per hour. When four-foot wide bike lanes are used, they shall include standard pavement markings and signs. 
e.  Commercial streets, residential streets, and lanes may contain one (one-way) or two travel lanes. Boulevards may contain up to four travel lanes. Travel lanes do not include dedicated turn lanes. Dedicated right-turn lanes are discouraged as they impede pedestrian travel. 
f.  Medians in boulevards shall be curbed and contain plantings, water features, and/or specialty pavement and be at least five feet in width, excluding curb. 
g.  Design speeds may not exceed 30 miles per hour for most streets within a TND Neighborhood, except for four-lane boulevards. For streets with design speeds of 25 miles per hour or less, travel lanes shall be ten feet wide. For streets with design speeds greater than 25 miles per hour but less than 35 miles per hour, travel lanes shall be ten or 11 feet wide. For streets with design speeds greater than 35 mile per hour, travel lanes shall be 11 or 12 feet wide. 
h.  The following cross-section diagrams illustrate typical examples of ways in which street cross-sections may be assembled: 

Streets 

Streets 

Streets 
(f)  Parking. Parking shall be provided pursuant to Section 808 of the Land Development Code, subject to the exceptions noted below and elsewhere in this section: 
(1)  Due to their design and compactness, TNDs encourage non-automotive trips between residential and non-residential uses. In order to reflect the reduced necessity of the automobile in this type of efficient development, the amount of parking required for all non-residential uses shall be reduced by 25 percent. 
(2)  The parking requirements for buildings containing more than one use shall be the total of the amount of parking required for each use. 
(3)  On-street parking adjacent to a building or lot shall count toward fulfilling the parking requirements for that building or use. In the event that there is no building or use on the opposite side of the street, on-street parking on the opposite side of the street, along the same building elevation or lot width may count toward fulfilling the parking requirements. A building or use must cease to utilize parking on the opposite side of the street to fulfill its parking requirements at the time when a building or use is constructed adjacent to said parking. In the event that an on-street parking space is adjacent to more than one property, the property to which the majority of space is adjacent, as determined by the community development director, shall count. However, all house uses shall maintain a minimum of one on-site parking space. On-street parking not adjacent to any building or lot may count toward fulfilling the overall parking requirements of the TND Neighborhood. 
(4)  The maximum number of parking spaces required for any dwelling unit is four. 
(5)  Garages or carports shall not be required for any dwelling unit. 
(6)  Off-site parking areas (i.e., parking lot, parking garage, etc.) are permitted for all categories of use except house uses and shall be credited to the required parking for individual uses. House uses may utilize on-street parking to fulfill their parking requirements, as regulated in this section. Off-site parking areas should provide parking for multiple users and shall be within one-quarter mile of the activity that is utilizing its parking capacity. 
(7)  On-street parking and spaces within an off-site parking area may be utilized as shared parking when calculating the required parking for applicable uses. The use of shared parking must be authorized in writing by the community development director. The shared spaces shall not conflict with spaces that have already been designated as shared spaces for other uses likely to occur at the same time. A document graphically outlining the locations, number of shared parking spaces and times of use must be submitted to the community development director prior to shared parking authorization. 
(8)  Off-street parking areas shall be located at the rear or at the side of buildings within all categories of use. Parking areas shall not be built into the front elevation of any building, except for buildings containing structured parking, in which case such elevation shall be designed to imitate the surrounding uses. Streetwalls shall be built on the frontage line of all parking lots. 
(9)  Parking areas shall not abut street intersections or terminate a street vista. On-street parking shall not be closer than 25 feet to a street intersection, measured from the extended right-of-way lines. 
(10)  Up to five percent of the required parking spaces for all uses except house uses may be replaced by providing spaces for motorcycles, motor bikes or racks for bicycles. 
(g)  Landscaping and open space. 
(1)  Landscaping. Landscaping in a TND is intended to reinforce community identity, minimize visual blight and noise, maintain building and property values, prevent soil erosion, reduce stormwater runoff, increase groundwater recharge, create shade and reduce solar overheating. 
a.  A cohesive planting theme should emanate throughout the TND. Plantings layout and style should not conflict within the TND. 
b.  Landscaping requirements shall adhere to the requirements of Chapter 9 of the Land Development Code. 
c.  Shade trees are recommended in the planting areas along all streets, particularly in the absence of colonnades or awnings that provide shade directly over a sidewalk. It is desirable for street trees opposite each other to have their branches grow into each other to create a canopy effect over the street. 
d.  Bufferyards shall not be required adjacent to areas that would offer a natural extension of the TND or that are compatible with the TND as determined by the community development director. This is meant to facilitate the interconnectedness of compatible uses. 
(2)  Open spaces. TND open spaces shall be planned, improved and within walking distance from persons living nearby. Open space areas are a vital part of the focal point for each neighborhood. A square or plaza located at the central focus of a TND Neighborhood, for example, may comprise a majority of the required open space. There shall be at least one central plaza or square for each TND Neighborhood. There shall be a hierarchy of open space within TND Neighborhoods, to serve the needs of all residents. 
a.  Each TND Neighborhood shall contain open space recreational areas of at least 100 square feet per residential unit. At least 25 percent of this requirement shall be designed as a play lot. The minimum size of any open space recreation area shall be 1,500 square feet. The balance shall include improved land and facility improvements, to include basketball courts, tennis courts, gazebos, open play fields and the like, as determined by the development review committee (DRC). The play lot shall not be located in an area directly adjoining a water body, unless it is otherwise impractical. Residential uses shall not be located further than 600 feet from an open space recreational area. 
b.  Each TND Neighborhood shall contain at least one square or plaza. The minimum size of any square or plaza shall be one acre or two percent of the TND Neighborhood land area, whichever is less. The square or plaza should be located near the geometric center of the TND Neighborhood or at its focal point and shall be within one-quarter mile of 80 percent of all residential uses in that neighborhood. 
c.  Fifty percent of the border of a plaza must be defined by adjacent buildings, except house use buildings. The remainder may be bordered by streets or pedestrian accessways. 

Plaza Border 
d.  Seventy-five percent of the border of a square must be defined by Streets, except lanes. 

Square Border 
(h)  Lighting. The general rule for lighting in a TND is to prefer a greater amount of smaller lights, as opposed to fewer high-intensity lights. This is in keeping with the overall goal of maintaining the elements of a TND street in a human scale, but also allows for more aesthetic matters, such as allowing people to see the night sky. 
(1)  Height of freestanding lights. For this section, height includes the pole and fixture. 
a.  Lighting within the interior of parking areas of two or more acres shall not exceed 25 feet in height, except along the perimeter where it shall not exceed 12 feet in height. 
b.  Lighting within the interior of parking areas of less than two acres shall not exceed 16 feet in height, except along the perimeter where it shall not exceed 12 feet in height. 
c.  Street lights shall not exceed 12 feet in height. 
d.  Lighting in pedestrian and recreational areas shall not exceed ten feet in height. 
e.  Lighting within ballfields and recreational uses shall not exceed 40 feet in height, shall be designed to be as inconspicuous as possible, and shall not light surrounding uses, excluding streets. 
f.  In cases where the light fixture is placed below the highest point of the pole, the pole may extend an additional three feet. 
Examples of lighting: 
Examples of Lighting 
(2)  Color of light. Lighting elements that provide full-spectrum light (white light) should be used for all street lights, so that colors at night are realistic. This has the effect of deterring criminal activity and providing people with a better awareness of their surroundings. White light sources include incandescent, fluorescent, mercury vapor, and metal halide, with metal halide being preferred. 
(3)  Separation from plantings. Lighting that is meant to provide visibility for ground locations (i.e., street lights, parking lot lights, etc.) should not be placed in a manner that illuminates the top of trees or is blocked by structures. 
(4)  Decorative lighting. Lighting that enhances the architectural design of buildings and plantings is encouraged. 
(i)  Transportation. The TND shall be built in a manner that encourages the viability of transportation mode alternatives to the automobile. The design of the TND should be of sufficient density and accessibility to encourage pedestrian or bicycle travel within the development and to allow coordinated mass transit nodes for travel outside of the development. 
(1)  Transit. Since the highest levels of patronage for transit stations and stops are often found where such transit may be conveniently walked to, TND design should be inherently compatible with transit. To properly plan for transit, designers should try to have transit access as direct as possible to locations and buildings in the TND. Each transit route should also have direct, safe, secure, and pleasant pedestrian and bicycle access planned as a part of each route. Transit services should go directly into the center of each TND Neighborhood, since TND Neighborhood centers typically have shops and services which provide people with a safe and pleasant environment while waiting for the transit to arrive. 
Mass transit mode is dependent on the number of persons likely to patronize the mode. Mass transit may consist of motorized vehicles (buses, trolleys, shuttles), light rail, or heavy rail. It is expected that mass transit will be limited to motorized vehicles within the City of Miramar's bounds. Therefore, bus shelters and bays must be accommodated in the design of the TND. 
(j)  Income levels. A mix of income levels should be represented within a TND to ensure that all occupations necessary to the TND employment areas are adequately represented within the residential population. At least two dwelling unit types (single-family house, garden apartment, mixed use residential/commercial, or townhouse) shall be provided within a TND Neighborhood in order to effect a mix of income levels. 
    714.7. Specific use standards. 
(1)  Distance requirements between establishments that sell alcoholic beverages shall not be applied within a TND. 
(2)  No business establishment shall be permitted to sell alcoholic beverages, for consumption either on or off the premises, if the business establishment is adjacent to any established house of worship or school, except as provided for in F.S. Chapter 563, as may be amended from time to time. 
(3)  Guesthouses shall contain no more than six rooms for the lodging of guests. Transients shall not be lodged for more than 30 consecutive days. 
(4)  The following uses are prohibited where visible from open space areas and all streets, except lanes: Utility boxes and machinery, including but not limited to: backflow devices, electric meters, and air conditioning units, except for fire hydrants and fire department connections. 
(5)  Pain management clinics and pharmacies, as defined in Section 201, shall be prohibited in a TND. 
    714.8. Regulations per category of use. 
(a)  Public use. 

Public Use 
(1)  Land use. Land designated for public use shall consist of open space and recreational property, civic use structures, streets, and public accessways. 
(b)  Civic use. 

Civic Use 
(1)  Land use. Land designated for civic use may include any use permitted in the Community Facilities (CF) zoning district. 
(2)  Location. Civic use buildings should be located within or adjacent to a square or plaza or on property terminating a street vista. 
(3)  Lots and buildings. Civic use buildings shall not exceed 80 feet in height, excluding spires, cupolas, campaniles, monuments, flag poles, and chimneys. 
(c)  Shopfront use. 

Shopfront Use 
(1)  Land use. 
a.  Land designated for shopfront use may include any use permitted in the Community Business district (B2) and Multi-family residential districts (RM10, RM16, and RM25); guesthouses; and production support activities (artist studios, pottery shops, etc) as determined by the community development director. 
b.  Residential uses, except for entries, lobbies, and recreational support uses for residential uses, are not permitted on the ground floors of shopfront use buildings. 
(2)  Lots and buildings. 
a.  Shopfront use lots and buildings shall have the facade or column face of the colonnade built directly on their frontage line along at least 70 percent of their linear frontage. For lots and buildings with more than one possible frontage line, the facade or column face of the colonnade shall also be built directly on the secondary frontage line(s) for at least 50 percent of their linear frontage. 
b.  Shopfront use lots and buildings shall have a streetedge built along the unbuilt portions of their frontage line or their secondary frontage line(s). 
c.  A shopfront use building shall be built up to an adjacent property line or building along at least one of its sides. 
d.  Minimum floor area, minimum lot area, and minimum lot width shall be as provided for in the Land Development Code for multi-family dwelling units. 
e.  Shopfront use buildings shall not be less than 24 feet in height and shall not exceed 80 feet in height (excluding chimneys and elevator towers), except where adjacent to a house use. Where adjacent to a house use, the 15 feet of the building closest to the house use shall not exceed 35 feet in height. 
(d)  Rowhouse use. 

Rowhouse Use 
(1)  Land use. 
a.  Land designated for rowhouse use may include any use permitted in the Community Business district (B2) and Multi-family residential districts (RM10, RM16, and RM25), and guesthouses. 
b.  Non-residential uses, except live/work units, are only permitted on the ground floors of rowhouse use buildings. 
(2)  Lots and buildings. 
a.  Rowhouse use lots and buildings are encouraged to have a streetedge built along the unbuilt portions of their frontage line and secondary frontage line(s). 
b.  Rowhouse use principal buildings shall have a first floor front elevation of at least two feet above finished sidewalk grade, except for areas used for non-residential uses and buildings that are required to provide a handicapped accessible ramp per the Florida Accessibility Code for Building Construction. 
c.  Rowhouse use buildings may be set back a maximum of ten feet from their frontage line and secondary frontage line(s). 
d.  Minimum floor area, minimum lot area, and minimum lot width in rowhouse use buildings shall be as provided for in the Land Development Code for multi-family dwelling units. 
e.  Rowhouse use buildings shall not exceed 60 feet in height (excluding chimneys and elevator towers), except where adjacent to a house use. Where adjacent to a house use, the 15 feet of the building closest to the house use shall not exceed 35 feet in height. 
(e)  House use. 

House Use 
(1)  Land use. 
a.  Land designated for house use may include any use permitted in the single-family residential districts (RS3, RS4, RS5, RS6, and RS7) and guesthouses. 
(2)  Lots and buildings. 
a.  House use lots and buildings are encouraged to have a streetedge built along the unbuilt portions of their frontage line and secondary frontage line(s). 
b.  House use principal buildings shall have a first floor front elevation of at least two feet above finished sidewalk grade. 
c.  House use principal buildings shall be set back a minimum of five feet and a maximum of 25 feet from their frontage line and secondary frontage line(s). 
d.  House use secondary buildings shall be set back a minimum of five feet from their frontage line and secondary frontage line(s). 
e.  House use principal buildings shall be set back from the side lot lines (in total) a minimum of 20 percent of the width of the lot. The entire setback may be allocated to one side; however, a minimum of five feet shall be maintained between adjacent principal structures. 
f.  House use lots shall have a minimum width of 40 feet with a minimum lot size of 4,000 square feet. 
g.  The minimum floor area of a house use principal building, not including garage or non-air-conditioned areas, shall be 1,200 square feet. 
h.  House use buildings shall not exceed 35 feet in height (excluding chimneys). 
i.  A maximum of 75 percent of a house use lot's area may be covered by a structure. Front porches and stoops are encouraged and shall not count toward this maximum and may be placed within the frontyard setback. 
(f)  Accessory uses. 
(1)  Outbuildings on shopfront use, rowhouse use, and house use property are limited to 50 percent of the floor area of the principal structure(s). 
(Ord. No. 01-04, § 3, 11-15-00; Ord. No. 11-10, § 7, 9-21-11) 
Sec. 715. - Transit Oriented Corridor District Code. 
    715.1.1. Introduction. A Transit Oriented Corridor is generally characterized as a developed environment within a quarter-mile of a public transit system, with building characteristics and public amenities that promote the safe movement of pedestrians. 
    The City of Miramar's Future Land Use designation, Transit Oriented Corridor ("TOC"), is a component of a regional initiative to revitalize the State Road 7 corridor and its surrounding communities. 
    Prior to the establishment of the TOC Future Land Use designation, the City formed the Citizens' Master Plan, which was created by the Miramar/West Park Charrette, conducted in February 2005. The Citizens' Master Plan was prepared by the Treasure Coast Regional Planning Council, the South Florida Regional Planning Council, City officials, and Miramar Department of Community Development staff on behalf of Miramar stakeholders and residents. In addition to the Citizens' Master Plan, the City relied on the recommendations of the Historic Miramar Study prepared by Anthony Abbate Architect, PA, in 2003, for development of the areas near State Road 7. 
    The TOCD Code incorporates the goals of previous efforts with elements of the current Traditional Neighborhood Development ("TND") and State Road 7 Overlay District standards to produce development standards for the TOCD. The TOCD Code facilitates mixed-use development, pedestrian-oriented streets, public mobility options, Mediterranean Revival style architecture, and opportunities for location of work, play, services and entertainment within walking distance. 
    715.1.2. General. This Code shall be known as the TOCD Code for the City of Miramar. The TOCD Code shall promote the Goals, Objectives and Policies contained of the TOC designation within the Future Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan. Specifically, Policy 1.17 and Objective 9D of the Future Land Use Element are designed to maximize the development potential of State Road 7, Pembroke Road, Miramar Parkway, and County Line Road. 
    The TOCD Code supplements the Land Development Code ("LDC") provisions within the City of Miramar for the area known as the TOCD. The TOCD is generally described as the area bound to the north by Pembroke Road, to the east by State Road 7, to the south by County Line Road, and to the west by Southwest 66th, 61st and 64th Avenues. 
    To create the "Miramar" envisioned by the citizens during the visioning process, the City of Miramar's TOCD Code is modeled after the SmartCode. 
    The Smart Code, released by Duany Plater-Zyberk & Company and distributed by the nonprofit Center for Applied Transect Studies, is a Form-Based land development code that addresses the physical form of buildings and community. The open-source SmartCode is a transect-based model code intended to be used as a template for adaptation by local governments. 
    Form-Based codes are an alternative to conventional zoning that support the disposition of a community, mixed-use development, and a sustainable and walkable environment. As defined by the Form-Based Code Institute, Form-Based codes foster predictable results and a high-quality public realm by using physical form (rather than separation of uses) as the organizing principle for these regulations. 
    Miramar's TOCD Code is specifically created to encourage compact first-rate projects based upon smart growth principles; to preserve the existing character of neighborhoods surrounding the State Road 7 corridor; to regulate for high-quality infill development, and to create a predictable process for developers and the community to meet these goals. 
    The intent and purpose of the TOCD Code is to encourage and promote: 
• Public Health and Safety. 
• Mixed-Use Development. 
• Pedestrian Mobility. 
• Public Transit. 
• Preservation of Neighborhoods. 
• Conservation of Land. 
• Environmental Protection. 
• Energy Efficiency. 
• Sustainable Buildings and Practices. 
• Aesthetically Pleasing Community Urban Design. 
• Adequate Public Utilities and Facilities. 
    715.1.3. Components of the TOCD Code. The TOCD Code shall be comprised of a Regulating Plan, Pattern Book and Regulations that dictate the placement, character and Function of buildings, signs, and other structures within the TOCD. 
715.1.3.1. Miramar's official "zoning" map for the TOCD is the Regulating Plan. All properties within the TOCD shall be classified within regulatory Districts pursuant to the Regulating Plan. The boundaries of all districts within the TOC and their designations are shown on the Regulating Plan. The Regulating Plan may be supplemented by additional layers or separate maps to show specific details of a particular area which the Regulating Plan does not adequately describe. 
A.  On the City's official Zoning Map, the commercial properties within the TOCD are rezoned and shown as Mixed-Use Low, Mixed-Use High, and Special District. The six existing zoning districts for Residential properties have been consolidated into two districts, RS8 and RM4. The existing Open Space and Community Facility properties are reclassified as those designations, respectively. 
B.  The Regulating Plan, together with all adopted explanatory and supplemental material shown therein, is hereby adopted by reference and shall be part of this Code. The Regulating Plan determines the locations of the districts and graphically depicts the regulation areas. 
715.1.3.2. Districts within the TOCD determine the functions and further detail the regulations which limit or determine the height, volume, and form of buildings and structures, the area of yards and other open spaces, and the Density and intensity of functions. TOCD District descriptions are provided in Table 1. TOCD Descriptions. 
A.  The TOCD is comprised of zoning designations including Residential Districts, Mixed-Use Districts, and Special Districts. 
B.  Residential Districts will retain the same property rights as they had under their previous zoning designations, with the addition of new Setback, height and function requirements established to increase the development potential of the Lots. 
C.  The existing commercial areas within the TOCD are rezoned to Mixed-Use districts which are classified according to the Density, intensity and hierarchy of the adjacent corridor. 
D.  The Special Districts include areas that have different building characteristics, and in some cases, functions from the other districts. Due to their intrinsic function, placement, or character, the areas within the Special Districts do not conform to one or more of the other districts specified by the TOCD Code. 
Name TOCD Category Prior Zoning Classification Density and Intensity RS Residential Single-Family R-1B, RS-3, RS-5, RS-6 (low Density) RM Residential Multi-Family RM-10, RM-16 (moderate Density) ML Mixed-Use Low B-2, B-3 (moderate Density and intensity) MH Mixed-Use High B-2, B-3, SR7 Commercial (high Density and intensity) SD1 Special District 1 B-3 (moderate Density and intensity) SD2 Special District 2 Open Space (low Density and intensity) SD3 Special District 3 Community Facility (low Density and intensity)  
715.1.3.3. Regulations for each District are divided into categories, which detail building placement, building character, building function, street standards, parking, and landscape standards that determine the type of development allowed in each District. 
715.1.3.4. Categories of Building function and allocation. 
(a)  It is the intent of this Code that building functions should not be concentrated in a particular area; they should be mixed together in a pedestrian-friendly and compact manner. 
(b)  A TOC Monitoring Report will be established and maintained by the Community & Economic Development Department in order to maintain an accurate measure of the development thresholds within the TOC as indicated in Policy 1.17 of the Future Land Use Element of the Comprehensive Plan. 
    715.1.4. Reserved. 
715.1.4.1.-715.1.4.5. Reserved. 
715.1.4.6 . Existing Parking Areas that provide parking in excess of the requirements of this Code may be reduced in accordance with Section 715.3.1 "Parking." 
    715.1.5. Administrative approval and variances . 
715.1.5.1 . There shall be two types of authorized deviations from the requirements of this Code: Administrative Approvals and Variances. The DRC shall have the authority to administratively approve or disapprove a request for an Administrative Approval. Variances shall be subject to review and approval by the Planning and Zoning Board or City Commission, in accordance with the requirements of Section 315 of the LDC. 
(a)  An Administrative Approval is a ruling that would permit a practice that is not in strict conformance with a specific provision of this Code, but is determined to be consistent with the goals of the applicable TOC district in accordance with subsection 715.1.5. 
(b)  Deviations from this Code which are authorized for Administrative Approval are as specifically provided in the TOCD Code and shall be reviewed, and approved or denied, by the DRC. 
(1)  Administrative Approvals Involving Deviations From Development Standards. Except for Administrative Approvals from Table 9A "Specific Function and Use" which shall be considered under the criteria provided in subsection b(2) of this section, the applicant shall demonstrate satisfaction of all of the following criteria: 
(A)  The strict application of this Code would prohibit site improvements to bring a TOCD development site as close as possible to meeting TOCD Code requirements; 
(B)  The need for the proposed waiver of the applicable TOCD standard arises from some condition peculiar to the specific property involved; 
(C)  The proposed waiver of the applicable TOCD standard would improve the quality and/or safety of the property and will not diminish the use of the property, nor negatively impact surrounding properties and the TOCD area; and 
(D)  The proposed development meets the requirements of the TOCD Code as nearly as possible under the unique circumstances. 
(2)  Administrative Approvals Involving Specific Function And Use Standards. For Administrative Approvals provided in Table 9A. Specific Function and Use, the applicant shall demonstrate that all of the following standards have been met: 
(A)  The proposed use is appropriate in the area in which it is proposed; 
(B)  The proposed use will be reasonably compatible with surrounding uses; 
(C)  The proposed use will not contaminate the Biscayne Aquifer; 
(D)  Any nuisance or hazardous feature involved is suitably separated and buffered from adjacent uses; 
(E)  The proposed use will not hinder development of the site or nearby vacant property; 
(F)  That the use will not have a detrimental effect on vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or parking conditions, and will not result in the generation or creation of traffic inconsistent with the health, safety and welfare of the community; 
(G)  The land or building which is involved is adequate for the proposed use; and 
(H)  The proposed use complies with the Comprehensive Plan. 
(I)  Drive through facilities shall not have direct ingress or egress to Commercial Streets. 
(3)  Applications for Administrative Approval shall be submitted to the Department of Community & Economic Development, and scheduled for review by the DRC. 
(A)  A Variance is a ruling on a deviation which is not qualified for consideration as an Administrative Approval in accordance with this subsection. Variances shall be available for relief from development standards provided in this Code, which are not expressly subject to Administrative Approval. Variances shall not be granted to allow the establishment of a use which is not otherwise allowed in a TOCD district. Variances from the TOCD Code shall be processed and reviewed in accordance with Section 315 of the LDC. 
(B)  The request for a Variance shall not subject the entire application to public hearing, but only the specific issue requiring the relief. 
715.1.5.2. Site Plan Submittal and Consideration . Site plans for projects within the TOCD area that do not require Variances shall be processed, and approved or denied, by the DRC. The procedure for site plan filing and submittal shall be as provided for in Section 310 of the LDC. However, for applications subject to administrative review by the DRC under this subsection, the DRC shall determine whether the site plan meets the standards of this Code, and the general site plan criteria of Section 310 of the LDC. The requirements of Section 310 of the LDC shall apply to all site plans approved under this subsection. Site plan approvals may be subject to conditions as approved by the DRC. 
715.1.5.3. Request for Quasi-Judicial Hearing. An applicant or affected party may request a quasi-judicial City Commission hearing on an application subject to an administrative decision of the DRC under this subsection. Within five days of the DRC's decision to grant or deny administrative approval of a site plan or other administrative approval under this subsection, the Director shall provide posted and mailed notice of the DRC's decision to the applicant and all owners of property located within 500 feet of the property that is subject to the site plan or administrative approval, advising them of their right to request a quasi-judicial hearing of the City Commission on the application by filing an application on a form provided by the Director. Such request for a hearing of the City Commission shall be made within 30 days of the mailing of the notice by the Director. An approved administrative site plan or administrative approval shall become effective 30 days following the Director's posting and mailing of the notification of the DRC's decision, provided that no request for City Commission hearing is filed. If a request for a quasi-judicial hearing is made by the applicant or an affected property owner, it shall be scheduled for the next available City Commission meeting following the Director's completion of his or her review of the request. The City Commission hearing and decision shall be governed by the standards applicable to site plans and administrative approvals under this section. 
715.1.5.4. Should a violation of the Regulating Plan or an approved Site Plan occur during construction, or should any construction, site work, or development be commenced without an approved Regulating Plan or Site Plan, the Building Official shall be authorized to require the owner to stop, remove, and/or mitigate the violation. 
    715.1.6. Development incentives. 
715.1.6.1 . To encourage development and redevelopment within the TOCD in accordance with this Code, the City of Miramar grants the following incentives: 
1.  Site plan applications under the TOCD Code shall be processed administratively by the DRC and CAB in accordance with subsection 715.1.5. 
2.  The City of Miramar has been designated as a "Platinum City" by the Greater Fort Lauderdale Alliance for its permitting excellence process. The purpose of this process is to provide developers with a streamlined, first rate experience when going through the development, permitting, and inspection process. 
3.  The City shall internally coordinate the application development approval process for the placement of underground utilities with the appropriate federal, state, and county agencies for all property within the TOCD. 
4.  The City shall reduce the planning application fees for site plans and community appearance review by 50% of the established fee rates. 
5.  The City shall exempt applicants for development of residential units from the requirement for land dedication or entering into a park agreement with the City and instead shall allow payment of the established Community Parks Land Dedication impact fees. 
6.  All development in the TOCD shall receive a maximum of 35 percent reduction from the parking standards listed in Section 808 "Off Street Parking and Loading Standards" of the LDC. 
    715.1.7. Affordable housing incentives. To encourage the provision of Affordable Housing within the TOCD, the City of Miramar provides the incentives identified in the City's adopted Local Housing Assistance Plan (LHAP), in accordance with Section 420.9071(16), Florida Statutes. 
    715.1.8. Sustainability standards. 
715.1.8.1. Sustainable building practices refers to building and building site design, materials and construction techniques that minimize demand for nonrenewable material and energy resources and water consumption, and minimizes the generation of waste products, pollution, and stormwater runoff. 
Sustainable building practices are generally consistent with the techniques used to achieve certification of construction and development through third party sustainable building and development certification programs including the United States Green Building Council ("USGBC") Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design ("LEED"), the Florida Green Building Coalition certification program, and the Florida Green Lodging certification program. 
To support sustainable building practices, all buildings and structures within the TOCD shall comply with the following: 
1.  Applicants for development within the TOCD are required to schedule a preliminary development application meeting with the Community & Economic Development Department Director. 
2.  At the preliminary development application meeting, the applicant shall identify the third party green building development standards proposed to be incorporated in the project design and implementation, and provide a copy of the standards to the Community & Economic Development Director for review. 
3.  Approved third party green building development certification programs shall include but are not limited to the certification standards of the Florida Green Building Coalition, Florida Green Lodging, and LEED. If the standards of a third party certification program other than those listed in this subsection are proposed to be incorporated into the development by the applicant, the Community & Economic Development Director shall review the standards of the rating organization certification program intended to be used by the applicant and notify the applicant if the proposed program and standards are accepted or rejected as adequate standards for certification of sustainable building and development practices. 
4.  Applicants must choose one of the following options for incorporation of sustainable building practices: 
(A)  Formal application for Third Party Green Building Certification Program Development Rating. The applicant may formally apply for third party certification with a selected third party green building development rating organization approved by the Community & Economic Development Director in accordance with subsection (C), including full compliance with the applicable submittal, application and fee requirements for the selected third party certification; or 
(B)  Participation in Community & Economic Development Department Sustainability Review Program. As an alternative to formal application for third party organization certification as provided in (D)(1) of this subsection, and as a requirement for those projects that apply for and do not receive certification from a third party organization, the applicant shall list the standards of the approved third party green building certification program which are proposed to be incorporated into the development. The Community & Economic Development Director shall review the building plans and verify their adherence to the third party green building and development standards proposed to be incorporated in the project design and implementation. The applicant shall document compliance with all of the approved third party green building certification program certification criteria on the building plans for the project, to the satisfaction of the Community & Economic Development Director. 
5.  Site development plan submittal requirements for demonstration of compliance with this section shall include the following: 
(A)  Documentation that the applicant has participated in the preliminary development application meeting and has received written notification that all structures within the proposed development shall incorporate sustainable building practices; and 
(B)  For developments seeking formal third party certification with a selected third party green building development rating organization in accordance with (D)(1) of this subsection, a written statement identifying the applicable third party green building and development standards, and demonstrating said third party organization's recognition of the development's compliance with the minimum standards of the third party green building and development standards; or 
(C)  For developments participating in the Community & Economic Development Department Sustainability Review Program in accordance with (D)(2) of this subsection, the applicant shall provide a narrative explanation of how the sustainable building measures are being incorporated in the development, including documentation that the applicant has incorporated sustainable practices according to the City's Community & Economic Development Department Sustainability Review Program. 
_____
    715.2.1. Building function. 
715.2.1.1. Building Function: 
(a)  The TOCD regulatory districts shall be in accordance with the table below: 
Previous Zoning Prior Zoning Districts Residential (R1-B 37.58 acres) TOCD-Residential Single Family Residential-1 (RS-3 1.03 acres) (TOCD-RS 82.42 acres) Residential-5 (RS-5 43.81 acres) Residential-10 (RM-10 88.93 acre) TOCD-Residential Multi-Family Residential-16 (RM-16 69.69 acres) (TOCD-RM 161.42 acres) Planned Unit Development (PUD 2.8 acres) Community Business (B-2 38.41 acres) TOCD-Mixed-Use High (TOCD-MH 51.86 acres) Heavy Business (B-3 13.45 acres) Community Business (B-2 49.76 acres) TOCD-Mixed-Use Low (TOCD-ML 49.76 acres) Heavy Business (B-3 16.35 acres) TOCD-Special District 1 (TOCD-SD1 16.35 acres) Open Space (OS 62.03 acres) TOCD-Special District 2 (TOCD-SD2 62.03 acres) Community Facility (CF 15.79 acres) TOCD-Special District 3 (TOCD-SD3 15.79 acres)  
_____ 
(b)  Buildings shall conform to the functions listed in Table 9A. Specific Function and Use. 
(c)  Automobile-oriented functions are prohibited in the TOCD Prohibited Functions include: 
(1)  Large Surface Parking Lots; 
(2)  Gas stations; 
(3)  Auto repair; 
(4)  Car washes; 
(5)  Auto dealers; 
(6)  Self-storage; 
(7)  Equipment storage; 
(8)  "Big Box" warehouses. 
(d)  First Story Commercial Functions shall be permitted. 
(e)  Residential Functions shall be prohibited on the ground floors of Mixed-Use buildings. 
(f)  Drive through facilities shall be permitted only upon an Administrative Approval in accordance with Section 715.1.5.1 B(2). 
715.2.1.2. Distance requirements concerning establishments that sell alcoholic beverages, as per Section 713.3.3 of the LDC, shall not be applicable within the TOCD. 
    715.2.2. Building placement. 
A.  The maximum intensity allowed within the TOCD, as provided within the Transit Oriented Corridor Land Use designation of the Future Land Use Element, shall be in accordance with the table below: 
TOCD Land Use 
Designations Density and Intensity Thresholds Commercial 2,500,000 SF Office 2,500,000 SF Residential 3,406 Dwelling Units Hotel 250 Hotel Rooms Parks 61.31 Acres  
B.  Newly platted Lots shall be dimensioned according to Table 6. Building Placement and Character. 
C.  The required Setbacks for buildings on newly platted Lots within the TOCD are illustrated on Table 6. Building Placement and Character. 
D.  Buildings shall define the streetscape through the function of uniform Setbacks along the Build-to Line for each Block. 
E.  Buildings shall be constructed at the Build-to Line which is behind the Pedestrian Zone and typically defined as 15 feet to 20 feet from the edge of the Curb depending on the street type as demonstrated on Tables 2C-F. Thoroughfare Assemblies. 
F.  The following exceptions to the Build-to Line and Setback requirements shall be permitted: 
1.  A portion of the building may be set back from the Build-to line to create interest in the building Facade. A maximum Setback of 20 feet on Primary Streets and 15 feet maximum on Secondary Streets shall be permitted. 
2.  In the case of an Infill Lot, Setbacks shall match one of the existing adjacent Setbacks of an approved TOCD project. 
3.  Setbacks and Build-to Lines may otherwise be adjusted by Administrative Approval. 
G.  The permitted yard types for each district within the TOCD are indicated in Table 5. Building Disposition. 
H.  Land in the TOCD is largely developed on Lots platted prior to the adoption of this Code. Due to limited Lot sizes in the TOCD, Lot assembly is encouraged, and the following standards shall apply: 
1.  New Lots created within existing Blocks that have 4, 6 or 8 Lots shall have at minimum a Frontage of one-half of the Block, or 225 feet, whichever is less, on Primary Streets. 
2.  New Lots created within existing Blocks that have 5 lots shall have at minimum a Frontage of 2/5 of the Block, or 225 feet, whichever is less, on Primary Streets. 
3.  New lots created within existing Blocks that have 12 lots shall have at minimum a Frontage of 1/3 of the Block, or 225 feet, whichever is less, on Primary Streets. 
I.  Buildings shall be placed in relation to the boundaries of their Lots in accordance with Table 6. Building Placement and Character. 
1.  Buildings with Frontage on a Primary Street shall be prioritized over other Frontages for Building Placement and Facade enhancement in accordance with this Code. 
2.  The Principal Frontage of all buildings shall contain the Principal Entrance and face a public street. 
    715.2.3. Building character. 
715.2.3.1. Building heights shall conform to Table 6. Building Placement and Character. 
A.  To provide variety to the skyline, the number of stories, not the overall height shall limit building elevation. 
B.  Finished ground floor heights shall be 18 inches minimum above the Sidewalk, except for Residential and lodging. 
C.  At the ground level, Residential or lodging functions shall be raised a minimum of 2 feet from average Sidewalk grade. 
D.  Ground floors from finished floor to finished ceiling shall be a minimum of 12 feet from finished floor to finished ceiling and a maximum of 25 feet. 
E.  Upper floors from finished floor to finished ceiling shall be a minimum of 8 feet and a maximum of 14 feet. 
F.  A single floor level exceeding 14 feet, or 25 feet at ground level, shall be considered as a double height space and shall be counted as 2 Stories. 
G.  Mezzanines extending beyond 33 percent of the usable floor area shall be counted as an additional Story. 
H.  Height limits do not apply to raised basements, belfries, clock towers, or elevator bulkheads. Attics shall not exceed 14 feet in height. 
715.2.3.2. The Principal Frontage of buildings shall conform to and be allocated in accordance with Table 2A. Public Frontages and Table 7. Private Frontages. 
A.  Buildings along the State Road 7 Corridor shall be designed and placed to support pedestrian activity. 
B.  Buildings on corner Lots shall have two Principal Frontages. 
C.  Buildings along Primary and Secondary Streets shall provide covered walkways, where possible, along the side of the building facing the corridor. 
D.  Options for covered walkways and Frontages are listed below. Buildings on Primary and Secondary Streets may choose from Retail Frontages, Gallery Frontages or Arcade Frontages in accordance with this subsection. 
1.  The following standards shall apply for usage of a Retail Frontage for buildings on Primary and Secondary Streets. 
(a)  All buildings shall provide a Shopfront at Sidewalk level along the entire length of its Private Frontage. 
(b)  The Shopfront shall be no less than 70 percent glazed in not more than 20 percent tinted glass and shaded by an Awning, Gallery, or Arcade overlapping the Sidewalk. Reflective film shall not be permitted on glass. 
(c)  The first floor shall be confined to Retail function through the depth of the second Layer. 
2.  The following standards shall apply for usage of a Gallery Frontage for buildings on Primary and Secondary Streets. 
(a)  All buildings shall provide a permanent cover over the Sidewalk, either cantilevered or supported by columns. 
(b)  A Gallery Frontage may be combined with a Retail Frontage. 
3.  The following standards shall apply for usage of an Arcade Frontage for buildings on Primary and Secondary Streets. 
(a)  The Arcade Frontage may be combined with a Retail Frontage. 
(b)  All buildings shall overlap the Sidewalk such that the first floor Facade is a Colonnade. 
4.  Awnings, Arcades, and galleries may Encroach into the Pedestrian Zone to within 2 feet of the Curb, and may not affect street trees or opt out of the street tree requirement but must clear the Sidewalk vertically by at least 8 feet. 
5.  Stoops, Lightwells, Balconies, Bay Windows, and Terraces may Encroach into the Setback depth. 
6.  A coordinated Frontage is recommended for all buildings on Primary and Secondary Streets. 
(a)  The front Setback and Pedestrian Zone may be coordinated as a single, coherent landscape and paving design. 
715.2.3.3. Building Design Principles. Building design shall be in accordance with Section 803 "Architectural Standards" of the LDC. 
715.2.3.4. Building Massing. Building massing shall be in accordance with Section 813 "Community Appearance Board Standards" of the LDC. 
715.2.3.5. Roof Form. Roof form shall be in accordance with Section 813 "Community Appearance Board Standards" of the LDC. 
715.2.3.6. Window Standards. Windows shall be in accordance with Section 813 "Community Appearance Board Standards" of the LDC. 
715.2.3.7. Lighting Standards. Exterior lighting posts and poles provided within the TOCD shall be in accordance with Table 3. Public Lighting. 
A.  Lighting within the interior of Parking Areas of two or more acres shall not exceed 25 feet in height, except along the perimeter where it shall not exceed 12 feet in height. 
B.  Lighting within the interior of Parking Areas of less than two acres shall not exceed 16 feet in height, except along the perimeter where it shall not exceed 12 feet in height. 
C.  Pedestrian Street lights shall not exceed 12 feet in height. 
D.  Recreational area lighting shall not exceed 12 feet in height, except for ball field or park lighting. 
E.  In cases where the light fixture is placed below the highest point of the pole, the pole may extend an additional 3 feet. 
F.  Lighting elements that provide full-spectrum light (white light) shall be used for all street lights. Metal halide lighting shall be preferred. Permissible white light sources include the following: 
1.  Incandescent; 
2.  Fluorescent; 
3.  Mercury vapor; 
4.  Metal halide. 
G.  Lighting that is intended to provide visibility for ground locations (i.e., street lights, parking lot lights, etc.) should not be placed in a manner that illuminates the top of trees or is blocked by structures. 
H.  Lighting that enhances the architectural design of buildings and plantings are encouraged. 
715.2.3.8. Sound Standards. 
A.  Within the TOCD, sound levels measured at the property line of the sound-generating property shall not exceed 70 decibels from sunrise to midnight, and shall not exceed 60 decibels from midnight to sunrise. 
B.  Screening and landscaping shall also be used to buffer noise. 
    715.3.1. Parking and density calculations. 
715.3.1.1. Allocations and Calculations . 
(a)  All parking allocations must be approved by the DRC. 
(b)  All development in the TOCD shall receive a maximum of 35 percent reduction from the parking standards listed in Section 808 "Off Street Parking and Loading Standards" of the LDC. 
715.3.1.2. Payment-in-Lieu of Parking Fund . A Payment-in-Lieu of Parking Fund shall be established by the City to provide funding specifically for parking and related improvements within the TOCD. Payment-in-Lieu of Parking Fees will be collected from all applicants for development and uses within the TOCD that do not provide sufficient on-site parking spaces or Shared Parking spaces to meet the minimum parking requirements of the Code. The Payment-in-Lieu of Parking Fee option for compliance with this subsection shall become effective upon adoption by the City Commission of a Resolution which specifies the amount of the Payment-in-Lieu of Parking Fund Fee. 
(a)  Payment-in-Lieu of Parking Fund Fee Calculation. The amount of a payment to the Payment-in-Lieu of Parking Fund shall be calculated per parking space which is required but not provided via on-site parking spaces or Shared Parking spaces. The amount per parking space shall be determined by the average cost to the City for the construction of a parking space in a Parking Structure on a program wide basis within the TOCD, which shall be determined by the Director of Construction & Facilities Management in coordination with the Community & Economic Development Director. The average cost shall include actual costs and fees for land acquisition, design and planning, legal fees, engineering, actual construction, and permit review and inspection. 
(b)  Payment in Full of Payment-in-Lieu of Parking Fee. For property owners opting to pay in full, or applicants not eligible to provide payment through a Payment in Lieu of Parking Agreement as provided in subsection 715.3.1.2(D), payment of the full amount of the in-lieu fee shall be due prior to the issuance of a building permit for the development, or prior to issuance of a certificate of use for the use for which the payment is required, whichever occurs sooner. 
(c)  Payment in Lieu of Parking Agreement. In-Lieu of Parking Fee Agreements shall only be made between the City and the owner(s) of the subject property. Applicants for an in-lieu fee which is not paid in full prior to issuance of a building permit, must enter into an In-Lieu of Parking Fee Agreement with the City prior to the issuance of a building permit for the development, or prior to issuance of a certificate of use for the use for which the payment is required, whichever occurs sooner. Such agreement shall be approved by the community development director, and shall be recorded at the property owner's expense in the Public Records of Broward County, Florida. The In-Lieu of Parking Fee Agreement shall provide that the obligations imposed by the agreement constitute a restrictive covenant upon the property, and shall bind successors, heirs and assigns, and shall be released by the City upon payment in full of the amount due under the agreement. 
(d)  Payment in Lieu of Parking Agreement Term. An In-Lieu of Parking Fee Agreement executed by a property owner applicant in accordance with this subsection shall provide that installment payments shall be made over no longer than a 36 month time period in 3 installments. The first installment shall be at least 50 percent of the total fee due, and shall be paid upon signing the agreement, prior to the issuance of a building permit for the development or a certificate of use, whichever occurs sooner. The second installment shall be in the amount of at least 25 percent of the total fee amount due, and shall be paid no later than the second anniversary date of the execution of the agreement. A third and final payment of 25 percent of the total fee may be authorized by the agreement, and shall be due no later than the third anniversary date of the execution of the agreement. A property owner subject to an In-Lieu of Parking Fee Agreement may make a redemption payment of the remainder of the amount due pursuant to the agreement, at any time prior to the final required payment. 
715.3.1.3. On-Site Parking . 
(a)  All parking lots, garages, and Parking Structures shall be located at the rear of all buildings. 
(b)  Parking Areas shall be accessed from side and back streets and from adjacent properties. Access to Parking Areas from SR-7 shall be avoided unless no other access is available. 
(c)  Large Surface Parking Lots shall be visually and functionally segmented into several smaller lots through the use of structures and landscaping. Designs that reduce visibility, especially between Parking Areas and business entrances, shall be discouraged. 
(d)  Surface Parking Areas shall be obscured from Frontages by a building or Street Screen. 
(e)  Existing Surface Parking Lots are intended to be reduced, over time, through redevelopment and/or construction of structured parking facilities. 
(f)  Parking Areas shall not abut street intersections or terminate a street vista. On-street parking shall not be closer than 25 feet to a street intersection, measured from the extended right-of-way lines. 
715.3.1.4. On-Street Parking (Parallel Parking) . 
(a)  On-street parking is not allowed on State Road 7. 
(b)  On-street parking located adjacent to a building or lot shall count toward fulfilling the parking requirements for that building or function. 
715.3.1.5. Shared Parking . 
(a)  The parking requirements for buildings containing more than one function shall be the total of the amount of parking required for each function. 
(b)  Shared Parking Areas shall be located no further than one-quarter mile of the building or function utilizing the Shared Parking capacity. 
(c)  Cross-access easements or similar mechanisms approved by the City Attorney shall be used to provide joint access between Shared Parking Areas. 
(d)  In a Parking Structure or Garage, each above-ground level counts as a single Story regardless of its relationship to habitable Stories. 
(e)  Parking Structures shall have Liner Buildings along primary frontages and landscape bufferyards adjacent to residential properties. 
(f)  Vehicular entrances to parking lots, Parking Garages, and Parking Structures shall be no wider than 24 feet at the Build-to Line. 
(g)  Pedestrian walkways shall be integrated, to the extent possible, into the interior and/or perimeter landscaping of parking lots; constructed with brick pavers, stamped concrete or a paved or similarly firm surface, at least six feet in width; and separated from vehicular and Parking Areas by grade, Curbing and/or vegetation, except for necessary ramps. 
(h)  Pedestrian exits from all parking lots, garages, and Parking Structures shall be directly to a Build-to Line except underground levels which may be exited by pedestrians directly into a building. 
(i)  Parking facilities and appurtenant driveways shall be designed to maximize the safety and convenience of pedestrians walking between parked cars and business entrances as well as between external points and locations on-site. 
715.3.1.6. Loading and Service Areas . 
(a)  Loading docks, solid waste facilities, recycling facilities and other service areas shall be located to the rear or side of a building in visually unobtrusive locations. 
(b)  All trash and recycling service areas shall be enclosed so as not to be visible. 
(c)  Loading docks and service areas shall be permitted on Frontages only by Administrative Approval. 
715.3.1.7. Amenities. A minimum of one bicycle rack place shall be provided within a Pedestrian Zone for every ten vehicular parking spaces required by this Code within the Mixed-Use High and Mixed-Use Low districts. 
    715.3.2. Street requirements. 
715.3.2.1. Streets in a TOCD are intended to be inviting public spaces and integral components of community design. TOCD streets shall be organized according to a hierarchy based on function, size, capacity, and Design Speed. In descending order of importance, the hierarchy shall consider pedestrians as the most important, followed by cyclists, mass transit, and automobiles. All design elements must consistently be applied to calm automobile traffic and to facilitate pedestrian activity. 
715.3.2.2. The hierarchy of streets for the TOCD should adhere to Tables 2A. Public Frontages, 2B. Vehicular Thoroughfares, and 2C-2F. Thoroughfare Assemblies. The proposed hierarchy of streets shall be indicated on the submitted site plan with each street type being separately detailed. 
715.3.2.3. Specialty paving required for pedestrian areas and the TOCD entrance is detailed in Tables 2C-2F. Thoroughfare Assemblies. 
715.3.2.4. Streets may be comprised of segments. Each segment shall have the characteristic of one street type. 
715.3.2.5 The elements that comprise a street within the TOCD are listed below and are depicted in detail in Tables 2C-2F. Thoroughfare Assemblies. 
A.  Pedestrian Zone: 
1.  Curb and Gutter. 
2.  Planting Area. 
(a)  Street Trees. 
(b)  Shrubs. 
(c)  Ground Cover. 
3.  Sidewalk. 
(a)  Optional Planting Area. 
(b)  Pedestrian Accessways, Paths or Passages. 
4.  Street Furniture. 
5.  Lighting. 
B.  Public Utility Equipment or Public Easement (required if determined to be necessary by the Director of Community Development). 
C.  On-Street Parking. 
D.  Bicycle Lanes. 
E.  Travel Lanes. 
F.  Landscaped Medians. 
715.3.2.6. In the TOCD, Sidewalks in addition to street trees, planting areas and furnishings occur within the Pedestrian Zone, which is comprised of the Build-to Line and the right-of-way. 
715.3.2.7. Sidewalks are required on both sides the street except for a street on the undeveloped edge of a TOCD. Sidewalk requirements are listed in Tables 2C-2F. Thoroughfare Assemblies. 
715.3.2.8. The primary Facades of all buildings shall contain the primary pedestrian Entry and face a public street. 
715.3.2.9. The requirements for placement and types of street trees are specified in Table 4. Public Planting. 
715.3.2.10. Street trees shall be planted on both sides of the street except for a street on the undeveloped edge of the TOCD district. 
715.3.2.11. Depending on the street type, the planting area may contain the required landscaping, the required street trees, or a combination of both. 
715.3.2.12. The required planting area width may be combined with the required Sidewalk to expand the Sidewalk beyond the required width. In this scenario, the street trees must be placed in tree grates. 
715.3.2.13. Utilities shall be placed underground and should be located along Rights-of-Way ("ROWs"). 
715.3.2.14. Curbs and gutters shall conform to the City's Engineering design standards. 
715.3.2.15. Parallel on-street Parking Areas (including area of adjacent paved gutter) shall be at least 7 feet wide for Residential streets and at least 7 to 8 feet wide for Primary and Secondary Streets, and at least 22 feet long for all streets. 
715.3.2.16. Angled on-street parking may be provided as long as wheel stops or Curbed Sidewalks are provided. 
715.3.2.17. On-street parking width shall include the adjacent paved gutter area. Curbed bulb-outs containing streets trees and/or other plantings are encouraged to be built at regular intervals and at all intersections within a dedicated on-street Parking Area. 
715.3.2.18. Where provided, Bicycle Lanes shall be at least four feet in width and shall be placed between on-street Parking Areas and travel lanes, or between the Curb and gutter and the travel lanes in the absence of on-street Parking Areas. 
715.3.2.19. City approved bus shelters shall be provided by the property owners or the City on all Primary Streets within the TOCD. 
715.3.3. Landscape standards . Development within the TOCD shall be exempt from full compliance with the landscape standards of Chapter 9 Landscaping Requirements and Tree Conservation of the LDC, and governed by Table 4. Public Planting. Specifically, sites shall incorporate the design intent of the standards, but do not have to meet the particular planting requirements for accessways (Section 901.5), street trees (Section 901.6, other than noted in this section), pedestrian landscape zone (Section 901.4.1) and bufferyard width requirements (Section 905 Table 3). If building setbacks of a minimum of 8 feet in width are achievable for perimeters other than the primary frontage (which typically is provided with a pedestrian zone including a street scape pattern described in Section 715.3.2 above), then bufferyard planting requirements shall apply. Building setbacks less than 8 feet in width shall not require shade trees. Trees and landscape shall be required for streets, medians, squares, plazas, and private property in accordance with the following: 
715.3.3.A. Street Trees : Street trees shall be placed at a maximum average spacing of thirty-five (35) feet on center. Street trees shall have a minimum caliper of three inches and a minimum clear trunk height of eight feet at the time of planting. Palms require a maximum average spacing of twenty-five (25) feet. Street trees shall be planted in one or more of the following methods of installation: 
(a)  Tree Grates: Trees shall be planted within openings in the sidewalk, which shall be covered by permanently installed grates perforated to permit natural irrigation and flush and shall be flush with the surrounding sidewalk. 
(b)  Tree Planters: Trees planted within a raised planter located on the sidewalk, shall be defined on all sides by a permanent masonry structure to consist of a minimum six inch raised curb. The area within the planter, in addition to the required trees, shall be planted with ground cover, shrubs and other appropriate plant material. 
(c)  Continuous Planting Strips: Trees planted in the area between the curb or roadway edge and the sidewalk shall include grass and ground cover. This option is not permitted along frontages where the ground story of buildings is occupied by storefronts. Street trees shall not be required where colonnades are provided and the swale area is less than eight feet in width; however, if at least 5 feet are provided, then planters and trellises may be substituted. 
715.3.3.B. Median Trees : Median trees shall have a minimum caliper of three inches and a minimum clear trunk height of eight feet at the time of planting, and shall provide 100% canopy coverage within two years of installation. 
715.3.3.C. Plot Requirements : 15 trees per net acre of lot area with a minimum three inches of caliper and eight feet of clear trunk height at time of planting. 
715.3.3.D. At-Grade Parking Lots : Parking areas not covered by a parking structure shall meet the landscaping requirements of Section 901.8. 
All landscaped areas shall be continuously maintained in a good, healthy condition and sprinkler systems of sufficient size and spacing shall be installed to serve all required landscape areas, consistent with Section 901.14 Maintenance Requirements. 
    715.3.4. Public art and amenities. 
715.3.4.1. Description. Public Art and Amenities are classified as aesthetic and functional features within the public realm of the TOCD that enhance the experience of pedestrians, patrons and residents. The requirements of this subsection shall be construed to promote the aesthetic values of the TOCD, and the enjoyment and livability of the TOCD. The requirements of this subsection are development standards based upon the aesthetic and public amenities needs of the community and are not intended to be either an impact fee or a tax. 
715.3.4.2. Public Art and Amenities. Public Art and Amenities include art work and community amenities located in the public realm. Public Art and Amenities are intended to encourage and promote local culture and talent, to define the TOCD community identity and the unique character of the TOCD, and to facilitate use and enjoyment of the TOCD by citizens and residents. Examples of items that may be considered to be Public Art and Amenities include: 
A.  Sculptures. 
B.  Paving Patterns. 
C.  Decorative Exterior Lighting. 
D.  Street Furniture. 
E.  Kiosks. 
F.  Decorative Gates. 
G.  Fountains. 
H.  Play Equipment. 
I.  Engravings. 
J.  Carvings. 
K.  Frescos. 
L.  Mobiles. 
M.  Collages. 
N.  Mosaics. 
O.  Bas-Reliefs. 
P.  Earthworks. 
715.3.4.3. Public Art and Amenity Fund. The City of Miramar TOCD Public Art and Amenity Fund (hereinafter the "Fund") shall be created and maintained by the City and shall be used solely for the acquisition, installation, improvement, maintenance and insurance of Public Art and Amenities located on public property within the TOCD, as follows: 
A.  All funds received by the City pursuant to Public Art and Amenities program shall be placed in the Fund. 
B.  All money received pursuant to this subsection, and interest which may accrue on such funds, shall be deposited in the Fund in a manner to avoid any commingling with other revenues of the City and all funds shall be expended solely for the purposes of acquisition, installation, improvement, maintenance and insurance of items classified as Public Art and Amenities under this subsection. 
715.3.4.4. [Building Permit.] Prior to issuance of a final building permit for development within the TOCD, projects subject to this subsection shall be required to comply with the following, as applicable: 
A.  Any applicant requesting a building permit for the construction or remodeling of a non-Residential property with a total improvement or construction value over $250,000.00, shall pay a one-time fee of one-fourth of one percent (0.25%) of said construction value into the Fund established by the City, or comply with (D)(2) of this subsection. 
B.  An applicant requesting a building permit for the construction of two or more Residential units valued in excess of $250,000.00 in aggregate, shall pay a one-time fee of one-fourth of one percent (0.25%) of said construction value into the Fund, or comply with (D)(2) of this subsection. 
C.  For the purpose of this subsection, "construction value" is defined to include architectural and engineering fees and site work. It does not include land acquisition or subsequent changes to the construction contract. All construction values shall be calculated as of the date the contract for the construction is executed. 
D.  An applicant for development within the TOCD which is subject to this subsection may elect one of the following two options for compliance with this subsection: 
1.  Payment. The applicant may pay the fee required by subsection (A) or (B), as applicable, into the Fund prior to issuance of a building permit for the development; or 
2.  Provision of Public Art and Amenity Item. The applicant may provide and install one or more acceptable items (as listed in subsection 715.3.4.2) upon a publicly-accessible location approved by the Director of Community Development within the applicant's development site. The Public Art or Amenity items provided shall be valued in the amount of at least one-half of one percent (0.50%) of the development construction value, and shall be subject to approval from the community development director. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for the development, the applicant shall provide documentation to the community development director that the fee required by subsection 715.3.4.4(A) or (B) (as applicable) has been deposited into an escrow account pending the final installation of the Public Art or Amenity Items on the development site. 
i.  The applicant shall be given up to 9 months after issuance of the building permit to obtain approval of the proposed placement of Public Art and Amenity items from the community development director. If no such approval is obtained within the time period, the City shall require transfer of the required Public Art and Amenity fee from the escrow account to the Fund. 
ii.  If the Public Art or Amenity Item(s) is/are to be placed on-site within the development, the applicant shall be given up to 9 months after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy to install the approved Public Art or Amenity Item(s). The community development director may grant one additional six-month extension for good cause as determined in its sole discretion. If no installation occurs within the required time period, Public Art and Amenity fee funds shall be transferred from the applicant's escrow account to the Fund. 
715.3.4.5. Community Gardens. 
A.  Community Gardens are permitted and encouraged within any suitable public green space, such as Plazas, Squares, courtyards and planting areas. 
B.  Rooftop gardens are encouraged. 
C.  Private gardens are encouraged. 
    715.3.5. Special District 1 (SD1). 
715.3.5.1. Location. Special District 1, as depicted on the TOCD Regulating Plan, shall be known as the area bound to the north by Southwest 21st Street, to the east by State Road 7 and to the south by Southwest 25th Street and includes all of the parcels facing Southwest 60th Way. 
715.3.5.2. Intent and Purpose. The intent and purpose of the Special District 1 is to promote art and entertainment within the City. This district is intended to serve as a venue for local artists and designers, and other artisans, to assemble and create, showcase, store and sell their works. The area is intended to provide for a variety of uses to support the general welfare, education, and recreational pleasure of the public. 
715.3.5.3. Development Standards. The developments standards for this district shall conform to Section 4. Graphics and Tables. 
A.  Building Heights shall conform to Table 6. Building Placement and Character. Building heights for buildings with Frontages on the State Road 7 Corridor shall conform to the TOCD-Mixed-Use High standards while building heights on the east side of Southwest 60th Terrace shall conform to the standards of Special District 1. 
B.  Provision of on-street parking shall be encouraged. 
C.  Signage shall conform to Chapter 10 "Signs" of the LDC. 
1.  Buildings and other surfaces may be permitted to include murals and other artistic treatments subject to approval by the community development director. 
D.  Building Character shall conform to the Mediterranean-Revival style of Miramar. 
E.  Building functions shall include uses related to art, culture, and design. Allowable functions shall be as provided in Table 9A. Specific Function and Use. However, buildings with Frontages directly on State Road 7 shall be authorized to include functions provided by the Mixed Use High district. 
    715.3.6. Open Space. 
715.3.6.1. Location. Open Space classifications shall be as depicted on the Regulating Plan. 
715.3.6.2. Intent and Purpose. The Open Space classification shall be intended to provide for the recreational and open space needs of the TOCD, and includes existing Open Space areas. 
715.3.6.3. Development Standards. The following development standards shall apply to property within the Open Space classification within the TOCD: 
A.  Maximum height: No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be erected to a height exceeding two stories or 30 feet, whichever is less. 
B.  Setbacks: Every plot upon which a structure is hereafter erected shall have minimum Setbacks as follows: 
1.  25 feet in depth. 
2.  Adjacent to any trafficway depicted on the Broward County Trafficways Plan, as amended from time to time, 75 feet in depth. 
C.  Building Functions: No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be erected, altered or used, or land used in whole or part for other than one or more of the following specific uses: 
1.  Open space and passive recreational areas. 
2.  Publicly operated camp grounds. 
3.  Boat ramps and docks. 
4.  Outdoor cultural, educational and Civic facilities. 
5.  Parks. 
6.  Uses accessory to any of the above uses when located on the same plot. 
    715.3.7. Community Facility. 
715.3.7.1. Location. Community Facility classifications shall be as depicted on the Regulating Plan. 
715.3.7.2. Intent and Purpose. The Community Facility designation within the TOCD area is intended for those uses of institutional character such as places of worship, government and cultural buildings, public facilities, hospitals and parks and other facilities which generally benefit the community. 
715.3.7.3. Development Standards. 
(a)  Maximum height: No building or structure, or part thereof shall be erected to a height exceeding 5 stories. 
(b)  Minimum lot area and width: Every plot upon which a structure is hereafter erected shall have a minimum lot size of 20,000 square feet in area and a Lot Width of not less than 100 feet. 
(c)  Front yards: Every plot upon which a structure is hereafter erected shall have a minimum front yard as follows: 
(1)  25 feet in depth. 
(2)  No Parking Areas shall be located within 20 feet of any residentially zoned property or within 5 feet of any street line. 
(d)  Side yards: Every plot upon which a structure is hereafter erected shall have a minimum side yard of 25 feet. 
(e)  Rear yards: Every plot upon which a structure is hereafter erected shall have a minimum rear yard of 20 feet. 
(f)  Functions permitted: No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be erected, altered or used, or land used in whole or part for other than one or more of the following specific uses: 
(1)  Parks. 
(2)  Places of public assembly. 
(3)  Libraries. 
(4)  Cultural, Civic and community centers. 
(5)  Municipal government, administration, services and maintenance facilities. 
(6)  Police and fire protection facilities. 
(7)  Uses generally accessory to the above principal uses. 
(8)  The following uses if first approved by Administrative Approval: 
(A)  Governmentally sponsored or subsidized Residential/care facilities for the aged and/or handicapped, nursing homes, convalescent homes, and congregate care facilities. 
(B)  Hospitals and clinics. 
(C)  Non-municipal governmental buildings. 
(D)  Private fraternal, Civic, charitable, professional or educational non-profit organizations. 
    715.4.0. Graphics and tables. 
    A Transit Oriented Corridor is generally characterized as a developed environment within a quarter-mile of a public transit system, with building characteristics and public amenities that promote the safe movement of pedestrians. 
    The City of Miramar's Transit Oriented Corridor is located in historic Miramar. It is bound to the north by Pembroke Road, the east by State Road 7, the south by Countyline Road, and the west by SW 64th, SW 61st and SW 66th Avenues. 
    Miramar's Transit Oriented Corridor District Code (TOCD Code) is modeled after the SmartCode which is a form-based code, specifically created to facilitate mixed-use development, with access to transit stations or stops along existing and planned high performance transit service corridors. 
    The TOCD Code also encourages commercial functions that include shop-fronts at street level, with residential units and office space above, wide pedestrian-friendly and multimodal sidewalks, rear on-site parking, and possibly public parking facilities. 

Table 1. TOCD Descriptions 

Table 2A. Public Frontages 

Table 2B. Vehicular Thoroughfares 
Table 2C: Thoroughfare Assemblies. These thoroughfares are assembled from the elements that incorporate the public frontages of Table 2A. The key gives the thoroughfare type followed by the right-of-way width, followed by the pavement width, and in some instances followed by specialized transportation capability. 

Table 2C. Thoroughfare Assemblies 
Table 2D: Thoroughfare Assemblies. These thoroughfares are assembled from the elements that incorporate the public frontages of Table 2A. The key gives the thoroughfare type followed by the right-of-way width, followed by the pavement width, and in some instances followed by specialized transportation capability. 

Table 2D. Thoroughfare Assemblies 
Table 2E: Thoroughfare Assemblies. These thoroughfares are assembled from the elements that incorporate the public frontages of Table 2A. The key gives the Thoroughfare type followed by the right-of-way width, followed by the pavement width, and in some instances followed by specialized transportation capability. 

Table 2E: Thoroughfare Assemblies 
Table 2F: Thoroughfare Assemblies. These thoroughfares are assembled from the elements that incorporate the public frontages of Table 2A. The key gives the Thoroughfare type followed by the right-of-way width, followed by the pavement width, and in some instances followed by specialized transportation capability. 

Table 2F: Thoroughfare Assemblies 
Table 3: Public Lighting. Lighting varies in brightness and also in the character of the fixture according to the district. The table shows five common types. 
TABLE 3. PUBLIC LIGHTING RS RM ML MH SD1 ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦  
Table 4: Public Planting. This table shows six common types of street tree shapes and their appropriateness within each district. 
TABLE 4. PUBLIC PLANTING RS RM ML MH SD1 Specifications ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Canary Island Date Palm 
Sabal Palm ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Ironwood 
Red Maple 
Beautyleaf 
Bald Cypress 
Pink Trumpet Tree ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Powder Puff 
Paradise Tree 
Pigeon Plum ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Live Oak 
Pygmy Date Palm 
Gumbo Limbo 
Dwarf Poinciana 
Cassia  
Table 5: Building Disposition. This table approximates the location of the structure relative to the boundaries of each individual lot, establishing suitable basic building types for each district. This table shows six common types of street tree shapes and their appropriateness within each district. 
TABLE 5. BUILDING DISPOSITION a.  Edgeyard: Specific Types-Single-family house, cottage, villa, estate house, urban villa. A building that occupies the center of its lot with setbacks on all sides. This is the least urban of types as the front yard sets it back from the frontage, while the side yards weaken the spatial definition of the public thoroughfare space. The front yard is intended to be visually continuous with the yards of adjacent buildings. The rear yard can be secured for privacy by fences and a well placed backbuilding and/or outbuilding. b.  Sideyard: Specific Types-Charleston single-house, double house, zero-lot-line house, twin. A building that occupies one side of the lot with the setback to the other side. A shallow frontage setback defines a more urban condition. If the adjacent building is similar with a blank side wall, the yard can be quite private. This type permits systematic climatic orientation in response to the sun or the breeze. If a sideyard house abuts a neighboring sideyard house, the type is known as a twin or double house. Energy costs, and sometimes noise, are reduced by sharing a party wall in this disposition. c.  Rearyard: Specific Types-Townhouse, rowhouse, live-work unit, loft building, apartment house, mixed use block, flex building, perimeter block. A building that occupies the full frontage, leaving the rear of the lot as the sole yard. This is a very urban type as the continuous facade steadily defines the public thoroughfare. The rear elevations may be articulated for functional purposes. In its residential form, this type is the rowhouse. For its commercial form, the rear yard can accommodate substantial parking. d.  Courtyard: Specific Types-Patio house. A building that occupies the boundaries of its Lot while internally defining one or more private patios. This is the most urban of types, as it is able to shield the private realm from all sides while strongly defining the public thoroughfare. Because of its ability to accommodate incompatible activities, masking them from all sides, it is recommended for workshops, loading and schools. The high security provided by the continuous enclosure is useful for crime-prone areas. e.  Specialized: A building that is not subject to categorization. Buildings dedicated to manufacturing and transportation are often distorted by the trajectories of machinery. Civic buildings, which may express the aspirations of institutions, may be included.  
Table 6. Building Placement and Character 

Building Placement and Character 
The DRC may vary the requirements or allow an additional story as described below provided that the intent of the TOC is being satisfied. RS RM ML MH SD1 Lot Requirements Lot Width 70 ft. min. 70 ft. min. 100 ft. min. 100 ft. min. 100 ft. min. Building Requirements Lot Coverage 50% max. 50% max. 80% max 80% max 80% max Building Frontage (% of building at) N/A 70% min. 70% min. 70% min. 70% min. Setbacks Minimum Principal Front 20 ft. max. N/A N/A N/A N/A Side Street 15 ft. max. N/A N/A N/A N/A Side (Interior) 5 ft. 5 ft. 5 ft. 5 ft. 5 ft. Rear 25 ft. 10 ft. 5 ft. 5 ft. 5 ft. Build-to-Lines and Pedestrian Zones (Front and Side Streets) *Primary Streets N/A 10 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. Secondary Streets N/A 15 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. All other streets N/A 15 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. Area between building and right-of-way shall include a minimum five foot sidewalk and landscaping. *Zero feet if a Colonnade is provided. Height Min. 1 story 1 story 2 stories 3 stories 2 story* Max. 2 stories 3 stories 4 stories 6 stories 6 stories* * If a public open space or plaza is provided, a development site may be eligible for a one story increase in the maximum heights shown above. 
Site design and size of the public space shall be the primary criteria for allowing an additional story.  
Table 7: Private Frontages. The private frontage is the area between the building facades and the lot lines. 

Table 7: Private Frontages. 
TABLE 9A. SPECIFIC FUNCTION AND USE ¦ = Permitted 
Blank = Not Permitted ? = By Administrative Approval 
? = Conditional Use Approval per § 503.4 LDC RS RM ML MH SD1 a. RESIDENTIAL Accessory Unit ¦ ¦ ? ? ? Apartment Building ¦ ? ¦ ? Duplex House ¦ Single Family Residence ¦ ¦ Live/Work Unit ? ? ¦ ? ? Mixed Use Building ¦ ¦ ¦ K-12 School ? ? b. LODGING/HOTEL Bed & Breakfast ? ? Hotel ? ¦ Inn ? ? ? ? c. OFFICE Business and Professional ¦ ¦ ¦ Medical/Dental ¦ ¦ ? Office Building ¦ ¦ ¦ Work-Live ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ d. COMMERCIAL Banks, Financial Institutions ? ? ? Display Gallery ¦ ¦ ¦ Entertainment ¦ ¦ ¦ Kiosk ¦ ¦ ¦ Liquor Selling Establishment ¦ ¦ ? Open-Air Market ¦ ¦ ¦ Personal Service ¦ ¦ ¦ Push Cart ¦ ? ? Restaurant ¦ ¦ ¦ Commercial Use with Drive Through Facility ? ? ? Retail Building/Store ¦ ¦ ¦ Childcare Center/School ¦ ¦ ? Funeral Home/Mortuary ? ? ? e. CIVIC Bus Shelter ? ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Convention Center ¦ ¦ Conference Center ¦ ¦ ¦ Exhibition Center ¦ ¦ ¦ Fountain or Public Art ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Library ¦ ¦ ¦ Live Theater ¦ ¦ ¦ Movie Theater ¦ ¦ ¦ Museum ¦ ¦ ¦ Outdoor Auditorium ? ? ¦ Parking Structure ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Passenger Terminal ¦ Playground ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Sports Stadium Surface Parking Lot ¦ ¦ ¦ Religious Assembly ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Fire Station ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ Police Station ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ f. OTHER: EDUCATION College ¦ ¦ Trade School ¦ ¦ ?  
TABLE 10. CIVIC SPACE a.  Park: A natural preserve available for unstructured recreation. A park may be independent of surrounding building Frontages. Its landscape shall consist of Paths and trails, meadows, water bodies, woodland and open shelters, all naturalistically disposed. Parks may be lineal, following the trajectories of natural corridors. The minimum size shall be 8 acres. b.  Green: An Open Space, available for unstructured recreation. A Green may be spatially defined by landscaping rather than building Frontages. Its landscape shall consist of lawn and trees, naturalistically disposed. The minimum size shall be 1/2 acre and the maximum shall be 8 acres. c.  Square: An Open Space available for unstructured recreation and Civic purposes. A Square is spatially defined by building Frontages. Its landscape shall consist of paths, lawns and trees, formally disposed. Squares shall be located at the intersection of important Thoroughfares. The minimum size shall be 1/2 acre and the maximum shall be 5 acres. d.  Plaza: An Open Space available for Civic purposes and Commercial activities. A Plaza shall be spatially defined by building Frontages. Its landscape shall consist primarily of pavement. Trees are optional. Plazas should be located at the intersection of important streets. The minimum size shall be 1/2 acre and the maximum shall be 2 acres. e.  Playground: An Open Space designed and equipped for the recreation of children. A Playground should be fenced and may include an open shelter. Playgrounds shall be interspersed within Residential areas and may be placed within a Block. Playgrounds may be included within parks and greens. There shall be no minimum or maximum size.  







    715.5.0. Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 12-10, § 2(Exh. A), 3-21-12; Ord. No. 15-04, §§ 2, 3, 11-24-14; Ord. No. 15-10, § 4, 2-4-15; Ord. No. 16-05, § 7, 1-27-16; Ord. No. 18-01, § 2(Exh. D), 11-1-17) 
Chapter 8 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS OF GENERAL APPLICABILITY 

Sec. 801. - Development standards. 
    All development shall conform to the specific requirements of the appropriate zoning districts and shall comply with the standards contained in this chapter and other regulations outlined in this Code. These standards shall be considered to be minimum requirements. In considering development plans, the development review committee, planning and zoning board and city commission shall be guided by the standards set forth hereinafter. 
Sec. 802. - Subdivision design standards. 
    In considering plans for the subdivision of land, the appropriate review bodies shall be guided by the standards set forth hereinafter. These standards shall be considered to be minimum requirements. 
    802.1. General. 
802.1.1. Character of land. Land to be subdivided shall be of such character after development that it can be used safely for the intended purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood or other menace. 
802.1.2. Conformity to the trafficways plan, and the comprehensive plan. Subdivisions shall conform to the Broward County Trafficways Plans and shall be in harmony with the city's comprehensive plan. Trafficways shall conform to the criteria and characteristics established by and shown on the Broward County Trafficways Plan. 
802.1.3. Specifications for required improvements. All required subdivision improvements shall be constructed or installed to conform to the city specifications, a copy of which is on file with the director of public works/utilities. 
802.1.4. Street capacities. Street capacities shall be determined by standards established by the Florida Department of Transportation, the basis of which is the Highway Capacity Manual prepared by the Transportation Research Board of the National Research Council, Washington, D.C. and shall provide a L.O.S. adopted by the Miramar Comprehensive Plan. 
802.1.5. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of public or private street right-of-way. Within areas zoned Industrial sidewalks shall not be required. All interior private sidewalks shall connect with the sidewalks in the right-of-way. Handicap ramps not exceeding a slope of one foot vertical to 12 feet horizontal shall be provided at all intersections. 
802.1.6. Traffic engineering standards. The more stringent of either the Florida Department of Transportation or Broward County Traffic Engineering Division Regulations shall apply in all cases. 
    802.2. Street layout. 
802.2.1. Width, location and construction. Streets shall be of sufficient width, suitably located, and adequately constructed to accommodate the prospective traffic at the adopted level of service identified in the city's comprehensive plan, and to afford access for fire fighting and road maintenance equipment. 
802.2.2 Arrangement. The arrangement of streets shall be such so as to compose a functional system which provides safe and adequate access to and from private property and which causes no undue hardship to adjoining property. The arrangement of streets in the subdivision shall provide for the continuation of arterial and collector streets of adjoining subdivision, and for proper projection of arterial and collector streets into adjoining properties which are not yet subdivided, in order to take into account possible necessary fire protection, movement of traffic and the construction or extension of needed utilities and public services. 
802.2.3. Access to streets. Development projects shall be designed to maintain a hierarchy of street access so that the interior of development parcels are served by local streets or parking lots, local streets and parking lots shall be connected to collector streets or arterial streets where permitted, and collector streets shall be connected to arterial streets or other collector streets as provided for herein. 
802.2.4. Driveway access. Residential lot driveways shall only access local streets. Residential parking lots may access local, collector or arterial streets provided adequate turn lanes and vehicle storage areas are provided and the street being accessed has sufficient capacity to accommodate the traffic. Nonresidential development shall only access collector and arterial streets. The minimum spacing between driveways shall be as provided for in section 804, Driveway Standards. 
802.2.5. Local streets. Local streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
802.2.6. Street connections. Nonresidential development with parking for 20 or more vehicles and residential property with 20 lots or more shall have connections with at least two publicly accessible streets which shall exist prior to the issuance of certificates of occupancy. In lieu of the two required connections, one connection may be permitted if adequate provision for emergency and service vehicles is provided. Such single connection shall consist of a minimum two in bound lanes and two outbound lanes with a minimum median of 15 feet within a minimum 80-foot right-of-way. 
    802.3. Minimum intersection spacing 
802.3.1. Local street intersections with collector and arterial streets. Local street or cul-de-sac openings into collector streets shall be a minimum distance of 660 feet from another intersection, or in the case of a T-type intersection, a minimum distance of 330 feet from any other intersection. Local streets and local dead-end streets may not intersect an arterial unless unavoidable in which case the local street may intersect an arterial only if aligned with and extending an existing local street which intersects the arterial or is a minimum of 660 feet from another minor or collector street intersection with the arterial, and is a minimum of 760 feet from the intersection of two arterial streets. 
802.3.2. Collector street intersections with arterial streets. A collector street or collector dead-end street may intersect an arterial if aligned with and extending an existing or planned collector which intersects the arterial or is a minimum distance of 1,320 feet from the intersection of an existing collector and the arterial, and is a minimum distance of 1,420 feet from the intersection of two arterial trafficways. 
802.3.3. Intersection of two collector streets. A collector street may intersect another collector but only if aligned with and extending an existing or planned collector or is a minimum distance of 660 feet from any other intersection of the collector. 
802.3.4. Intersection of two arterial streets. The spacing requirements for the intersection of two arterial streets shall be as provided for by the Broward County Land Development Code, as amended. 
    802.4. Street design. 
802.4.1. Geometric design of street. The geometric design of streets shall conform to the minimum standards established by the Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways, prepared by the Florida Department of Transportation and A Policy on Design of Urban Highways and Arterial Streets prepared by the American Association of Street Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO). 
802.4.2. Street jogs at intersections. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall not be permitted. 
802.4.3. Angle of intersection. In general, all streets shall join each other so that for a distance of at least 100 feet the street is approximately at right angles to the street it joins. This requirement may be modified for the intersection of two local streets if it can be shown that an alternate design will meet minimum safe site distance requirements. 
802.4.4. Widths of rights-of-way. Streets shall have the minimum widths as specified in Table 802-1. When not indicated functionally classified by the FDOT, the classification of streets shall be determined by the community development director. The actual width of a right-of-way shall be determined based on the ultimate cross section design needed to accommodate the projected level of traffic at the adopted level of service. Additional right-of-way may be required for a bicycle lane, in compliance with a city or county bicycle circulation plan. 
TABLE 802-1 
Widths of Public and Private Rights-of-Way 
Street Type Minimum 

Rights-of-Way Ultimate 

Traffic Lanes Sidewalk Width 1 

Both Sides of Street Arterial Street 106 ft 6 6 feet 4 Lane Collector 80 ft. 4 5 feet 2 Lane Collector 60 ft. 2 5 feet Local Street (Single-Family) 50 ft. 2 4 feet Town House Developments 2 44 ft. 2 4 feet  
1 A pedestrian/bicycle path which is a minimum of six (6) feet wide and constructed within the right-of-way, or an easement adjacent to the right-of-way, may be used in lieu of the required sidewalk on that side of the right-of-way within private residential developments. The back of sidewalk shall coincide with the right-of-way line for public or private roadways. 
2 Applicable only to site developments greater than five (5) acres. 

Drainage Pipe Image 
802.4.5. Public utility easements. Where conditions are such as to make impractical for the inclusion of utilities within the street right-of-way, perpetual easements with satisfactory width and access, as determined by the city, shall be required. Wherever possible, easements shall be continuous from block to block and shall present as few irregularities as possible. Side yard easements containing underground pipes are discouraged. However, in such cases when necessary said easements shall be 20 feet wide minimum or greater as determined by the public works/utilities director. Such easements shall be cleared, demucked, and graded where required. 
802.4.6. Underground utilities. All facilities for the distribution of electricity, telephone, and cable television shall be installed underground in new subdivisions. Appurtenances such as transformer boxes, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets may be placed above ground on a level concrete slab and shall be located in such a manner to minimize noise effects upon the surrounding properties. Such appurtenances shall be landscaped in accordance with the landscape requirements outlined in this Code. Street lighting poles and fixtures may be placed above ground. Primary transmission lines carrying in excess of 7,000 volts single phase or 12,000 volts three phase may be suspended above the surface. 
New pole lines located within or adjacent and parallel to a road right-of-way which serve new developments shall be constructed of reinforced concrete. At the time of development the city shall require replacement of existing wood poles with concrete poles. The city manager may waive this requirement if an undue hardship would result from this requirement. 
802.4.7. Grades. Longitudinal slopes of all streets shall conform in general to the department of transportation standards for arterial, collector or local streets. Grades shall be approved by the director of public works/utilities. 
802.4.8. Curve radii at local street intersections. All local street right-of-way lines at intersections shall be rounded by curves of at least 25-feet radius. 
802.4.9. Dead-end streets (culs-de-sac). Dead-end streets exceeding 150 feet, shall have a turning area and be of a type and size approved by the DRC. Dead-end streets exceeding 300 feet shall terminate in a circular turn-around having a minimum right-of-way radius of 60 feet and pavement radius of 40 feet. At the end of temporary dead-end streets a temporary turnaround with a pavement radius of 35 feet shall be provided, unless the director of public works/utilities approves an alternate arrangement. 
802.4.10. Watercourses. When a street is proposed to abut any canal, or a water body, provision shall be made for adequate safe vehicular recovery area between the ultimate edge of right-of-way and the edge of water. The distance from the outside edge of the ultimate right-of-way to the edge of water shall be no less than 50 feet for roads with a design speed of 50 mph or greater and 40 feet for roads with a design speed less than 50 miles per hour. A guardrail shall be required for lakes and canals where it is not possible to maintain these required minimum distances. 
802.4.11. Curve radii. In general, street lines within a block, deflecting from each other at any one point by more than ten degrees, shall be connected with a curve, the radius of which for the centerline of street shall not be less than 400 feet on arterial streets, 200 feet on collector streets and 100 feet on local streets. 
802.4.12. Half streets. The platting of half streets along the edge of a subdivision shall occur only in accordance with the trafficways plan and shall be a minimum of 50 feet in width. Platting of a narrow reserve strip (spite strip) along the edge of a subdivision shall not be permitted. 
802.4.13. Private streets. Private local streets may be permitted by the city when the design and construction of such streets meets or exceeds the minimum standards and specifications as outlined or referred to herein for public streets; and when a method suitable to the city is established for the perpetual maintenance of said private streets by developer or by the development's homeowners association and with the provision of a permanent access easement for service and emergency vehicles, maintenance and repair of public and semi-public utilities and common area improvements. Sidewalks and setbacks along private streets shall be from the theoretical right-of-way line. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Code, no private streets shall be permitted by the city unless the owner of the private streets executes an agreement with the city whereby the city is authorized to enforce the city's traffic and parking ordinances and regulations over the private roads. 
802.4.14. Street lights. Installation of street lights shall be required in accordance with design standards of Florida Power and Light and an approved site plan and shall be approved by the director of public works/utilities. 
802.4.15. Inverted crowns. Inverted crown roadways shall not be permitted on public or private streets. This limitation shall not apply to private parking lots or private driveways within multifamily development. 
    802.5. Addresses. 
802.5.1. Type of name. All streets shall be numbered in accordance with a numbering system approved by the U.S. Post Office and community development director. All streets shall have a sign displaying the street number. Street signs shall have reflective type lettering meeting Broward County standards. 
    802.6. Lots. 
802.6.1. Lots in conformance with zoning district. Lots shall be subdivided in conformance with the applicable zoning district's development standards. 
802.6.2. Side property lines. All side property lines of lots shall be at right angles to straight street lines and radial to curved street lines. 
802.6.3. Driveway access. Driveway grades and access shall conform to city specifications and the requirements of this section. 
802.6.4. Frontage on curve or cul-de-sac. The minimum arc frontage for lots abutting the turnaround of a cul-de-sac shall be 25 feet for residential uses and 60 feet for nonresidential uses. 
    802.7. [Reserved.] 
(Ord. No. 13-15, § 3, 8-21-13; Ord. No. 18-07, § 19, 3-7-18) 
Sec. 803. - Architectural design standards. 
803.1. Design concepts. The principles set out below are not intended to limit innovative architecture, but to establish a meaningful design guide for development and redevelopment in the City of Miramar. All development shall be designed in accordance with the fundamental concepts described in this section. The fundamental design concepts shall include: 
(a)  The design of architecturally varied structures within planned developments through the use of building massing, varied roof-scapes, varied window design, ornamentation and color; 
(b)  The linkage of landscaped exterior spaces (courtyards, loggias, arcades and plazas) to buildings; and 
(c)  The linkage of separate development parcels by pedestrian and vehicular connections. 
(d)  The recognition of the South Florida climate which should influence building shape and orientation, nature of roofs and overhangs and the location and size of windows. 
(e)  The identification of individual subdivisions by utilizing signage. 
(f)  The use of private common open space as a community design feature. 
803.2. Pedestrian orientation. All nonresidential and multifamily development shall contribute to the creation of a pedestrian oriented community by providing the following: 
(a)  Emphasis on the buildings' street facades as major elements of the overall street-scape; and 
(b)  Street level architectural treatment including colonnades, arcades, awnings, and other shade producing elements should be provided along all pedestrian-oriented frontages. 
(c)  Pedestrian oriented frontages shall be adjacent to building entrances and integrated with adjacent properties. 
    803.3. Minimum design standards. 
803.3.1. Nonresidential development. All nonresidential development shall be consistent with the traditional architecture and design themes of South Florida including the following: 
(a)  New buildings shall be designed in a manner that is compatible with the adjacent building in height and scale. 
(b)  Recognition of the scale and character of adjacent structures or developments, including continuation of existing facade treatment or expression lines, and the use of similar finish materials. 
(c)  Roof materials shall consist of Spanish "S" or barrel tile. This requirement shall not apply to flat roofs with a parapet wall. 
(d)  All mechanical equipment (including roof-mounted equipment) shall be screened with materials consistent with those used in the construction of the building. The screening material and structure shall be architecturally compatible with the building. The screening shall be high enough so that the equipment is not visible from a point 5.5 feet above the crown of any adjacent public right-of-way. 
(e)  Pedestrian circulation systems shall be barrier-free and provide alternative ramps in addition to steps consistent with American Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements. 
(f)  All sides of any nonresidential structure shall have compatible facade and roof treatments. 
(g)  All dumpsters and trash handling areas shall have a concrete slab, and finished masonry wall as provided for in this Code, and be landscaped in accordance with Section 901.8 of this Code. Dumpsters shall oriented in a logical fashion so as to minimize truck maneuvers. Enclosures shall be finished with similar materials and colors as the principal structure. 
803.3.2. Residential development. All residential development shall adhere to the following standards: 
(a)  Minimum roof standards: Pitched roofs shall have a minimum pitch of 2:12. Pitched roofs shall be constructed of durable materials consistent with Florida Building Code requirements and compatible with the architectural design of the building(s). Cedar shingle and asphalt shingle roofs are not permitted on any principal residential structure permitted after the effective date of this Code, except for single-family and duplex dwellings located within plats recorded prior to March 1996, or within the unrecorded subdivision of Tropical Valley. Flat roofs may be permitted if the flat roof area does not comprise over 25 percent of the total roof area. Such flat roofs may be permitted over porches, Florida rooms, and utility rooms located to the rear of the dwelling unit. Homeowners are hereby advised that new roofs on buildings that are located within a homeowner or condominium association may be subject to that association's approval for a different roof material. 
(b)  Driveways within all RS zoning districts shall be constructed of Portland concrete at a minimum. Asphalt is not permitted. 
(c)  No two houses having the same elevation in any residential single (RS) family zoning district shall be built side by side or directly across the street. In no instance, shall two houses of identical color package be side by side or directly across the street. 
(d)  Architecture and site development should incorporate consideration of the subtropical characteristics of the area. The provision of sun-control devices, shaded areas, vegetation, roof terraces, and similar features characteristic of subtropical design is encouraged. 
(e)  Open space for multi-family dwelling units should be located and designed to maximize its utility to the dwelling units. 
(f)  All multi-family buildings which abut or are separated by a street or water body from an existing or proposed single-family district shall have hip or gable roofs. 
(g)  All dumpsters and trash handling areas in development within RM zoning districts shall have a concrete slab, be enclosed by a finished concrete block wall similar in color and detail to the principal structure as provided in this Code, and be landscaped in accordance with section 901.8 of this Code. Dumpsters shall be oriented in a logical fashion so as to minimize truck maneuvers. 
803.3.3. Pedestrian/bicycle paths. Pedestrian/bicycle paths incorporated into a plan shall have six feet of pavement width within a minimum 20-foot landscape easement. The path shall be a minimum of ten feet from a right-of-way, except where it transitions and crosses an intersecting street. The path shall not be incorporated into a residential lot. The path shall connect all the residential parcels to park(s) and school(s). 
(Ord. No. 03-22, § 3, 9-17-03; Ord. No. 18-07, § 20, 3-7-18) 
Sec. 804. - Driveway standards. 
    804.1. Design. Driveway locations, cross-sections and grades shall be in accordance with this section, approved engineering plans, Chapter 23 of the Code of the City of Miramar, and the South Florida Building Code (Broward edition) as amended from time to time. Driveway access to the street system shall be according to the subdivision design standards, street layout contained in this Code. 
    804.2. Intersection with streets. Driveways for residential lots shall not encroach into the street corner radius of two intersecting streets, or be closer than 25 feet to the intersection of extended right-of-way lines. Driveways for multi-family and nonresidential parking lots shall not intersect a street corner radius, or be closer than 50 feet to the intersection of extended right-of-way lines. 
    804.3. Separation between driveways. 
804.3.1. Residential lots. Driveways for single-family residential lots shall be separated by the minimum distance required in section 804.6, Proximity to Property Lines. 
804.3.2. Multi-family and nonresidential parcels. Driveways for multi-family residential parcels and nonresidential parcels on collector roads shall be separated by no less than 150 feet of landscaped frontage. Driveways for multi-family residential parcels and nonresidential parcels on arterial roads shall be separated by no less than 330 feet of landscaped frontage or the distance required by the Broward County Land Development Code, section 5-192(b) as may be amended, whichever may be greater. 
    804.4. Maximum width. The maximum width of pavement in a swale is provided for in section 23-5 of the Code of the City of Miramar, as amended. The maximum width of any driveway measured at the right-of-way line shall not exceed the following: 
(a)  Single-family and duplex residential. 20 feet in width for straight driveways, except for houses with five or six bedrooms which may be up to 30 feet. Circular driveways may be permitted with a total of 30 feet in width, with no portion of the driveway being wider than 20 feet at the right-of-way line. 
(b)  Multifamily residential and non residential. 36 feet in width per driveway, except that driveways containing a curbed landscaped median may be permitted up to 48 feet in width per driveway. The total number of driveways allowed shall be limited to the number allowed by the plat or the approved site plan. 
    804.5. Minimum size. Driveways for single-family and duplex structures in all residentially zoned districts shall have minimum paved dimensions per parking space of eight feet in width and 18 feet in length (clear of sidewalk). 
    804.6. Proximity to property lines. Except for fee simple attached residential and joint use accessways, driveways shall not be located closer to a property line than the following: 
(a)  Single-family and duplex residential. Five feet for rectangular lots, two-and-one-half feet for pie-shaped lots. 
(b)  Multifamily residential. Ten feet or the bufferyard requirement contained in this Code, whichever is greater. 
(c)  Nonresidential. The width of a required bufferyard, or if no bufferyard is required, ten feet to another nonresidential parcel or 15 feet to a residential parcel. 
(d)  Zero lot line. Ten feet separation between driveways. 
    804.7. Paving. Except as provided for below, driveways shall be paved with a hard, dust-free paving material complying with the Florida Building Code. All new single-family and two-family residential dwellings shall use concrete, brick pavers, or similar non-asphalt material. All other uses shall provide concrete driveway connections (aprons). 
    Exceptions: 
• Uses permitted to provide grass overflow parking. 
• Single-family lots over 35,000 square feet in area. 
• Lots platted before March 1996 or lying within the unrecorded subdivision of Tropical Valley. 
    804.8. Clear sight triangles. All driveways and street intersections shall provide clear sight triangles in both directions as follows: 
804.8.1. Measurement. Clear sight triangles on both sides of all driveways, medians and at all street intersections shall be measured as follows: 
(a)  Two major streets. 30 feet along the right-of-way line from the intersection of two major streets. 
(b)  Major street/local street. 25 feet along the right-of-way line from the intersection of a major street with a local street. 
(c)  Two local streets. 25 feet along the right-of-way line from the intersection of two local streets. 
(d)  Driveway/major street. 25 feet along the right-of-way line from the intersection of a driveway with a major street. 
(e)  Driveway/local street. Ten feet along the right-of-way line from the intersection of a driveway with a local street. 
(f)  No parking areas shall be permitted within clear sight triangles. 
804.8.2. Landscaping. The area within any clear sight triangle shall be planted and maintained in a way that provides clear visibility from a height of 30 inches to a height of eight feet above the crown of the street. Vegetation shall be trimmed so that no limbs or foliage extend into the required visibility area. 
(Ord. No. 02-06, § 3, 12-12-01; Ord. No. 03-15, § 3, 5-21-03) 
Sec. 805. - Outdoor lighting standards. 
    805.1. General. No structure or land shall be developed, used or occupied unless all outdoor lighting conforms to the requirements of this section. The terms used in this section shall have the definition use by the Illuminating Engineers Society. Lighting shall be designed and placed to illuminate the ground, a vehicular use area, a building, a street, or a sign. All lighting shall be concentrated on the ground, building, street, or sign it is intended to illuminate. Lighting which is designed to illuminate the building roof area shall be prohibited. 
    805.2. Preparation of site lighting plan. A plan which shows the photometrics of the site's lighting for vehicular use areas, outside building areas, signs and streets shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer. The plan shall incorporate all existing and proposed sources of artificial light used on the site, including adjoining outparcels for nonresidential development. The lighting plan shall be submitted with the final building plans, prepared at the same scale. The plan must indicate and be certified for compliance with the standards of this section. 
    805.3. Minimum illumination. All multi-family, shopping centers and office buildings shall illuminate parking lots and pedestrian areas to a minimum maintained average of 1.0 footcandle and a maximum to minimum ratio of 12 to 1, with no area below the illumination of 0.5 footcandle. 
    805.4. Maximum illumination. All lighting for parking areas, buildings and signs shall be located, screened, or shielded so that adjacent property, structures, and rights-of-way are not directly illuminated. All lighting for parking areas, buildings and signs shall either be shaded or screened in a manner that will limit spillover of lighting onto adjacent property and public rights-of-way. Spillover shall not exceed 0.5 footcandles measured vertically along the property line at the perimeter of the property. 
    805.5. Lighting height standards. All private outdoor lighting shall be designed, located and mounted at heights no greater than: 
(a)  12 feet above grade for non-cut-off type luminaries, and 
(b)  30 feet above grade for cut-off type luminaries. 
    805.6. Exceptions. Public facilities including but not limited to parks; lighted recreation and athletic areas, courts and fields; and water and wastewater treatment facilities shall be exempted from these standards. 
    805.7. Street lighting. A street lighting system shall be provided in all land development projects with public or private streets. All street lighting shall be installed according to standards established by Broward County Engineering Division. 
Sec. 806. - Wetlands preservation standards. 
    806.1. Conformance with applicable regulations. Prior to the development of land, including land clearing and excavation operations, having wetlands soils as delineated on map 1-3 (floodplains and wetlands) of the comprehensive plan a determination shall be made by the appropriate jurisdictional agencies as to the presence of jurisdictional wetlands. If it is determined that jurisdictional wetlands are present the property owner shall be required to comply with all agency requirements regarding the protection and mitigation of wetlands on the property as part of any city issued development order. 
Sec. 807. - Surface water management standards. 
    807.1. Conformance with applicable laws. All structures or land shall be developed, used or occupied such that surface water is managed in conformance with the following laws, rules and regulations: 
(a)  Chapter 27-14, Broward County Department of Natural Resource Protection, Code of Regulations, as amended, "Management of Stormwater Discharges and Non-Point Sources of Pollution"; 
(b)  Chapter 67-904, as amended, Laws of Florida; 
(c)  Chapter 40-E, as amended, Florida Administrative Code, "Rules of the South Florida Water Management District." 
(d)  South Broward Drainage District rules and regulations, as amended. 
(e)  South Florida Building Code, as amended. 
Sec. 808. - Off-street parking and loading standards 
    808.1. General. Every building, use or structure, instituted or erected after the effective date of this article shall be provided with off-street parking facilities in accordance with the provisions of this section for the use of occupants, employees, visitors or patrons. Such off-street parking facilities shall be maintained and continued as an accessory use as long as the main use is continued. 
808.1.1. Existing buildings. Where a building existed at the effective date of this article, such building may be modernized, altered or repaired, provided there is no increase in floor area or capacity and there is no change of occupancy, without providing the required parking facilities. 
Where a building or use, which existed at the effective date of this article, is enlarged in floor area, volume, capacity or space occupied, off-street parking facilities as specified herein shall be provided for the additional floor area, volume, capacity or space so created or so occupied. 
Where a building or use, which existed at the effective date of this article, is changed in use or occupancy, additional off-street parking facilities shall be provided to the extent that the off-street parking required by this section for the new use or occupancy exceeds the off street parking which would have been required for the previous use or occupancy had the regulations of this section been applicable thereto. For the purposes of this section a change of use or occupancy shall mean a change from one category of off-street parking requirements to another such category. 
It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of any building, structure or use affected by this section to discontinue, change or dispense with, or to cause the discontinuance or reduction of the required parking facilities apart from the discontinuance, sale or transfer of such structure or use, without establishing alternative vehicle parking facilities which meet the requirements of this section. It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize such building, structure or use without providing the off-street parking facilities to meet the requirements of and be in compliance with this article. 
808.1.2. Proximity of off-street parking. Required off-street parking spaces shall be located on the same parcel they are intended to serve. As an alternative, they may be located on a separate parcel not more than 300 feet from the use they are intended to serve provided the owner of said parking areas shall enter into a written agreement with the city of whereby the land providing the parking area shall be joined with the primary site and shall not be sold or disposed of except in conjunction with the sale of the building the parking area serves so long as these parking facilities are required. Said agreement shall be recorded at the expense of the owner and shall run with the land and shall bind the heirs, successors, and assigns of said owner. Said agreement may be voided by the City of Miramar if other provisions are made for off-site parking facilities pursuant to the requirements of this section. In approving off-site parking, the city commission must find that the off-site parking facility is reasonably located in relation to the use it is intended to serve, based upon such factors as the type of facility, likely purpose of the trip to the facility, distance from the use intended to be served, and any physical barriers which must be crossed to reach the use to be served. Parking spaces backing into a main drive aisle adjacent to the front of buildings shall be discouraged. 
808.1.3. Parking plan required. A parking plan shall be provided with all applications for development approval which shall clearly and accurately designate the required parking spaces, required landscaped areas and planter islands, access aisles and driveways and the relationship of the parking to the uses or structures the spaces are intended to serve. 
808.1.4. Required handicapped spaces. Parking spaces for disabled persons shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 553, Part II, of the Florida Statutes, as amended from time to time. 
808.1.5. Size and character or required parking. The following design requirements shall be observed for off-street parking: 
(a)  Size. Each parking space required and provided pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be not less than nine feet in width and 18 feet in length. See figure 808-1. Detached single-family dwelling units with two or less bedrooms shall have a minimum of one car garage. All one car garages shall provide a single parking space of nine feet by 18 feet, free from all obstructions. Detached single-family dwelling units with three or more bedrooms shall have a two car garage. All two car garages shall provide two parking spaces consisting of an 18 feet by 18 feet unobstructed space. 
The city manager shall have the authority to grant administrative variances from the foregoing requirements of this subsection for lots created by a recorded plat prior to December 1, 1997, located east of Palm Avenue. In no case shall an administrative variance be granted for any property enclosing an existing garage or carport. The administrative variance may be granted in those cases where a property owner is proposing an expansion of an existing single-family home or existing duplex subject to the conditions contained herein provided the construction activity complies with the following conditions: 
1)  The expansion involves the addition of a room other than a bedroom, in which case the provision of additional parking shall not be required. The determination of whether a room is a bedroom shall be at the discretion of the community development director. 
2)  An administrative variance may be granted if the expansion involves the addition of one or more bedrooms provided the lot contains at least three parking spaces, a garage or carport shall count toward the required parking. If the property does not have a garage or carport, the three required spaces must be provided in a paved driveway which meets this Code's driveway design standards. (Ord. No. 98-19, § 2, 2-4-98) 
(b)  Striping. All parking spaces shall be divided with painted double lines except for single-family homes, zero lot line developments, townhouses and duplexes where the parking spaces are on a single-family site or as otherwise permitted in this chapter. See figure 808-2. 

Figure 808-1 

Figure 808-2 
(c)  Accessibility. In all zoning districts, the width of access aisles and driveways shall be in conformance with the standards set forth in Figure 808-1. Each space shall be accessible without driving over or through another parking space. Back-out parking onto any public right-of-way is only permitted in RS zoned properties, and then only onto public rights-of-way of less than 80 feet in width. Parking stalls abutting the same continuous drive aisle shall have the same angle and orientation. Drive aisles shall be one-way only which are less than 24 feet wide or which abut parking stalls with angles less than 90 degrees. Parking stall angles and drive aisle direction of flow may change only when the drive aisle is interrupted by a circulation drive or structure. 
(d)  Composition. Parking facilities, including access aisles and driveways shall be surfaced with brick, asphalt or concrete surfacing (required in RS zoning districts) maintained in a smooth, well-graded condition with standards set-forth according to the office of the city engineer, provided, however, that the following exceptions shall apply. 
(e)  Drainage. All off-street parking facilities may not be drained to adjacent parcels without the recordation of appropriate drainage easements and agreements. Such drainage facilities shall be arranged for convenient access and safety of pedestrians and vehicles with standards set forth in this Code. 
808.1.6. Parking setback. The edge of all parking pavement and access roads (not including driveway connections to a street) shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the right-of-way of all major streets, and a minimum of 12.5 feet from the right-of-way of all other streets and shall be landscaped in conformance with this Code. 
808.1.7. Landscaping of off-street parking. Parking structures and surface parking lots shall be landscaped in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
    808.2. Grassed overflow parking. For the following specified uses up to 20 percent of the required off-street parking facilities may be provided through the utilization of a grass or lawn alternate parking surface: 
Business Professional Industrial Nursing Home Sanitariums Elderly Housing Theater Private club Hospital Governmental Schools Manufacturing Dormitories  
Eighty percent of the required off-street parking facilities may be provided through the utilization of a grass or lawn parking surface area when the use of the property for which the off-street parking is required is for the following: 
Church 
Funeral home 
Stadium or other sports facility 
    808.3. Amount of off-street parking. The minimum number of parking spaces to be provided and maintained for each use or occupancy shall be as follows: 
808.3.1. Residential uses: 
(a)  * Dwelling, one-family and two-family: 
Lots platted before March 1996 or lying within the unrecorded subdivision of Tropical Valley: Two spaces per dwelling unit, except dwelling units with four or more bedrooms shall provide three spaces. 
Lots platted after March 1996: Two spaces per dwelling unit, with one space provided by a garage, except dwelling units with four or more bedrooms shall provide four spaces, with two spaces provided by a garage. 
* All one car garages shall provide a single parking space with a minimum of nine feet by 18 feet, free of obstructions. All two-car garages shall provide two parking spaces with a minimum of 18 feet by 18 feet, free of obstructions. 
(b)  *  Dwelling, multiple-family: 
One space per bedroom with minimum two spaces per dwelling unit for residents. An additional five percent of the total residents' spaces shall be provided for visitors. 
* Editor's Note: Unless exempt pursuant to Section 103.3, Vested Rights. 
(c)  Dormitories, fraternities: One parking space for each bed. 
(d)  Hotels and motels, including clubs: One parking space for each sleeping room. If, in addition to sleeping rooms, there are other uses operated in conjunction with and/or as part of the hotel/motel, additional off-street parking spaces shall be provided for such other uses as would be required by this section if such uses were separate from the hotel/motel to the extent of 35 percent of the off-street parking specified in this article for retail stores, offices, services, establishments, bars, restaurants, dining rooms, night clubs, cabarets, ballrooms, banquet halls meeting rooms, auditoriums. 
(e)  Housing for elderly: One parking space for each unit. 
(f)  Residential care facility, Category 2 and 3: one and twenty-six hundredths parking spaces for each sleeping room. 
808.3.2. Commercial uses: One parking space is required per square footage indicated in each category: 
60 square feet: 
Bars 
Beer gardens 
Cafeterias 
Cocktail lounges 
Night clubs 
100 square feet: 
Call centers 
125 square feet: 
Convenience stores 
150 square feet: 
Bakery, 
Butcher shop, 
Delicatessens, 
Dry cleaning, 
Grocery, 
Ice ream, 
Laundry, 
Liquor store, 
Package store, 
Self-service laundry, 
Take out foods 
200 square feet: 
Amenity centers, 
Animal hospitals, 
Auction galleries, 
Auto repair shop, 
Auto service station, 
Bank and savings and loan, 
Barbershop, 
Business school, 
Car wash, 
Child care center, 
Civic clubs, 
Community centers (non governmental), 
Dancing school, 
Dental clinic, 
Drugstores, 
Financial institutions, 
Health institutions, 
Indoor display area for vehicle sale or rental, 
Kennel, 
Library, 
Medical and dental offices, 
Medical clinic, 
Pharmacies, 
Pool (surface area), 
Post office, 
Trade school, 
Veterinarians, 
Vocational school 
300 square feet: 
Building supplies, 
Business and professional offices, 
Contractor shops: 
General electrical plumbing roofing air conditioning, etc., 
Financial companies, 
Governmental offices, 
Household equipment, 
Household repairs, 
Hardware, 
Marine supplies, 
Personal service shops, 
Pet grooming, 
Retail stores, 
Swimming and pool supplies, 
Travel agencies, 
Wholesale medical supplies, 
Wholesale stores 
500 square feet: 
Art gallery, 
Carpet and flooring materials retail stores, 
Furniture store, 
Outdoor display area for vehicle sale or rental, 
Printing and engraving, 
Research and testing laboratories, 
Sign shop, 
Telephone exchange housing automatic equipment only. 
800 square feet: 
Industrial uses, 
Manufacturing uses, 
Storage buildings, and warehouses. 
2,000 square feet: 
Self-storage warehouse facilities 
808.3.3. Miscellaneous uses: 
(a)  Hospitals: One and one-half parking spaces for each bed. Bassinets do not count as beds. 
(b)  Places of public assembly: 
(1)  Places of public assembly with fixed seats, exhibition halls, dance halls, skating rinks,, libraries,, museums, or amusement centers . One parking space for each four (4) fixed seats or one parking space for each 200 square feet of gross area; whichever is greater. The exemptions provided pursuant to Section 808.3.4(d) shall apply to this subsection. 
(2)  Places of public assembly without fixed seats. One parking space for each 200 square feet of gross area. 
(3)  Places of public assembly which include accessory uses. A place of public assembly which includes - uses such as an elementary school, university or college, senior high school, middle school, public or private school, or another use which is accessory to the place of public assembly shall provide the cumulative number of parking spaces required for the public assembly use and accessory uses. 
(c)  [ Reserved. ] 
(d)  Funeral homes: One parking space for each four fixed seats in public rooms, plus one parking space for 90 square feet in public rooms with movable seat. 
(e)  Bowling centers: Six parking spaces for each lane. 
(f)  University or college level educational facilities: One parking space for each classroom, plus one parking space for each five students or one-half of the additional parking spaces for rooms used for public assembly as otherwise required by this section, whichever may be greater. 
(g)  Kindergarten through 12th grade schools, public or private: Minimum parking requirements shall be calculated as follows: 
(1)  Faculty and staff: One space for each member; 
(2)  Visitor: One space for every 100 students; 
(3)  Schools which include student enrollment for students in grades 11 through 12: One space for every ten students in grades 11 and 12. 
(h)  Private clubs, lodges, fraternal buildings, union halls: One parking space for each 100 square feet of assembly hall and auditorium, or one parking space for each 50 square feet of gross floor area occupied by guests, customers, patrons, members or other occupants, whichever may be greater. 
(i)  Sanitariums, asylums, orphanages, convalescent homes, home for infirms: One parking space for each five beds for patients. 
(j)  Stadiums and sports arenas: One parking space for each five seats. 
(k)  Restaurants: One parking space for every 100 square feet of building area (1:100). Required parking for open air seating shall be calculated at 50 percent of the above rate. Open air seating area shall be defined as follows: 
1.  Any seating-area without a heating or cooling system, and 
2.  Seating area with or without a roof where two sides are open or consist of a substantially non rigid material such as, but not limited, to canvas or screening. 
(l)  Shopping centers: 
1.  One parking space for each 225 square feet of gross floor area in shopping centers with less than 200,000 square feet of gross leasable area. One parking space for each 200 square feet of gross leasable area in shopping centers with 200,000 square feet or more of gross leasable area. 
2.  Shopping centers which have gross floor areas over 40,000 square feet of gross leasable area and under 200,000 square feet shall not have more than ten percent of its gross leasable area occupied by any one or any combination of the following uses: 
Bars, 
Beer gardens, 
Cafes, 
Cafeterias, 
Cocktail lounges, 
Convenience stores, 
Night clubs, 
Restaurants, 
Taverns, 
Theaters 
3.  Shopping centers which have a gross floor area of 40,000 square feet or more and are owned by a single entity or subject to a cross access/cross parking agreement, may petition the city commission for approval of shared parking. The petition for shared parking shall include an independent parking study in a form acceptable to the city, which includes but is not limited to, information indicating that the shopping center uses are such that a sufficient disparity in peak demand for parking spaces exists to support the concept of shared parking. 
4.  Parking requirements for shopping centers not meeting these criteria shall be calculated on a use by use basis. 
(m)  Private court club: Five spaces per court. 
(n)  Movie theaters: One space per three seats. 
(o)  Golf course: Eight spaces per playing hole, two spaces per practice driving tee, plus any parking necessary to satisfy requirements for other facilities on-site. 
(p)  Outdoor recreational courts: 
1.  Basketball court: Five spaces per court. 
2.  Volleyball court: Five spaces per court 
3.  Tennis court: Two spaces per court 
4.  Other: As determined by community development department. 
These requirements shall be applied in full per any portion of a court. 
(q)  Flex buildings in planned industrial developments (PIDs): Parking requirements shall be based on the amount of gross square footage devoted to each use within the building. Any office uses accessory to permitted light industrial use as defined in section 706.3.2(h) or office uses which are less than 25 percent of an industrial building's gross square footage shall count as industrial uses for the purposes of parking calculations; except that, within previously approved developments of regional impact, any such office uses which are less than 35 percent of an industrial building's gross square footage shall count as industrial uses for the purposes of parking calculations. 
808.3.4. Calculating required parking spaces. 
(a)  Uses not specifically mentioned: The requirements for off-street parking for any unspecified uses in this section shall be determined by the community development department. It is the intent to require all uses except agricultural to provide off-street parking. 
(b)  Fractional spaces: When units or measurements determining number of required off-street parking spaces result in requirement of fractional space, any such fraction equal to or greater than one-half shall require a full off-street parking space. 
(c)  Mixed uses: In the case of mixed uses, the total requirements for off-street parking shall be the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately, and off-street parking space for one use shall not be considered as providing the required off-street parking for any other use. However, when a business which has been issued an occupational license conditioned upon the operation of the business only between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m., excluding all day holidays and Sundays: 
Said business may utilize up to 60 percent of the parking spaces required for the building in which the business is located. 
(d)  Measurements: 
1.  For the purposes of this chapter, gross floor area shall mean the floor area inside of the exterior walls excluding elevators, stair wells, common corridors, trash rooms, common lobbies, common rest rooms, meter rooms ancillary power equipment rooms. In hospitals, bassinets shall not count as beds. In stadiums, sport arenas, places of worship and other places of assembly in which occupants utilize benches, pews or other similar seating facilities, each 20 lineal inches of such seating shall be counted as one seat for the purpose of computing off-street parking requirements. 
2.  In outdoor display areas for vehicle sales or rental, only areas designated for vehicle parking shall be measured. Driveway aisles and landscaped medians are not intended to be included in the measured area. 
    808.4. Use of permitted facilities. 
808.4.1. Permitted use. Parking spaces approved in accordance with this chapter may be used for the intermittent parking of licensed motor vehicles of employees, occupants, owners, tenants or customers utilizing the building or use served by said required parking space. Supplemental parking (parking facilities provided but not required) may be used for any purpose related to the use of the building it serves, subject to the conditions hereinafter set forth. Parking may be used for any purpose related to the use of the building it serves, subject to the conditions hereinafter set forth. 
808.4.2. Limitations on use of required parking facilities. The following uses and activities shall not be permitted in required parking facilities: 
(a)  Parking to serve an off-site building unless in accordance with a unity of title approved by the city in accordance with this chapter. 
(b)  Storage, repair or display of any vehicles, equipment or merchandise, except as may be approved by the city through a temporary use permit. 
(c)  Parking of vehicle, which, due to its size, shape, contents or location creates an obstruction or public safety hazard, or which cannot be contained within a single designated parking space. 
(d)  Vehicles shall be required to park on paved or stabilized alternative parking surfaces. Parking shall be prohibited in all other areas. 
    808.5. Off-street loading. 
808.5.1. General provisions. Adequate space for loading and unloading of materials, goods or things, and for delivery and shipping, shall be provided and maintained on the same plot as the building which it serves. 
Where any structure is enlarged or any use is extended so that the size of the resulting occupancy comes within the scope of this section, the full amount of off-street loading space shall be supplied and maintained for the structure or use in its enlarged or extended size. Where the use of a structure or land or any part thereof is changed to a use requiring an off-street loading space, such space shall be supplied and maintained to comply with this section. 
For the purposes of this section, an off-street loading space shall be an area at the grade level at least ten feet wide by 25 feet long with fourteen foot vertical clearance. Each off-street loading space shall be directly accessible from a street or alley without crossing or entering any other required loading space, and shall be arranged for convenient and safe ingress and egress by motor truck and/or trailer combination. Such loading space shall also be accessible from the interior of any building it is intended to serve. 
808.5.2. Specifications. The following minimum conditions shall apply; additional conditions may be imposed as part of a conditional use or final site plan approval. Off-street loading spaces shall be provided and maintained in accordance with the following schedule: 
(a)  For each retail store, storage warehouse, wholesale establishment, industrial plant, factory, freight terminal, market, restaurant, funeral home, laundry, dry cleaning establishment or similar building or use which has an aggregate gross floor area of: 
Up to 25,000 square feet-1 space 
25,000 square feet to 60,000 square feet-2 spaces 
60,000 square feet to 120,000 square feet-3 spaces 
120,000 square feet to 200,000 square feet-4 spaces 
200,000 square feet to 290,000 square feet-5 spaces 
Plus for each additional 90,000 square feet over 290,000 square feet or major fraction thereof-1 space. 
(b)  Convenience store-1 space 
(c)  For each multiple dwelling, hotel or motel which has a number of dwelling or hotel/motel units of: 
25 to 50 units-1 space 
Over 50 to 200 units-2 spaces 
Over 200 units-3 spaces 
Such loading spaces shall not be located in the required front yard. 
(d)  For each auditorium, convention hall, exhibition hall, museum, hotel, office building, sports arena, stadium, hospital or similar use which has an aggregate gross floor area of: 
Over 20,000 square feet but not over 40,000 square feet-1 space. 
Plus for each additional 60,000 square feet over 40,000 square feet or major fraction thereof-1 space. The loading requirements for any unspecified use shall be that which is required for similar specified uses. 
(e)  Off-street loading facilities supplied to meet the needs of one use shall not be considered as meeting off-street loading needs of any other use. 
(f)  No area or facilities supplied to meet the required off-street parking facilities for a use shall be for, or be deemed to meet, the requirements of this article for off-street loading facilities. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the collective, joint or combined provision of off-street loading facilities for two or more buildings or uses, provided that such off-street loading facilities are equal in size and capacity to the combined requirements of the several buildings or uses and arranged as to be usable thereby. 
(h)  Plans for buildings or uses requiring off-street loading facilities under the provisions of this section shall clearly indicate the location, dimensions, clearances and access of all such required off-street loading facilities. 
    808.6. Drive-through service. Businesses that provide a drive-through service are required to provide drive-through service lane or lanes, whether for stacking or queuing, as separate and distinct lanes from the circulation lanes necessary for entering or exiting the property. Each drive-through lane shall be separated from other on-site lanes. Each such drive-through lane shall be curbed striped, marked or otherwise distinctly delineated. A separate and distinct escape lane shall be provided. Neither a lane otherwise necessary for site circulation nor a public street or alley shall be counted as an escape lane. Drive-through lanes and escape lanes shall not conflict, or otherwise hamper access, to or from any parking space. Pedestrian walkways shall be clearly separated from drive-through lanes. 
808.6.1. Specifications. Stacking spaces necessary for the provisions of drive-through lanes shall be determined using the following table: 
Type of Facility Inbound Vehicles Outbound 
Vehicles Drive-in bank 4 spaces per service position 1 space per service position Drive-in beverage, food sales 6 spaces per service position 1 space per service position Laundry 3 spaces per service position 1 space per service position Attendant car wash 5 spaces per service to wash line 4 spaces between end of wash stall and other circulation lane Automatic car wash 4 spaces per service position 1 space per service position Automatic car wash as an accessory use 3 spaces per service position 1 space per service position Service station 2 spaces per service position 1 space per service position Gatehouse (residential) 5 spaces 1 space  
A stacking space is hereby defined as being 22 feet in length. Inbound stacking requirements shall be counted from the first stopping point. Out-bound stacking requirements shall be counted from the last stopping point. 
(Ord. No. 03-15, § 3, 5-21-03; Ord. No. 07-07, § 11, 11-29-06; Ord. No. 11-10, § 8, 9-21-11; Ord. No. 12-07, § 7, 11-30-11; Ord. No. 15-05, § 5, 11-24-14; Ord. No. 18-05, § 4, 11-27-17) 
Sec. 809. - Accessory uses and standards. 
    809.1. General. No accessory uses shall be permitted in a required yard or bufferyard area, except as set forth below. In no event shall an accessory use be construed to authorize a use not otherwise permitted in the district in which the principal use is located and in no event shall an accessory use be established prior to the principal use to which it is accessory. No permanent structures shall be permitted in utility easements without the prior written approval of the appropriate utilities and the concurrence of the city. 
    809.2. Awnings and canopies. The definition of an awning or canopy shall be as provided for in the South Florida Building Code. Except for single-family residences, awnings and canopies are subject to Community Appearance Board (CAB) approval. 
809.2.1. Awnings. An awning may be located at any window provided it is architecturally integrated into the building's design and color. The maximum height and width of an awning shall be limited to the minimum area required to cover a building's window. Awnings shall not be illuminated. 
809.2.2. Canopies. A canopy may be located over any walkway adjacent to a building or over a building's entrance. The maximum height of a canopy shall be 12 feet. The minimum height of the structural frame shall be seven and one-half feet. The maximum width of a canopy shall be limited to the width of the sidewalk or entry way that it is covering. Illumination of a canopy shall be limited to the minimum illumination required for safe pedestrian passage under the canopy. 
    809.3. Antennas, antenna towers and dish antennas: 
809.3.1. HAM radio antennas and towers. Antenna towers or antenna masts for use by amateur (HAM) radio operators who are licensed by the Federal Communications Commission shall be constructed in accordance with the following provisions: 
(a)  The height of any such permitted tower or mast and antenna shall not exceed 55 feet when fully extended. 
(b)  The height of any such push-up mast and antenna shall not exceed 35 feet when fully extended. 
(c)  The maximum permitted width of a tower shall not exceed 18 inches on a square or triangular tower. 
(d)  The maximum permitted diameter of a mast or push-up mast shall not exceed nine inches. 
(e)  The antenna and all support structures and cables shall be located in the rear yard and meet the same setback requirements as the principal structure. 
(f)  Shall comply with National Electric Code and Federal regulations governing amateur radio. 
(g)  Must maintain an eight-foot clearance from pole lines. 
809.3.2. Citizens' radio station. All antennas and supporting structures associated or used in conjunction with a citizens' radio station, licensed by the Federal Communications Commission, operated from a fixed location, must comply with one of the following provisions: 
(a)  A ground mounted antenna and its supporting structure shall not exceed 20 feet in height above ground level. 
(b)  An antenna attached to a man-made structure shall not be higher than 20 feet above the structure. No citizens' radio station antenna shall exceed a height of 40 feet from ground level. 
(c)  The antenna and all support structures and cables shall be located in the rear yard and meet the same setback requirements as the principal structure. 
(d)  Shall comply with National Electric Code and Federal regulations governing amateur radio. 
(e)  Must maintain an eight foot clearance from pole lines. 
809.3.3. Dish antennas in residential zoning districts. Dish antennas shall be permitted in all residential zoning districts subject to the following criteria: 
(a)  Location and setbacks. Except for roof-mounted antennas, all dish antennas shall be located to the rear of the principal building and shall not encroach into the following setbacks: (measured from edge of dish in the horizontal position) 
(i)  Rear yard. For ground mounted antennas the rear yard setback shall be equivalent to the height of the antenna or the structural setback applicable to the property, whichever is less. 
(ii)  Side yard. For all antennas, the minimum setback to a side lot line shall be the same as for a principal building in the district in which the antenna is located. 
(b)  Maximum size. The maximum diameter of any dish antenna in a residential zoning district shall be 12 feet. 
(c)  Maximum height. The maximum height of the various permitted antenna types shall be as follows. 
(i)  Roof mounted. The maximum height of any roof mounted dish antenna shall be no higher than the diameter of the dish. No residential structure under three stories in height shall mount an antenna on the roof. 
(ii)  Pole mounted. All pole mounted antennas shall be directly adjacent to and connected to the main structure, and shall extend no higher than six feet above the roof line. 
(iii)  Ground mounted. The maximum height of a ground mounted antenna shall be equal to the diameter of the dish. 
(d)  Screening, ground mount. For ground mounted dish antennas, a fence, wall, hedge, trees, berm, or any combination thereof shall be provided as specified below to obscure the view of the antenna from adjacent parcels. Fences or walls used as screening shall be installed at a minimum height of five feet except where such height would interfere with the satellite signals to the extent of causing deterioration in reception quality. When screening material is provided on a property line or otherwise within normal required setback areas, the maximum height of the screening, except for trees, shall be six feet. When vegetative material other than trees is provided, the height at time of planting shall be a minimum of two feet and must attain opacity and a minimum height of three feet within one year from date of planting under normal growing conditions. 
(e)  Number permitted. One dish antenna shall be permitted per single-family or duplex unit. For all other multi-family dwelling unit types only one dish antenna shall be permitted per unified development project, additional antennas may be permitted through conditional use approval. 
(f)  Anchorage. Dish antennas shall be anchored securely to the ground or building and otherwise installed in conformance with the requirements of the South Florida Building Code, Broward County Edition. 
(g)  Maintenance. Following installation, dish antennas and related appurtenances must be maintained in good operable condition and surrounding landscaping shall be maintained in good, healthy condition so as to provide maximum opacity. 
809.3.4. Dish antennas in nonresidential zoning districts. Dish antennas shall be permitted uses in all nonresidential zoning districts subject to the criteria of this section. Dish antennas which do not meet the criteria of this section shall require conditional use approval. 
(a)  Location and setbacks. Except for roof-mounted antennas, all dish antennas shall be located to the rear or side of the principal building and shall not encroach into the setbacks established herein. 
(i)  Rear yard. For ground mounted antennas the rear yard setback shall be equivalent to the height of the antenna or the structural setback applicable to the property, whichever is less. 
(ii)  Side yard. For all antennas, the minimum setback to a side lot line shall be the same as for a principal building in the district in which the antenna is located. 
(b)  Maximum size. The maximum diameter of any dish antenna in a nonresidential zoning district shall be 30 feet. If the antenna is proposed to be located on land adjacent to property designated residential on the land use plan or residentially zoned property, the maximum diameter of the dish shall be 12 feet. 
(c)  Maximum height. The maximum height of ground mounted dish antennas shall be no higher than the dish's diameter or the height of a structure, whichever is less. The maximum height of a roof or pole mounted antenna shall be no higher than one and one-half times the height of a structure measured from the ground. 
(d)  Screening, ground mount. Ground mounted antennas shall be screened around the base of the structure with a five-foot wide continuous landscape buffer. The minimum height of vegetation shall be three feet. 
(e)  Number permitted. Only one antenna per united development or parcel of land shall be permitted. Additional antennas may be permitted through conditional use approval. 
(f)  Anchorage. Dish antennas shall be anchored securely to the ground or building and otherwise installed in conformance with the requirements of the South Florida Building Code, Broward County Edition. 
(g)  Maintenance. Following installation, dish antennas and related appurtenances must be maintained in good operable condition and surrounding landscaping shall be maintained in good, healthy condition so as to provide maximum opacity. 
    809.4. Carports. Carports shall comply with the structural setbacks of the zoning district in which they are proposed to be located. Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe is expressly prohibited. Any carport lawfully established prior to the adoption of this Code which does not comply with the structural setbacks of the zoning district may remain as a nonconforming use subject to the provisions of the nonconforming chapter of this Code. 
    809.5. Domestic pet shelters. One pet shelter or pen for domestic household animals shall be permitted in any residential district, subject to the following: 
(a)  No pet shelter or pen shall be permitted within the required front yard area, or within utility, drainage or access easements. 
(b)  The structure must be set back at least six feet from the side and rear lot lines. 
(c)  No more than a total of three dogs or other common domestic household animals over six months of age shall be permitted on any residential lot except within the estate or rural districts. Within the estate or rural districts domestic animals may exceed these limitations subject to the section regulating "farm animals." 
(d)  The maximum size of any domestic pet shelter shall not exceed 15 square feet in area. Any structure in excess of 15 square feet shall be restricted to the rural and estate zoning districts and subject to the limitations for farm animals. 
(e)  Domestic pet shelters and pens shall be maintained in a clean and neat manner consistent with the City Code. 
    809.6. Dumpsters and trash handling areas. All dumpsters and trash handling areas in development within RM zoning districts shall have a concrete slab, be enclosed by a finished concrete block wall similar in color and detail to the principal structure as provided in this Code, and be landscaped in accordance with section 901.8 of this Code. Dumpsters shall be oriented in a logical fashion so as to minimize truck maneuvers. All such facilities shall be a minimum of 25 feet from a residential structure. 
    809.7. Fences and walls. 
809.7.1. Defined. A fence or wall is a barrier constructed of manmade materials. A wall is a concrete or block structure. 
809.7.2. Fences on residential lots. Fences on a residential lot shall be limited to six feet in height. Barbed wire and other similar material shall not be permitted on a fence or wall within a residential district. Fences and walls shall not be permitted within a required front yard, except as provided for herein. In all zoning districts, only pressure treated pine, redwood, cypress, black locust and cedar wood shall be acceptable for wood fence construction. All wood fencing shall have a nominal thickness of one inch. 
A fence or wall may be permitted within a required front yard only within the rural and estate zoning districts. Within the rural and estate districts, fences or walls in a required front yard may be constructed up to a maximum height of six feet, subject to the requirements of the clear sight triangles contained in this Code. Fences in a required front yard shall not be permitted to create a visible obstruction; only split rail, farm style or other open type fence shall be permitted. 
809.7.3. Residential parcel perimeter and entry walls. Uniform walls may be erected within a required bufferyard and at the access driveway entrances to residential development parcels. The wall shall be located at the interior edge of a bufferyard. Typical elevations, materials and the location of the wall shall be shown on a final site plan. Barbed wire and other similar material shall not be permitted. Walls shall be designed to discourage graffiti. 
809.7.4. Walls and fences on nonresidential parcels. Walls shall be permitted within a required bufferyard at the perimeter of nonresidential parcels, they shall not be permitted within a required front yard. Fences within nonresidential zoning districts adjacent to residential property shall not exceed eight feet in height. Fences and walls within nonresidential property adjacent to nonresidential property shall not exceed ten feet in height. Barbed wire and other similar material may be placed on a fence which secures a storage or freight area; however, this material shall not be permitted at the perimeter of a property visible from a right-of-way. Typical elevations, materials and the location of the fence shall be shown on a final site plan. 
809.7.5. Fences within easements. Fences, walls and landscaping shall not be permitted within a utility easement prior to the issuance of a permit. To locate a fence or wall in any easement an encroachment agreement shall be required. Said encroachment agreement shall only apply to properties platted after January 1, 1996. If a permit is issued, access to any easements shall be granted when required by any utility. A utility company or franchise shall not be responsible for damage to a fence, wall or landscaping within an easement. 
809.7.6. Maintenance. Fence or wall shall be finished and maintained in good condition and appearance. The finished side of all stockade fences shall face outward to the abutting property or right-of-way. 
    809.8. Flagpoles and flags. Flagpoles and flags shall be permitted in all districts subject to provisions of Chapter 10 of this Code, sections 1007(i) and 1012(j). Flagpoles in RS Zoning Districts shall not be greater than 20 feet in height above ground. In all other zoning districts, the maximum height of a flagpole shall be the maximum structure height for the district in which the flagpole is located or 40 feet whichever is less. 
    809.9. Gazebos and Pergolas . Gazebos shall be permitted in all residential districts, subject to the following: 
(a)  Gazebos and pergolas shall not be permitted within the required front yard area, or within utility, drainage, landscape bufferyard or access easements. 
(b)  Gazebos and pergolas must be set back at least six feet from the side and rear lot lines. 
(c)  Gazebos shall have a maximum area (footprint) of 150 square feet per 5,000 square feet of lot area. Pergolas for properties less than a 1/4 acre shall be limited to 250 square feet; properties greater than 1/4 acre up to 2 acres may have up to 500 square feet; and properties greater than 2 acres may have a pergola up to 1,000 square feet. 
809.10. Play equipment. Play equipment shall be permitted in any residential district, subject to the following: 
(a)  No permanently installed play equipment, except basketball hoops, shall be permitted within the front setback, ten feet of a right-of-way, or within utility, drainage or access easements. 
(b)  No play equipment shall use street right-of-way as part of playing area. 
(c)  Permanently installed play equipment shall be of a common playground type designed for children. 
(d)  All basketball hoops and backboards in front yard areas shall be permitted on the front of the building or on a pole in the driveway only. Basketball poles shall be located no closer then ten feet to any property line. 
809.11. Screen enclosures. Screen enclosures shall be permitted in all residential zoning districts, subject to the following: 
(a)  No screen enclosure shall be permitted in the required front yard or within utility, drainage or access easements. 
(b)  No screen enclosure may be converted to an enclosed structure unless the converted structure would comply with all standards of the applicable zoning district. 
(c)  Screen enclosures with a screen roof shall meet the following setback requirements: 
(1)  The side yard setback shall be the same as the structural setback requirement of the zoning district. 
(2)  The rear yard setback shall be a minimum five feet from the rear lot line. 
(d)  Screen enclosures with a solid roof shall meet the following setback requirements: 
(1)  The side yard setback shall be the same as the structural setback requirement of the zoning district. 
(2)  The rear yard setback shall be 15 feet or the same as the structural setback, whichever is less. 
809.12. Swimming pools and spas. Swimming pools and spas shall be permitted in all residential zoning districts, subject to the following: 
(a)  No swimming pools or spas shall be permitted within the required front yard area, or within utility, drainage or access easements. Swimming pools shall be required to have a safety barrier as provided for in the Miramar City Code. 
(b)  Above-ground pools and spas which exceed 24 inches in height must meet all structural setback requirements. 
(c)  The following setback requirements shall apply to swimming pools and spas: 
(1)  The side yard setbacks to the water's edge shall be two feet plus the required side yard structure setback. 
(2)  The rear yard setback shall be seven feet from the water's edge to rear lot line. 
(d)  Any pool for a nonresidential development shall meet the structural setbacks for the district in which it is located and all required governmental agency standards. 
809.12.1. Safety barrier required, specifications. 
(a)  Specifications. No swimming pool final inspection and approval shall be given by the community development department unless there has been erected a safety barrier. The safety barrier shall take the form of a screened-in patio, a wooden fence, a concrete block wall. The minimum height of the safety barrier shall be not less than four (4) feet. The safety barrier shall be erected either around the swimming pool or around the premises on which the swimming pool is erected; in either event, it shall enclose the area entirely, prohibiting unrestrained admittance to the enclosed area. Gates shall be of the spring lock type, so that they shall automatically be in a closed position at all times. Gates shall also be equipped with a self-latching lock and shall be locked when the swimming pool is not in use. Other safety requirements may apply based on the current Florida Building Code. 
(b)  Permits required. Before any work is commenced, permits shall be secured for all swimming pools and for the safety barriers. Plans shall contain all details necessary to show compliance with the terms and conditions of these regulations. No swimming pool permit shall be issued unless simultaneously therewith a permit is secured for the erection of the required safety barrier; if the premises are already enclosed, as herein before provided, a permit for the safety barrier shall not be required, if, upon inspection of the premises, the existing barrier is proven to be satisfactory. 
(c)  Construction specifications of walls and fences. In the wooden type fence, the boards, pickets, louvers, or other such members, shall be spaced, constructed, and erected, so as to make the fence nonclimbable and impenetrable. Walls, whether of the rock or block type, shall be so erected to make them nonclimbable. 
(d)  Authority to disapprove barriers. It shall be within the discretion of the building inspector to refuse approval of any barrier which does not furnish the safety requirements of this regulation, i.e., that it is high enough and so constructed to keep the children of pre-school age from getting over or through it. 
(e)  Maintenance of safety barrier; duty of owner, occupant. It shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or occupant of the premises containing the swimming pool to maintain and keep in proper and safe condition at all times the safety barrier required and erected in accordance with this article 
(f)  Maintenance of pool; duty of owner, occupant. It shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or occupant of the premises containing a swimming pool to keep such pool from becoming a health hazard to the community by becoming a breeding ground for mosquitoes, or by any other means. In the event any person owning or occupying the premises containing a swimming pool permits the safety barrier to become in an improper and unsafe condition, or permits the swimming pool to become a health hazard to the community, the city may direct a letter by certified mail to the owner or occupant of such premises, advising such owner or occupant that the city will have such safety barrier put in a proper and safe condition or correct the health hazard of the swimming pool within a period of ten days from receipt of such letter. The city shall be authorized to place a lien on the property not in compliance with this section in order to recover the costs associated with enforcement of this section. 
(g)  Temporary fence to enclose swimming pools while under construction. No person shall construct or cause to be constructed any swimming pools unless such swimming pool is completely enclosed by a fence with a minimum height of not less than four (4) feet. Such fence may be of a temporary nature but in lieu of a permanent fence, a temporary fence must be erected either around the swimming pool or around the premises on which the swimming pool is under construction; in either event, it shall enclose the area entirely, prohibiting unrestrained admittance to the enclosed area. However, the swimming pool need not be completely enclosed during those periods when an adult person is present on the site and actual construction is in process. This section shall only affect those pools under construction within 140 feet of any residence upon which a certificate of occupancy has been issued. The 140 feet shall be measured from the edge of the swimming pool to the closest property line containing such residence by straight line measure. 
    809.13. Utility sheds . Utility sheds shall be permitted in all residential districts, subject to the following: 
(a)  Number : A maximum of one utility shed shall be permitted for each parcel or lot, except that on lots or parcels located within the Rural (RL), Suburban Estate (E), and Estate (RS1) zoning districts, a maximum of two shall be permitted. 
(b)  Location : Shall not be permitted in any required front area or within utility, drainage landscape bufferyard or access easements. 
(c)  Size and height : The maximum area shall be no more than 100 square feet in footprint and eight feet in height, except that on lots or parcels located within the Rural (RL), Suburban Estate (E), and Estate (RS1) zoning districts, up to 240 square feet of total combined footprint area (e.g., one 240 square foot shed or two 120-square-foot sheds), and ten feet in height are permitted. 
(d)  Setbacks : Rear and side setbacks for utility sheds on single-family and duplex lots shall be a minimum of three feet from the lot lines as long as they are not within any easements; except that on lots or parcels located within the Rural (RL), Suburban Estate (E), and Estate (RS1) zoning districts, utility sheds that exceed 100 square feet in area and/or ten feet in height; must maintain a minimum 25-foot side and rear setback. 
(e)  Except for lots containing single-family and duplex residences, which are subject to paragraph (d) above, utility sheds within RM multi-family districts are subject to the setback and landscape bufferyard requirements of the zoning district and to Community Appearance Board (CAB) approval. Metal is prohibited. 
(f)  Utility sheds are to be used for storage only. No plumbing connections are permitted. 
(g)  Use of utility sheds for residential purposes is strictly prohibited. 
    809.14. Utility/mechanical equipment. Utility and mechanical used for a building's operation which is located outside the building shall only be located in a rear or side yard. The equipment shall not be located within a utility easement unless it is equipment serving that specific easement. The minimum distance from a property line to the structure shall be no less than the structure's height. All equipment shall be screened from view by landscape materials as provided for in this Code. These requirements shall not apply to municipal or franchise utilities such as power, phone, cable, communication or drainage equipment which is located within a public utility easement. 
    809.15. Waterfront lands. A rear yard setback of 20 feet from the rear or waterfront line measured landward therefrom shall be provided and no building construction, to include principal and accessory, shall be permitted in this setback. 
    809.16. Docks; construction requirements. Prior to the construction of a dock within the city, the owner shall obtain approval of the proposed construction from the community development department and appropriate drainage district. The amount of a dock protruding onto public property shall be at the discretion of the community development department and based upon waterway width. In no case shall protrusion onto public property exceed 15 feet. Docks shall be kept in a constant state of repair by the owner. Any dock not properly constructed or maintained must be removed at the direction of the community development department within 15 days of receipt of notice. 
    809.17. Patios on single-family, duplex and fee-simple multi-family lots; setback requirements and provision of on-site drainage . 
(a)  Side setback : Same as required structure setback; however patios on attached multi-family units must maintain at least a 2 foot side setback. 
(b)  Rear setback : Five feet and outside of any dedicated easements. 
(c)  Drainage provision. Rainwater runoff must be maintained on the property. Rainwater shall not be allowed to flow onto or across any adjoining property or sidewalk, either public or private. Exception: Rainwater may flow into a street gutter, storm sewer, or storm sewer catch basin if first approved by the engineering department. 
    809.18. Walkways on single-family, duplex and multi-family lots; setback requirements and provision of on-site drainage . 
(a)  Setback requirement . All walkways or sidewalks within single-family and duplex and multi-family lots shall be set back a minimum of two feet from the side or rear property line. 
(b)  Drainage provision . Water runoff must be maintained on the property. Rainwater shall not be allowed to flow onto or across any adjoining property or sidewalk, either public or private. Exception: Rainwater may flow into a street gutter, storm sewer, or storm sewer catch basin, if first approved by the City Engineer. 
    809.19. Portable storage units: 
809.19.1. Definitions. 
Portable storage unit means any container designed for the storage of personal property which is typically rented to owners or occupants of property for their temporary use and which is delivered and removed by vehicle. 
809.19.2. Location. 
(a)  Portable storage units may be located in single-family zoning districts. Portable storage units in single-family districts shall be placed in the driveway, be set back a minimum of three feet from the front property line and may not block any sidewalk. 
(b)  Portable storage units may be allowed in multi-family districts only upon the applicant demonstrating, to the satisfaction of city staff, that the specific location/complex has sufficient space to place a portable storage unit and continue to provide adequate parking, public safety access and comply with all health, safety and welfare concerns. 
(c)  Portable storage units are expressly prohibited in all other zoning districts, except those districts which specifically permit outdoor storage use. 
809.19.3. Number, duration, and removal. 
(a)  There shall be no more than one portable storage unit on site. The portable storage unit shall be no larger than 130 square feet in area and no higher than eight feet from grade. A site permit, as required in this section below, for a portable storage unit to remain at a site shall be valid for a maximum of 14 days. If, during the 14-day period, the portable storage unit is removed, it may be replaced by a different portable storage unit so long as there is never more than one on the property at any time and the total time such units are on the property does not exceed 14 days. All sites are limited to a maximum of three site permits within a calendar year with a minimum of 30 days between permits. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the time limitations set forth herein, all portable storage units shall be removed immediately upon the issuance of a hurricane watch by a recognized government agency. The removal of a portable storage unit during such hurricane watch is the responsibility of the owner/operator of the portable storage unit. 
809.19.4. Permits required. 
(a)  Prior to commencing business in the city, the portable storage company must obtain an annual permit outlining the obligations and requirements for conducting business in the city. The fee for such permit shall be set and amended by resolution of the City Commission. 
(b)  Prior to placing a portable storage unit on site, the owner/operator of the portable storage unit must apply for a site permit. Application for the site permit shall be made to the City on a form provided by the city. The application shall include the signature of the site property owner in order to ensure that the site owner has full knowledge of, and consents to the placement of the portable storage unit on site and the provisions of this section. A site permit fee shall accompany the completed application, payable by the portable storage company. 
(c)  Portable storage unit permits will not be granted to any portable storage unit company, or customer of any portable storage unit company, which is found to be in violation of the regulations of this section, until such violation is brought into compliance. 
809.19.5. Standards. 
(a)  The exterior of the portable storage unit shall have a weather-proof clear pouch which must display the site permit at all times. A portable storage unit shall have no signage other than the name and telephone number of the person or firm engaged in the business of renting or otherwise placing the portable storage unit. The sign must be permanently adhered to or painted on the portable storage unit. 
(b)  The owner of the portable storage unit shall be responsible to ensure that the portable storage unit is in good condition, free from evidence of deterioration, weathering, discoloration, rust, ripping, tearing or other holes or breaks. When not in use, the portable storage unit shall be kept locked. The owner and operator of any site on which a portable storage unit is placed shall also be responsible that no hazardous substances are stored or kept within the portable storage units. 
809.19.6. Violation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit the placement of a portable storage unit on property which he or she owns, rents, occupies or controls without first obtaining a site permit and approval from the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any owner/operator of a portable storage unit to place, or permit the placement of, a portable storage unit on a site within the city without first obtaining a site permit and approval from the city. 
(c)  Persons who place, or permit the placement of, a portable storage unit without first obtaining a site permit shall be provided a grace period of one business day from delivery to remove the portable storage unit or obtain a site permit. Should the person not obtain a permit or not remove the portable storage unit at the termination of the grace period, the person shall be considered in violation of the code. After the issuance of a Summons to Appear, the violator will be subject to the penalties as provided in Chapter 2 of the Code of Ordinances. Each day that any such portable storage unit remains at a site in violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate violation against the portable storage company, and against any person who owns, rents, occupies, or otherwise controls the site. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a portable storage unit to remain at a site in excess of the time periods permitted under this section. Each day that any such portable storage unit remains at a site in violation of the provisions of this section, shall constitute as a violation against the portable storage company, and against any person who owns, rents, occupies, or otherwise controls the site. 
    809.20. Rooftop photovoltaic solar systems. 
(1)  Intent. The provisions contained herein are intended to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens by removing barriers to the installation of alternative energy systems and encourage the installation of rooftop photovoltaic solar systems pursuant to the U.S. Department of Energy Rooftop Solar Challenge Agreement Number DE-EE0005701 ("Go SOLAR- Broward Rooftop Solar Challenge") on buildings and structures within municipal limits. The provisions and exceptions contained herein are limited to rooftop photovoltaic solar systems permitted through web-based applications for pre-approved rooftop photovoltaic solar system installations that utilize the Go SOLAR-Broward Rooftop Solar Challenge permitting process. 
(2)  Definitions. For purposes of this subsection, the following terms shall have the meaning prescribed herein: 
(a)  Roof line: The top edge of the roof which forms the top line of the building silhouette or, for flat roofs with or without a parapet, the top of the roof. 
(b)  Rooftop photovoltaic solar system: A system which uses one or more photovoltaic panels installed on the surface of a roof, parallel to a sloped roof or surface- or rack-mounted on a flat roof, to convert sunlight into electricity. 
(3)  Permitted accessory equipment. Rooftop photovoltaic solar systems installed pursuant to this subsection shall be deemed permitted accessory equipment to residential and commercial conforming and nonconforming buildings and structures in all zoning categories. Nothing contained in this Land Development Code, including design standards or guidelines included or referenced herein, shall be deemed to prohibit the installation of such rooftop photovoltaic solar systems as accessory equipment to conforming and nonconforming buildings, including buildings containing nonconforming uses. 
(4)  Height. In order to be deemed permitted accessory equipment, the height of rooftop photovoltaic solar systems shall not exceed the roof line, as defined herein. For flat roofs with or without a parapet, in order to be deemed accessory equipment, the rooftop photovoltaic solar system shall not be greater than five feet above the roof. 
(5)  Permits. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the property owner(s) must acknowledge, as part of the permit application, that: (a) if the property is located in a homeowners' association, condominium association, or otherwise subject to restrictive covenants, the property may be subject to additional regulations or requirements despite the issuance of a permit by the city; and (b) the issuance of said permit for a rooftop photovoltaic solar system does not create in the property owner(s), its, his, her, or their successors and assigns in title, or create in the property itself a right to remain free of shadows and/or obstructions to solar energy caused by development adjoining on other property or the growth of any trees or vegetation on other property or the right to prohibit the development on or growth of any trees or vegetation on another property. 
(6)  Tree maintenance and removal. To the extent that the city has discretion regarding the removal or relocation of trees, solar access shall be a factor taken into consideration when determining whether and where trees may be removed or relocated. 
(7)  Maintenance. The rooftop photovoltaic solar system shall be properly maintained and be kept free from hazards, including but not limited to, faulty wiring, loose fastenings, being in an unsafe condition or detrimental to public health, safety, or general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 03-21, § 3, 9-17-03; Ord. No. 05-03, § 2, 11-17-04; Ord. No. 06-05, § 3, 11-16-05; Ord. No. 13-02, § 2, 10-3-12; Ord. No. 14-15, § 2, 7-2-14; Ord. No. 16-05, § 8, 1-27-16; Ord. No. 18-07, §§ 21, 22, 3-7-18) 
Sec. 810. - Compliance with comprehensive plan. 
    810.1. General. The Land Development Code together with other provisions contained in the City Code are designed to be consistent with and to further the goals, objectives and policies of the comprehensive plan. 
    810.2. Compliance. To ensure compliance with the requirements of the comprehensive plan, the following regulations shall apply to all districts: 
(a)  No storage, handling use or production of hazardous or toxic substances shall be permitted which would violate Broward County's potable water supply wellfield protection ordinance. 
(b)  No development shall be permitted unless the required public facilities will be available at the prescribed levels of service concurrent with the impact of the development on those facilities. 
(c)  Within designated local areas of particular concern and urban wilderness areas, development permits issued by the city shall comply with all appropriate regulatory requirements. 
Sec. 811. - Miramar Parkway Scenic Corridor. 
    811.1 Intent and purpose. The intent and purpose of the Miramar Parkway Corridor is to create an aesthetically pleasing transportation corridor. The ultimate goal of the Miramar Parkway Scenic Corridor is to create a greenbelt through the city. In recognizing the local and regional importance of Miramar Parkway as a major east-west transportation route in southwest Broward County the city believes it is important to develop a scenic corridor which will be a distinct and aesthetically pleasing component of the City of Miramar Comprehensive Plan. 
    811.2. Location and components. The components of the corridor consist of: 
(a)  A 35-foot wide, landscaped easement adjacent to the boundary of Interstate 75. 
(b)  A 35-foot wide, landscape easement adjacent to the south side of the ultimate right-of-way of Miramar Parkway between Palm Avenue and the east right-of-way boundary of Interstate 75. 
(c)  A 50-foot wide, landscaped easement adjacent to the north and south sides of the ultimate right-of-way of Miramar Parkway from the west right-of-way boundary of Interstate 75 to the city's western boundary. 
(d)  The landscape easement along Miramar Parkway will include extensive berming and landscaping, as outlined in this section. 
(e)  A reduction in the 50-foot wide landscape easement shall be granted for those developments designed with water bodies or wetland mitigation areas immediately adjacent to the landscape easement for every seven feet of water or wetland mitigation area measured on a perpendicular line from the non right-of-way edge of the easement property. In no way shall the width of the landscape easement be less than 35 feet. 
(f)  The boundaries of landscape easement shall be from the ultimate right-of-way of Miramar Parkway and a parallel line to end of required size of the landscape easement as outlined in this section. 
    811.3. Dedication of landscape easements. Dedications for the landscape easement shall be shown on all plats, and designated on-site plans and developments of regional impact plans. The easement shall be dedicated in perpetuity for the purpose of landscaping. Said easement may include a drainage easement or utility easement, or both if such easement will not interfere with the requirements of the landscape easement as set forth herein. 
    811.4. Landscape easement development standards. The following standards shall apply to the landscape easement. Landscape plans required to be submitted for all rezoning applications, all conditional use requests and final site plans shall indicate compliance with the following requirements. Plans shall be prepared by a State of Florida registered landscape architect and shall be signed and sealed. The requirements of this section shall supersede the requirements of the landscape standards of this Code. 
811.4.1. Earth berms: 
(a)  Berm standards. Earth berms shall be employed to the extent possible within the landscape easement. In no instances shall less than 50 percent of the lineal frontage of the landscape easement along Miramar Parkway be devoted to berming. The minimum height at the center of all berms shall be four feet above the ground adjacent to the berm area. Berms shall be smooth, transitional, and large in scale. 
(b)  Alternatives to berming. In certain special circumstances and upon approval of the community development director, the aforementioned berming requirements may be reduced and replaced with low cement block structure walls, durable ornamental fences, or other appropriate landscape elements as approved by the community development director. Such alternatives should be designed to present a compatible appearance with the bermed areas. Walls, fences, or other approved landscape components shall be a minimum height of four feet above the ground adjacent to the landscape component and shall extend, singly or in combination with berming, along a minimum of 50 percent of the lineal frontage of the landscape easement on Miramar Parkway. 
811.4.2. Minimum planting requirements: 
(a)  Tree requirement. The minimum number of trees shall be calculated based upon one tree for each 30 lineal feet, or a fraction thereof, of the landscape easement along Miramar Parkway. The width of accessways which intersect the easement shall be included in the calculation of lineal dimensions. 
(b)  Spacing of trees. Trees in the landscape easement may be planted singly or in clusters. The maximum spacing of trees shall be 75 feet between planted trees or clusters, except where a vista to a significant architectural or scenic amenity is appropriate, in which case a wider spacing may be approved by the community development director. 
(c)  Planting standards for trees. Trees shall be a minimum of 12 feet in height at the time of planting. Trees shall also have a minimum crown spread of six feet and a minimum caliper diameter of two inches at a height of four feet above the ground. 
(d)  Tree types required. A minimum of 75 percent of all trees required within the landscape easement shall be shade trees. A maximum of 25 percent of all trees required may be ornamental. 
(e)  Native tree requirement. A minimum of 50 percent of all trees required within the landscape easement shall be of a native species. Native plant species shall be used wherever possible in order to generally reduce water and maintenance needs. 
(f)  Planting of palms. Palms planted within the landscape easement shall be installed in groups of no less than three palms. For the purposes of this section, each group of three palms shall be considered one tree. In the case of species of palms which characteristically grow in clumps, each clump shall be considered to be one tree. 
(g)  Shrub requirement. Shrub clusters or hedges shall be required within the landscape easement. The minimum number of shrubs shall be calculated based upon one shrub for each ten lineal feet, or a fraction thereof, of landscape easement along Miramar Parkway. The width of accessways which intersect the easement shall be included in the calculations of lineal dimensions. 
(h)  Spacing of shrubs. Shrubs within the landscape easement shall be planted either in clusters or in hedge formation. In no instance shall less than eight shrubs be planted in a group. Individual shrubs within clusters or hedges shall be spaced at a maximum of 30 inches on center. 
(i)  Planting, standards for shrubs. Shrubs shall be a minimum of 24 inches in height at the time of planting. 
(j)  Recommended plant list. Plants shall be chosen from the list in this section of this Code. 
811.4.3. Landscape treatment of the ground. The ground within the landscape easement not used for trees, shrubs, or other landscape elements shall receive appropriate landscape treatment in the form of one or more of the following: 
(a)  Ground cover. Ground cover may be used within planting beds around trees and shrubs. Ground cover shall provide a minimum of 50 percent coverage immediately upon planting and 100 percent coverage within two growing seasons after planting. 
(b)  Mulch. Mulch may be used within planting beds in lieu of, or in conjunction with, ground cover. Mulch shall be renewed and maintained as required. 
(c)  Grass. Areas within the landscape easement not used for trees, shrubs, ground cover, mulch, or other landscape elements shall be planted with solid sod of a suitable species, such as Argentine Bahia or St. Augustine Floratam. 
    811.5. General standards for planting and maintenance. The following standards shall be the minimum requirements for the installation and maintenance of all landscaping within the landscape easement: 
(a)  Quality of plants. Plants installed pursuant to this section shall conform with, or exceed, the minimum standards for Florida Number I as provided in the most current edition of "Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants, Parts I and II," prepared by the State of Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services. 
(b)  Continuing maintenance. The property owner, homeowner's association or the owner's successors in interest, assignees or agents, shall be jointly and severally responsible for maintaining all landscaping in the easements in good condition and in a manner that presents a healthy, neat and orderly appearance. 
(c)  Irrigation required. All landscaped areas shall be provided with an automatically operating underground irrigation system. The irrigation system must be designed to have a minimum of 100 percent coverage, with 50 percent minimum overlap in grass and groundcover areas and 50 percent minimum overlap in shrub areas. 
(d)  Prohibited plant species. The plant species listed in the landscaping standards of this Code shall not be planted in the City of Miramar. 
    811.6. Curbing or wheel stops required. 
(a)  Where the landscape easement abuts onsite vehicular use areas such as traffic lanes, the landscape easement shall be separated from the traffic lanes by mountable, reinforced concrete curbing. Extruded curbing which has not been reinforced shall be prohibited. 
(b)  Where the landscape easement abuts onsite parking spaces, the landscape easement shall be separated from the parking spaces by anchored, concrete wheel stops or non-mountable, reinforced concrete curbing. 
    811.7. Setbacks. For properties within the Miramar Parkway Scenic Corridor containing the landscape easement, setbacks shall be those specified in this Code and shall be calculated from the ultimate right-of-way line of Miramar Parkway. In those cases in which the setback from Miramar Parkway is less than 35 feet, the minimum setback shall be 35 feet from ultimate right-of-way line of Miramar Parkway. 
    811.8. Width variance. In certain circumstances and upon receipt of a recommendation from the planning and zoning board, the city commission may vary the width of the landscape easement, however, no variance shall be granted that breaks the continuous nature of the landscape easement. 
(a)  The commission may grant a variance only after it finds existing site conditions which would make it a hardship for the landowner to strictly comply with the terms of this section. Existing site conditions which may warrant a variance from the easement width requirement include: the presence of water bodies; size limitations caused by an extraordinarily narrow lot depth or width; or other unique physical characteristics not created by the landowner. In no event shall a variance be granted which reduces the width of the scenic easement by greater than 50 percent of that which is required in this section. 
(b)  The commission may grant a variance pursuant to this section only if the landowner provides additional landscape amenities as provided for in this section. Additional landscape amenities consistent with the goals of this section shall be approved by the city commission and provided by the landowner. Such additional amenities may include, but are not limited to: substantial increases in the minimum planting requirements within the landscape easement; additional landscaping in the roadway median along the Scenic Corridor on Miramar Parkway where needed, as determined by the city; or special landscape components, such as artistic elements or unique design features. 
Sec. 812. - Development advertising requirements. 
    812.1. Advertising requirement. If a location is included in any printed, radio or television advertisement of an approved real estate development in the city, the City of Miramar shall be noted in the text or map of said printed advertisement or be included in the description of the location in said radio or television advertisement. Each violation of this provision shall be deemed a separate and distinct infraction of the Land Development Code. Each violation of this Code shall be punishable in a court of competent jurisdiction by a fine of no more than $500.00 plus the cost of prosecution. 
    812.2.  Zoning map disclosure requirement. All developers of residential property are required to disclose to potential purchasers, the zoning districts of all vacant properties within 1,000 feet of the advertised residential development. Accordingly, the developer shall prominently display at least one full-size and most recent version of the city's zoning map obtained from the city's community development department in all sales model centers. The zoning map shall accurately display the zoning districts and the size and scale of the residential property in relation to the vacant property and include a description of the permitted uses allowed in each zoning category depicted, as well as a statement that the zoning is subject to change upon the passage of an ordinance by the city commission. The developer shall also include a reduced version of said zoning map in all marketing materials used to advertise the residential development. Any violation of this provision shall be subject to the same punishment as stated in section 812.1 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-02, § 2, 11-20-02) 
Sec. 813. - Community appearance board. 
    813.1. Preamble. This board has been established by the City of Miramar in recognition of the fact that beautiful communities enhance the health, safety and welfare of the citizenry and improve the value of the properties within the community. This goal can be created only through a deliberate search for proper design in all elements of the city on the part of the community leadership, architects, planners, realtors and the building industry, backed by an appreciation of the visual work by the people. 
    Public action for improving community appearance, as embodied through the community appearance board, will provide the ultimate designers of individual structures within the larger contexts in which their particular works will be viewed. Since the beauty of a community involves the aesthetic quality of all one sees in moving about, it goes far beyond the design of individual architectural facades. 
    Zoning is the single most powerful legal enforcement of an overall urban concept, but it does not fully plan building locations, traffic movement or parklands; it does not create beauty, aesthetic order, or amenity. The task of this board is therefore to preserve various elements of urban beauty and require that new projects enhance the existing. 
    It is the intent of this board to achieve a pleasant and comprehensible cohesiveness in our community development. The method of achieving this goal is by the use of a community design plan "the larger contexts" referred to above which would indicate for the various parts of the municipality the aesthetic character to be encouraged and the means by which aesthetic character is to be attained and protected. The community appearance board is composed of persons with experience in judging three dimensional forms and their interrelationships, who have the ability to meet any particular designer on the grounds of his own aesthetic understanding. The board acts in review of specific projects to ascertain whether proposals would enhance the community design plan or violate its spirit. The enabling legislation for the board defines the objectives and procedures by which the aesthetic intentions are actually embodied in proposed projects, and to comply with the architectural design standards described herein. 
    The standards must be understandable and definitive while still leaving sufficient room for variety and innovation. The City Commission of the City of Miramar has determined that all new construction as well as remodeling and renovation should exhibit Spanish, Italian and French Mediterranean Revival Style Architecture to create a cohesive and attractive identity for the city. 
    The community design plan and architectural design standards have been approved by the city commission officials representing the citizenry. By their action the local elected officials thus determine the basic aesthetic character to be the community design plan, as has been approved by the city commission officials representing the citizenry achieved in the development of the community. 
    813.2. Jurisdiction and application of standards. All buildings and structures except single-family detached and duplex residences shall be subject to the requirements of this ordinance and no building permit for such building or structure or remodeling or renovation thereof shall be issued without obtaining approval pursuant to the procedures set forth herein. 
813.2.1. Scope. The standards set forth herein shall apply to all applications to construct a building or structure, other than a single-family residence. All new construction as well as remodeling and renovation of existing structures, should exhibit Spanish, Italian, and/or French Mediterranean Revival Style Architecture. 
This board, by the nature of its function, will require certain information from an application for a permit within the City of Miramar over and above that required by the building and planning and redevelopment divisions of the community and economic development department, the engineering division, and fire-rescue department. This information shall be submitted prior to an application for a permit for any building, group of buildings, site development, alterations affecting their exterior, parking lots and vehicular use areas on a form prescribed by the department of community development. The CAB shall review all plans to ensure they comply with the architectural design standards described herein. 
813.2.2 [Reserved.] 
813.2.2.1. [Reserved.] 
813.2.2.2. [Reserved.] 
813.2.3 [Reserved.] 
813.2.3.1. [Reserved.] 
813.2.3.2. [Reserved.] 
813.2.3.2.2. [Reserved.] 
813.2.3.2.3. [Reserved.] 
    813.2.3.2.4. Time restrictions. 
(a)  Code enforcement action. Structures that are issued a notice of violation by the City of Miramar Code Compliance Division for noncompliance with design or aesthetic standards shall have ten working days from the date of notice to submit a complete application to the community and economic development department for community appearance board review. A citation shall not be issued while the project/property is undergoing review, which will enable the owner/applicant to consider steps to address and correct the problem(s) within a reasonable amount of time. The owner/applicant shall have a 30-day period after obtaining the required approval in which to apply for and be granted building or exterior painting permits in order to proceed with the project. The community and economic development department may grant additional time for the property owner to apply for and receive a building permit if it is determined that there has been reasonable progress made in the effort to obtain the permit. If, at any time, the community and economic development department determines that the applicant is not making such progress, then the code enforcement citation shall be issued. In the case of painting of the structure(s), the owner/applicant must commence the project within 30 days after receiving approval for the colors and material finishes and permission to paint. The community and economic development department may grant additional time for the property owner to commence the painting project, if it is determined that there has been reasonable progress made in the effort to bring the structure into compliance. Failure to comply with these procedures and with the design standards shall result in the issuance of a citation to the owner. 
(b)  Resubmitted plans. Applicants for projects that have made a compete formal submittal to the CAB shall have a 90-day period following a written request for additional information in which to revise plans or applications in order to make corrections. The community and economic development director may waive the 90-day requirement, if requested by the applicant, with proof that reasonable progress is being made in revising the application. 
813.2.3.3. [Reserved.] 
813.2.3.4. Exemptions. 
(a)  The following applications for development or building permit shall be exempt from the application of this ordinance: 
(1)  Single-family and duplex residences and accessory structures located completely on their lots such as fences, private walls, etc. 
(2)  Any building or structure for which final site plan approval has been obtained prior to April 2, 1997; plat or any other master plan approval do not qualify. 
(3)  Any of the following must submit an application or written request to the community and economic development department on a project-by-project basis for a determination for exemption or exception from the requirements of this ordinance if the applicant demonstrates that it satisfies one or more of the following criteria: 
(i)  Documented (written and/or graphic)evidence of a previously existing, acceptable and ongoing unified design requirement or architectural scheme within a DRI, PUD, PID or similar master plan. 
(ii)  A project that can demonstrate that no portion of the building facades would be visible from any perimeter of the project. 
(iii)  A project is determined to be of a temporary nature such that meeting the full spirit and intent of the ordinance would not be practical. 
(4)  Existing buildings undergoing renovation to repair damage to structures caused by fire, flooding, windstorm, or similar circumstance. 
(b)  Application procedures for the exemptions set forth in 1(b), (c) or (d) will be established by the community development director, as necessary. This shall include, but not be limited to, filing variance or appeal applications for ultimate approval by the city commission or waivers for administrative approval. 
(c)  The city commission may grant the exemption, deny the request or allow for variance from certain sections of this ordinance, based on a case by case review of previous approvals within the development based upon the city commission's determination of the degree of compliance with the criteria for exemption. 
    813.3. The community design plan (CDP). 
813.3.1. Scope. The overall community design plan is a single, unified three-dimensional impression of the community in its existing state and in consideration of its development potential. It consists of a general description of the City's attributes, followed by the treatment of specific areas, buildings and exterior space. It is intended that everything stated - the general descriptions as well as the specific recommendations - shall be considered a part of the design plan and as such shall constitute the basis of review by this board. 
In general, our community possesses an evident geometric order derived for the directional influence of natural topographic features. These are made more pleasing, are softened, and are enlivened through variety among their component parts. This same variety carries through into manmade features of roads and canals whose curves and bends result in the change that produces interest instead of monotony. 
813.3.2. General requirements. The general requirements outlined in this section are minimum aesthetic standards for all site development, buildings, structures or alterations within the corporate limits of Miramar, Florida, except for single-family residences. 
It is required that all new site development, structures, buildings or alterations to site development, structures, or buildings show proper design concepts, express honest design construction and be appropriate to its surroundings. 
813.3.2.1. Buildings/structures. 
813.3.2.1.1. General criteria. 
(a)  New buildings or structures that are a part of a present or future group or complex shall have a unity of character and design. This relationship of forms and the use, texture and color of material shall be such as to create a harmonious whole. When the area involved forms an integral part of, is immediately adjacent to, or otherwise clearly affects the future of anyestablished section of the city, the design, scale and location on the site shall enhance rather than dominate or detract from the character, value and attractiveness of the surroundings. All new buildings shall comply with the architectural design standards described herein. 
(b)  New buildings or structures located along strips of land or on single sites and not a part of a unified multi-building complex shall strive to achieve visual harmony with the surroundings. If they are built in underdeveloped areas, the primary requirements shall: 
(1)  Express honest design. 
(2)  Show proper design concepts. 
(3)  Be appropriate to the City of Miramar. 
(c)  Existing buildings undergoing remodeling and minor renovations (with a construction value 50 percent or less of the assessed value) which affect the exterior aesthetics (including painting as defined in Section 813.3.4) must comply with the intent of the architectural design standards as described herein, unless the project entails the repair of damage as outlined in section 813.2.3.4(1)(d), with special adherence to exterior and roof finish materials and colors. Building form may not necessarily have to comply. Window replacement must be consistent with the standards and comply for the entire facade. 
(d)  Existing buildings undergoing major renovation (with construction value exceeding 50 percent of assessed value) must conform with the architectural design standards described herein, unless the project entails the repair of damage as outlined in section 813.2.3.4(1)(d). 
(e)  It is not to be inferred that buildings must look alike to be harmonious. Harmony can be achieved through the proper consideration of scale, proportions, site planning, complimentary design elements, landscaping, materials, repeating shapes, and forms, accents and color. 
(f)  "Look alike" buildings are not allowed unless, in the opinion of the city, there is sufficient separation to preserve the aesthetic character of the present or evolving neighborhood, or it is necessary to create a unified theme that is deemed visually attractive, identifiable and unique. This is not to be construed to prohibit duplication of floor plans and exterior treatment in a planned development where, in the opinion of the city, the aesthetics of the development depend upon or are enhanced by the look alike buildings and their relationship to each other. Prototypical or "corporate" designs for buildings are not permitted, without respecting the requirements and intent of this ordinance, particularly as a repetitious design proposed to be located in various parts of the city. The proposals must adhere to achieving compatibility and harmony with their surrounding environment through the use of design tools described in (e) above. 
(g)  Buildings that are of symbolic design for reasons of advertising and marketing and buildings which are not compatible to the aesthetics or atmosphere of Miramar will not be approved by the city. Symbols attached to buildings will not be allowed unless they are secondary in appearance to the buildings and landscape and are an aesthetic asset to the building project and neighborhood. 
(h)  Exterior lighting may be used to illuminate a building and its grounds for public safety purposes, but in an aesthetically pleasing manner. Lighting is not to be used as a form of advertising in a manner that is not compatible to the neighborhood or in a manner that draws considerably more attention to the building(s) or grounds at night than in the day. Lighting following the form of the building or part of the building or structure or sign will not be allowed, if, in the opinion of the city, the overall effect will be garish or detrimental to the environment. All fixtures used in exterior lighting are to be selected for functional and aesthetic value. 
(i)  Building surfaces, walls, and roofs that are considered garish by the city will be denied approval. 
(j)  "Take-out" or "pick-up" windows of retail or whole sale establishments shall not be located on the building facade that faces a public right-of-way, unless they are designed in such a manner as to be an aesthetic asset to the building and neighborhood. 
(k)  All exterior forms, attached or not, to buildings shall be in conformity to and secondary to the building. They shall be an asset, both to the aesthetics of the site and to the neighborhood. 
(l)  Industrial, commercial, institutional, utility, and civic buildings (including shopping centers, wholesale and retail centers, outparcels, warehouses and light industrial) must be strictly controlled and must conform to the overall image of Miramar as set forth herein. These buildings must, of necessity, reflect the manufacturing, commercial, or civic activity, but they shall be designed in accordance with proper design concepts and honest design construction. Wherever possible, imagery reflecting the spirit of the community design plan and the architectural design standards must be incorporated. Design emphasis shall be placed on all facades visible to the public or from adjacent properties. That is not to say that facades that are not directly visible to the public shall not comply with the spirit of the Architectural Design Standards because the intent is to create a built environment that is aesthetically pleasing to frequent users of the building/site as well as to the public-at-large. The grounds surrounding the building, although they must also reflect the appropriate activity, shall be planned to present a sense of aesthetic and geometric order. There shall be definite boundaries to storage, loading, pedestrian and bicycle activity and parking areas. Screening shall be used to shield parking and/or truck use yards, storage and activity areas from the public view. Landscaping is to be employed on the site, not only to enhance the building or buildings, but also to create a pleasing atmosphere throughout the site. Accessory buildings and structures shall be harmonious with the main building(s). 
(m)  Outside equipment, including hoppers, cranes, mechanical apparatus, playground apparatus, street furniture, bollards, bicycle racks, and so forth, shall be painted a pleasing color that will blend with the whole. Vibrant or bright colors as a base color are not permitted. 
(n)  All telephones, vending machines, or any facility dispensing merchandise or a service on private property shall be confined to a space built into the building or buildings or enclosed in a separate structure compatible with the main building. 
(o)  No advertising will be allowed on any exposed amenity or facility, such as benches and trash containers. 
(p)  Symbolic color of the exterior facades or roofs may not be used unless they are harmonious with the atmosphere of the neighborhood and in compliance with the architectural design standards described herein. Such symbolic colors are considered to be signs depicting corporate identity that does not reflect the values of Miramar's CDP. 
813.3.2.1.2. Signs. Signage shall be incorporated into proposed plans to be approved by the city. The city sign regulations are amended to allow the city commission or their designee to modify signage to meet the spirit and intent of the city's community design plan, especially as it relates to colors, materials, size and location. Monument signs larger than 20 square feet in area shall incorporate a landscaping design around the base of the sign in accordance with LDC section 1005.7 at a minimum. Applicants are encouraged to exceed the minimum monument sign landscaping requirements with an attractive landscaping design. All signs, whether permanent, temporary, or exempt, as defined by Chapter 10 of the LDC, shall comply with the design criteria and community appearance standards and shall be used to enhance, not detract from, the buildings or site. Traffic signs, particularly handicapped accessible signs, since they are notably visible near a primary facade or adjacent to a building or site entrance, must be designed to have a decorative pole, frame or form. Such signs shall reflect the character of the land use. In industrial use areas, for example, galvanized steel or fluted metallic poles are acceptable. In commercial and residential use areas, on the other hand, decorative wooden or metallic poles are appropriate. Standard "U-channel" or solid metal poles are prohibited. 
813.3.2.1.3. Lighting. Lighting shall be incorporated into proposed plans to be approved by the city. Site lighting shall be designed to meet the spirit and intent of the city's community design plan, especially as it relates to pole heights, fixture and lighting colors, lamp and pole design, and location. The CAB will determine appropriate areas of the site in which to incorporate pedestrian oriented lighting fixtures during the preliminary review stages. Parking lot pole fixtures shall be limited to 25 feet in height and designed to meet the photometric requirements of the site. The non-cutoff decorative pole fixtures shall be no higher than 12 feet high to the top of the fixture. Lighting fixtures attached to the walls of the buildings shall harmonize with the architectural character of the buildings and are restricted to traditional "Mediterranean-style" sconces to be located on all visible facades. Typical wall pack fixtures may be used only within truck yards and loading areas on facades that are not visible from the perimeter roads of the site, unless additional landscaping is provided to screen such fixtures, as approved by the CAB. 
813.3.2.1.4. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be incorporated into proposed plans to be approved by the city. Landscaping shall be designed to exceed the minimum code requirements provided in LDC Chapter 9 and to meet the spirit and intent of the city's community design plan, especially as it relates to plant material selections and heights, locations and buffer design. Flowering shrubs, trees, ground cover and annuals are encouraged wherever possible to enhance the site design. The CAB will determine appropriate areas of the site in which to incorporate additional landscaping to enhance the pedestrian experience, during the preliminary review stages. 
813.3.3. Specific architectural design standards. In addition to the general criteria, the following specific architectural standards shall apply: 
813.3.3.1. Design concepts. The principles set out below are not intended to limit innovative architecture, but to establish a meaningful design guide for development and redevelopment in the City of Miramar. All development shall be designed in accordance with the fundamental concepts described in this section. The fundamental design concepts shall include: 
(a)  The design of architecturally varied structures within planned developments through the use of varied building massing, juxtaposition of vertical and horizontal planes, roofscapes, window and door design, ornamentation, materials, and colors. All designs shall comply with the spirit and objectives of the community design plan and the minimum architectural design standards. 
(b)  The linkage of landscaped exterior spaces (courtyards, loggias, pergolas, arcades squares, and plazas) to buildings. 
(c)  The linkage of separate development parcels by adequate and accessible pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular connections. 
(d)  The recognition of the South Florida climate which should influence building shape and orientation, the nature of roofs and overhangs and the location and size of windows and doors. 
(e)  The identification of individual subdivisions by utilizing appropriately designed and scaled signage and pedestrian amenities. 
(f)  The use of private common open space as a community design feature to encourage public gathering spaces. 
813.3.3.2. Pedestrian orientation. All proposed nonresidential and multi-family residential development shall contribute to the creation of a pedestrian oriented community by providing the following: 
(a)  Emphasis on the building's street facades as major elements of the overall streetscape; and 
(b)  Street-level architectural treatment, including colonnades, arcades, balconies, awnings, canopies, and other shade producing elements, should be provided along all pedestrian-oriented frontages. 
(c)  Pedestrian oriented frontage shall be adjacent to building entrances and integrated with adjacent properties. 
813.3.3.3. Minimum architectural design standards. All new construction, as well as remodeling and renovation of existing buildings and structures, within the city should exhibit Spanish, Italian and French Mediterranean Revival style architecture. Strong unifying characteristics include Spanish "S" or barrel tile roofs, pale pastel-colored washed walls, simple uncluttered detailing and trimming, and the appearance of thick walls and columns and prominent entrances. 
The emphasis on open architecture such as balconies, courtyards and verandas is suited for Miramar's subtropical climate. The selected architectural styles, Spanish, Italian and French Mediterranean Revival, will be described herein. Appropriate variations or interpretations of styles are permitted only when approved by the city commission. These regulations shall apply to all developments except single-family and dual-family residences. Where the scale may not harmonize with these standards, the design will create similar imagery consistent with that set forth herein. 
The design standards contained herein are either mandatory or discretionary. The terms "required" and "prohibited" are mandatory. The terms "preferred" and "discouraged" are discretionary. These terms are defined below: 
Required 
• Required items are design elements that are necessary in order to maintain the desired character and quality. 
• Compliance is mandatory for project approval. 
Preferred 
• Preferred items are design elements that, whenever possible, should be used in order to maintain the desired character and quality. Preferred items are intended to promote the following goals with respect to desired character and quality: 
• Consistency of neighborhood character. 
• Consistency of architectural style. 
• Consistency of building form and mass. 
• Consistency of materials and colors. 
• Consistency of location of elements. 
• Incorporating preferred items into a design increases the probability of, but does not assure, project approval. 
Discouraged 
• Discouraged items are design elements that should not be used in order to maintain the desired character and quality. The use of discouraged elements in rehabilitation or new construction is often inconsistent with desired zoning district character and quality goals: 
• Consistency of neighborhood character. 
• Consistency of architectural style. 
• Consistency of building form and mass. 
• Consistency of materials and colors. 
• Consistency of location of elements. 
• Incorporating discouraged items into a design decreases the probability of project approval and may result in project denial if, in the reasonable discretion of the city, the incorporation of such items causes the project to be inconsistent with the design goals set forth herein. 
Prohibited 
• Prohibited items are design elements that do not maintain the desired character or quality. 
• Use of prohibited elements mandates project denial. 
Not Applicable 
• Refers to items that have not been reviewed and/or do not apply to conformance with standards. 
• Use of these items may or may not affect project approval. 
813.3.3.3.1. Building form. Distinguished by simple and strong configurations, Spanish, Italian and French Mediterranean Revival style developments are typically less than four stories in height. Where feasible, four story or taller structures shall use imagery to comply with the spirit of these regulations. Spanish, Italian and French Mediterranean Revival style buildings often exhibit symmetrical or asymmetrical facades with varying roofs. Wall planes predominate on primary surfaces (windows, doors, and other design features shall be integrated within and shall enhance the facade development). Usually one or more predominant arches are incorporated into the exterior design. They are typically semicircular and in regular series with columns as supports or walls. Stucco columns should be square, rectangular or round, and appear massive in thickness. The column height should be four to five times the width of the column. Balconies, porches, canopies, awnings and verandas may be integrated into the building form to add articulation to the design. 
Preferred 
• Simple, strong rectilinear forms. 
• Wall planes predominate. 
• Semicircular arches. 
• Column height four to five times column width. 
• Capitals and column bands. 
• Balconies, porches, verandas, courtyards. 
• Wrought iron or wood railings. 
• Appearance of "thick walls." 
Discouraged 
• Complex or angular building forms. 
• Excessive large windows with irregular placement on the facades. 
• Flat or parabolic arches. 
813.3.3.3.2. Roofs. Spanish, Italian and French Mediterranean Revival roofs exhibit a combination of gable and hip roofs. 
Required 
• Traditional red barrel tiles, tapered or "S" shaped tile (clay or cement) on all hip or gable roofs. 
Preferred 
• Hip or gable roofs. 
• Simple short overhangs. 
• Exposed rafter tails. 
• Decorative chimney or bell tower. 
• Gutters and downspouts designed as a continuous architectural feature. 
• Exposed gutters and downspouts painted to match adjacent roof or wall material. 
• Flashing, vent stacks and pipes painted to match adjacent building surface(s). 
• 4:12 to 8:12 pitched roofs. 
Discouraged 
• Large areas of flat roofs except where appropriate (e.g. storage/distribution centers) 
Prohibited 
• Flat roofs visible over ten percent of total roof. 
• Gambrel roofs. 
• Solar panels on the street-side. 
• Non-earth tone colored tile. 
• Shingles. 
• Very low pitched roofs (slopes less than 4:12) 
813.3.3.3.3. Windows. Windows typically exhibit rectangular or round-headed openings. They have several small panes in each window rather than one large pane of glass. A large window area may be used as an accent on only one or two elevations. If proposed, roll-down hurricane shutters shall be built-in recessed window heads and jambs. 
Preferred 
• Large window areas as accent only. 
• Fenestration separated and "broken up" by building elements or trims. 
• Small, multi-paned windows. 
• Round-headed windows. 
• Recessed openings. 
• Roll-down shutters (recessed). 
• Removable hurricane panels. 
• Bahama shutters where appropriate. 
Discouraged 
• Large windows except when used as accents. 
• Continuous, unbroken expanses of glazing. 
• Metal or aluminum awnings, unless they are complimentary to the building facade. 
Prohibited 
• Glass block. 
• Jalousie windows. 
• Picture windows. 
• Accordion shutters. 
813.3.3.3.4. Entrances. Like windows, doors in Spanish, Italian and French Mediterranean Revival architecture are rectangular or round-headed. The doorway should be fully recessed in order to convey the appearance of thick, protective exterior walls. Doors are traditionally made of a "heavy" look, as well as being highly detailed. 
Required 
• Appropriate scale and proportion. 
Preferred 
• Recessed entry design. 
• Fan light or fenestration above and/or next to door. 
• French doors. 
• Articulated and ornamental door design. 
• Entrance well articulated and dominant from street-side. 
Discouraged 
• Solid, unarticulated doors. 
• Stained glass sidelights. 
• Entrance behind a porte cochere. 
Prohibited 
• Overdramatic, out-of-scale and/or proportion entrances. 
• Entrance not visible from street side. 
• Entrance dominated by garage doors. 
Required 
• Appropriate scale and proportion. 
813.3.3.3.5. Garages and accessory buildings and structures. Garages, storage sheds, enclosures, masonry walls, perimeter walls, signs, poles, fences, decks and other ancillary structures are elements which should be integrated with the principal building in color and architectural style. Garage doors and loading overhead doors shall not be visible from a straight-on elevation from street-side whenever possible unless adequately screened or buffered from adjacent properties. 
Required 
• Same or complimentary color and materials as the principal building. 
Preferred 
Spanish, Italian and French Mediterranean Revival style architecture. Same color and materials as the principal building. 
• Dumpster, compactor, and mechanical equipment enclosures shall have colors and trim details to match the principal building color and design with gates composed of opaque materials, such as wood or prefabricated metal, painted in a secondary approved color; chain-link gates with or without slats are prohibited. 
• Black or white aluminum, wrought iron, or white picket fencing in the most visible and pedestrian oriented areas of the site. 
• Fencing or gates painted in primary colors as accent, if deemed appropriate. 
• Chain-link fencing and gates with black or green vinyl coating, where appropriate, and especially in less visible locations as determined by staff. 
• Uniform perimeter fencing types along major roadways, especially within single-family residential parcels. 
• Appropriate landscaping, such as hedges, as required by code to be adjacent to the accessory structures and equipment to provide additional screening. 
Discouraged 
• Different color or material than principal building. 
• Shadowbox fencing, except for within single-family and duplex residential parcels, notwithstanding the creation of a uniform perimeter fence along a major roadway. Shadowbox fencing will be permitted in planned industrial districts (PIDs) around lift stations and similar outdoor utility facilities provided that the wood pickets are painted to match the adjacent buildings. 
• Prefabricated walls or structures, unless approved by the city. 
Prohibited 
• Metal storage sheds. 
• Uncoated, galvanized chain-link fencing. 
• Chain-link gates with slats. 
• Carports. 
• Garages facing street. 
813.3.3.3.6. Exterior materials/colors. Stucco is the primary Spanish, Italian and French Mediterranean type wall surface material. A smooth or light textured stucco finish is required. Accent materials and colors used to complement the stucco are encouraged in moderation. To the extent feasible, the use of tile, wood, brick and finished concrete should be used as design accents only. Buildings, accessory structures, perimeter walls, and signs are required to have at least two colors, but may be encouraged to have up to three colors or more when deemed appropriate. When using more than two colors, there shall be one or two base colors and one or two trim colors. Base colors and materials shall be warm pastels, light pastels, or shades of white selected in compliance with the pre-approved color palette. The trim/fascia colors shall be tones or shades of cream or off-white. Accent materials and colors are not limited to the pre-approved color palette, however, they must be approved by the CAB. Whereas the pre-approved color palette may be used as a guide for color selection, final CAB color approval shall only be given once the CAB reviews the selected color combinations shown as part of the design submittal package. 
Required 
• The principal building color(s) selected shall be approved by the CAB. 
• Smooth or light textured stucco finish. 
• Trim/fascia colors shall be shades of cream or off-white. 
Preferred 
• Any color tile, wood, brick or finished concrete as accent material where feasible. 
• Warm, light pastel or off-white principal color. 
• Light pastel or white window trim to harmonize with principal building color. 
• The principal building and trim color colors selected from the palette 
• Greens or reds used as accents approved by the CAB, but not as fascia colors. 
Discouraged 
• More than four colors (principal building and trim). 
• Principal building color not representative of architectural style. 
• Trim/accent color(s) not compatible with principal building and trim. 
• Trim/accent color(s) not compatible with architectural style. 
Prohibited 
• Any material other than stucco as the primary building material. 
• Primary color trims for windows and doors. 
• Non-approved colors for principal building and trim. 
• Blacks, yellows, reds, purple, blues, greens, as principal building color. 
• Blacks, yellows, reds, purple, blues, greens, as fascia colors. 
• Shades of purples, red (excluding doors), yellow and fluorescent colors as trim or accent. 
• Stain as principal building color. 
813.3.3.3.7. Pedestrian/bicycle paths. Pedestrian/bicycle paths incorporated into a plan, shall have a minimum of six feet of pavement width. The path shall connect all the residential parcels to park(s) and school(s), recreational areas, and whenever possible, commercial parcels. The use of brick pavers or specialty paving materials is encouraged. 
813.3.3.3.8. Supplemental development element regulations. Other elements which affect the overall community character and quality are as follows. 
(a)  Mechanical equipment. 
Required 
• All roof-mounted equipment must be screened by compatible materials equal to the height of the equipment. 
Preferred 
• Screened from view. 
• Insulated for sound attenuation. 
• Located in attic or backyard with appropriate landscaping. 
Discouraged. 
• Located other than in attic or backyard. 
• Ground-mounted equipment higher than four feet above grade. 
Prohibited 
• Roof-mounted equipment visible from abutting properties. 
• Yard-mounted equipment visible from street-side. 
(b)  Front yard accouterments. 
Preferred 
• Ornaments and objects d'art visible from street only when approved by the CAB and the community development department. 
Prohibited 
• Ornaments and objects d'art visible from street and not approved by the CAB and the community development department. 
813.3.4. Definitions/glossary of architectural terms. While many of these terms do not appear in this manual, they may appear on architectural drawings and are included to facilitate a better understanding of building design. Additional terms can be found in "Construction Dictionary" by Greater Phoenix, Arizona Chapter 98, The National Association of Women in Construction, Library of Congress Catalog Card #73-83758. 
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES A building or structure, the use of which is incidental to the main building or structure on the same property. ARCH Structural element shaped in an arcor curve. BALCONY Platform extending from the facade of a building. BARREL TILE Semi-cylindrical tile used for roofing; i.e., Mediterranean Revival. BAY WINDOW A window projecting outward from the main wall of a building. BOARD AND BATTEN Vertical siding composed of wide boards that do not overlap and narrow strips, or battens, nailed over the spaces between the boards. BOLLARDS Low, single posts typically composed of stone or concrete, set in a series to prevent vehicles from entering an area. BOND The general method of overlapping the joints of successive courses of bricks or stones, thereby binding them together to form a wall or other surface. Different patterns may be formed by these joints (e.g. common bond, Flemish bond, English bond, herringbone bond). CASEMENT WINDOW Window with hinges to the side and a vertical opening either on the side or in the center. CLAPBOARD Siding material or horizontal wooden strips, often applied with the thicker edge overlapping the clapboard below. COPING The capping or top course of a wall, sometimes protecting the wall from weather. CORNICE Projecting ornamental molding along the top of a building or wall. COURSE A horizontal row of bricks, shingles, stones or other building materials. COURSED MASONRY A wall with continuous horizontal layers of stone or brick. CUPOLA A lookout or similar small structure on the top of a building. DORMER Structure projecting from a sloping roof with window or ventilating louvers. DOUBLE-HUNG WINDOW A window with an upper and lower sash arranged so that each slides vertically past the other. DOUBLE PORTICO A projecting two-story porch with columns and a pediment. EAVE The projecting overhang at the lower edge of a roof. ENTABLATURE In classical architecture, the part of a structure between the column capital and the roof or pediment, comprising the architrave, frieze and cornice. FACADE A building's face, front or elevation. FAN LIGHT A semicircular or fan-shaped window with radiating members or tracery set over a door or window. FASCIA A flat, horizontal band used to finish the edge of an exposed rafter. FENESTRATION Window design and placement. FINIAL An ornament at the top of a spire, gable or pinnacle. FLASHING Copper or other materials used to make weather-tight the joint between a chimney and a roof. FLAT ROOF A roof having only enough slope for drainage. FLOOR AREA RATIO The ratio of the gross floor area of all structures on a lot to the lot (FAR) area, excluding vertical core circulation areas for multistory structures. FRIEZE A horizontal band, often with decorative detail, located below the cornice. GABLE A triangular wall section at the end of a pitched roof. GAMBREL ROOF A roof with a lower steeper slope and an upper flatter one on each side. HIP ROOF A roof with four uniformly pitched sides. JALOUSIE A type of window or door with numerous horizontal slats, usually glass, operated by a crank. KEYSTONE The central top most stone or feature of an arch. Also, the central detail above windows or doors which appears to come from an arch but is used for decorative purposes. LARGE-SCALE PROJECT Consists of any structure which requires final site plan approval as provided for in section 511 of the Land Development Code and all projects that are not otherwise defined as small- or medium-scale. LATTICE Diagonal interlocking lath or other material used as screening. LINTEL The horizontal beam over the top of a door or window. LOGGIA An arcaded or colonnaded structure, open on one or more sides, sometimes having an upper story; it may serve as a porch or gallery incidental to another structure. LOUVER A door or window with fixed or movable slanted slats. MANSARD A roof with two slopes on each side, the lower slope being much steeper; frequently used to add an upper story. MASONRY Stone work or brick work used in wall construction. MASS Mass described three-dimensional forms, the simplest of which are cubes, boxes (or rectangular solids). Buildings are rarely one of these simple forms. This composition is generally described as the "massing" of forms in a building. MEDIUM-SCALE PROJECT Consists of new structures; the renovation/rehabilitation/expansion of existing structures (including principal buildings); or the painting of structures which either use colors that are not included on the pre-approved color chart or use the combination of three or more colors in the design scheme; provided that the application meets all the following conditions: 1) They are exempt or excepted from final site plan approval; 2) They are not otherwise part of a large-scale project. Examples of medium-scale projects include, but are not limited to: the installation or replacement of roofs, fenestration, arches and columns; redesign and replacement of an existing sign; and the addition to existing sites of buildings which do not increase the total floor area of the structure in excess of ten percent. MITER The edge of a piece of material, generally wood, that has been beveled preparatory to making a miter joint. MOLDING A decorative band either carved or applied into a surface. MULLIONS A vertical member separating (and often supporting) windows, doors or panels set in a series. MUNTINS A small, slender wood or metal member which separates the panes of glass in a window. PAINTING Refers to the application of new colors to a building face or structure. Existing buildings and structures that reapply identical paint colors to a surface for the purpose of maintenance shall be exempt from a CAB review, provided that there is evidence of a previously existing unified design and that the aesthetic character is harmonious with neighboring structures and design features. Any change in color, however slight, must comply with the pre-approved standard color palette and be reviewed and approved by the city before the work commences PEDIMENT Wide, low-pitched gable end of the roof; triangular crowning element over doors and windows. PERGOLA A garden structure with an open wooden-framed roof, often in lattice form, supported by regularly spaced posts or columns. The structure is often covered by climbing plants, such as vines, roses, and bougainvillea, and serves as a shading device. PILASTER A pier or pillar with a capital and base that may serve as decorative features, rather than supporting structures. Often used with ornamental fencing. PITCH The slope of a roof expressed in terms of a ratio of height to span. PORCH An outside walking area having the floor elevated more than eight inches above grade. PORTE COCHERE A large covered entrance porch through which vehicles can drive. PORTICO A major porch, usually with a pediment roof supported by classical columns. PRIMARY BUILDING The particular facade of a building which faces the street to which the address of the building pertains. PRINCIPAL BUILDING The main structure on a lot. QUOIN Units of stone, brick or raised stucco used to accentuate the corners of a building. RAFTER A sloping structural member of the roof that extends from the ridge. SETBACK The minimum horizontal distance between the lot or property line and the nearest front, side or rear line of the building (as the case may be), including terraces or any covered projection thereof, excluding steps. SHAKE Split wood shingles. SHED ROOF A sloping, single-planed roof such as seen on a lean-to. SHINGLE (ROOF) A thin, oblong shaped material laid in overlapping rows as a covering for roofs, typically of wood or an asphalt-based material. SHIPLAP SIDING Early siding consisting of wide horizontal boards with "U" or "V" shaped grooves. SHUTTER A cover or screen for a door or a window. SIDELIGHT A window or opening in or at the side of a wall, door, etc. SIDING Building material used for the surface of a building. SILL Lowermost member of a frame house. The large dimension wooden element resting directly on the foundation. SLATE Thinly laminated rock, split for roofing, paving, etc. SMALL-SCALE 
PROJECT Consists of accessory and minor structures(which are not a principal use) such as fences, walls and sheds; the replacement of existing sign face; change of sign copy; the installation of attached wall or freestanding signage that meet the code requirements; or the renovation of exterior materials or paint colors which use up to two colors from the pre-approved color chart; that meet all of the following conditions: 1) They are exempt or excepted from final site plan approval; 2) They are not otherwise part of a large-scale or medium-scale project. SOFFIT The finished underside of an eave. STREET FRONTAGE The total linear dimension of all property lines which coincide with the edge of an adjoining street right-of-way. STUCCO Coarse or fine plasterwork used for exterior or interior walls. TRANSOM A small window or shutter-like panel directly over a door or window. TERRA COTTA A fine-grained, brown-red, fired clay used for roof tiles and decoration; literally, cooked earth. TILE (ROOF) A thin, usually rectangular, material laid in overlapping rows as a covering for roofs, typically of fired clay or concrete. VERANDA A roofed porch sometimes stretching on two sides of a building.  
(Ed. Note: The words "city council" as they appear in Ordinance No. 97-14 and Ordinance No. 97-25 have been changed to "city commission" throughout the chapter). 
(Ord. No. 00-36, § 3, 7-5-00; Ord. No. 16-04, § 5, 1-27-16; Ord. No. 17-07, § 12, 11-14-16) 
Sec. 814. - Wireless telecommunications towers and antennas. 
    814.1. Intent. The regulations and requirements set forth herein establish general guidelines for the siting of wireless telecommunications towers and antennas and are intended to accomplish the following purposes: 
A.  Protect and promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city; 
B.  Provide for the appropriate location and development of wireless communications facilities within the municipal limits, excluding the siting of any facilities within any rights-of-way; 
C.  Minimize residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts of towers and antennas; 
D.  Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas and to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; 
E.  Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community by strongly encouraging the co-location of antennas on new and pre-existing towers and other structure sites as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use telecommunications towers; 
F.  Encourage users of telecommunications towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the telecommunications towers and antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
G.  Minimize potential damage to property from telecommunications towers and facilities by requiring such structures be soundly designed, constructed, modified and maintained; and 
H.  Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to the community through an efficient and timely application process. In furtherance of these goals, the city shall at all times give due consideration to the city's comprehensive plan, zoning map, existing land uses, and environmentally sensitive areas, including hurricane preparedness areas, in approving sites for the location of telecommunications towers and antennas. 
    814.2. Applicability and administration. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided by Section 365.172, Florida Statutes, Section 6409 of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012 and other applicable state and federal law, all new telecommunications facilities and repairs or modifications to existing telecommunications facilities in the city shall be subject to the regulations in this section to the full extent permitted under applicable state and federal law. This section shall not apply to wireless telecommunications towers, antennas and other facilities including DAS systems, placed or maintained in any rights-of-way, which is regulated by Chapter 23, Article IV of the City's Code of Ordinances. This section shall not apply to new and existing telecommunications facilities owned by the city and used for the city's public safety and communications purposes. Construction and maintenance of such city facilities may be subject to the development standards contained herein, and to other provisions of the City Code and the City's Land Development Code. 
B.  Pre-existing telecommunications towers or antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this section, other than the specific requirements set forth herein. 
C.  Broadcasting facilities/amateur radio station operators/receive only antennas. This section shall not govern any broadcasting facility or a telecommunications facility owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive only antennas. 
D.  Pending applications. This section shall apply to applications for telecommunications facilities, telecommunications towers, and antennas as defined herein unless prohibited by applicable law. This section shall not apply to wireless telecommunications towers, antennas and other facilities including DAS systems, placed or maintained in any rights-of-way, which is regulated by Chapter 23, Article IV of the City's Code of Ordinances. 
E.  Not essential services. The providing of personal wireless services and the siting and construction of telecommunications facilities shall be regulated and permitted pursuant to this section and shall not be regulated or permitted as essential services or public safety telecommunications as defined herein. 
F.  Except for matters herein specifically reserved to the city commission, the city manager shall be the principal city official responsible for the administration of this section. The city manager may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder unless prohibited by applicable law. 
    814.3. Application requirements. 
A.  The city may create an application form as may be amended from time to time, for a person to apply for the construction, installation, or placement of a telecommunications facility, telecommunications tower, or antenna on private property or government owned, leased or controlled property within the city consistent with the terms of this section. 
(1)  Upon application by service provider, the city reserves the right to negotiate for space on any new telecommunications tower at a rate to be determined by service provider and the city. 
B.  The following information must be included in an application. 
(1)  Whether the proposed facility is the principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be considered either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use of an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or telecommunications tower on such lot. 
(2)  Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a telecommunications tower or antenna complies with the zoning provisions, including, but not limited to, setback requirements, lot coverage requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the antenna or telecommunications tower may be located on leased parcels within such lot. 
(3)  Specific information about the proposed location, height, and design of the proposed telecommunications facilities. 
(4)  An inventory of existing sites. 
(a)  Each applicant shall provide the city with an inventory of its pre-existing telecommunications towers and antennas within the city, and the pre-existing sites of other service providers' telecommunications towers within a one mile radius from the proposed site. This inventory shall separately categorize wireless telecommunications towers, antennas and other facilities located, placed or maintained in any right-of-way, including DAS systems, from those located, placed or maintained on private property, or government owned, leased or controlled property. 
(b)  For applications for new telecommunications towers, the applicant must provide information to demonstrate, pursuant to the procedures listed within this subsection, that no pre-existing telecommunications tower, structure, or state of the art technology that does not require the use of new telecommunications towers or new structures, can accommodate or be modified to accommodate the applicant's proposed telecommunications tower. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing telecommunications tower, structure or state of the art technology is suitable may consist of the following: 
(1)  An affidavit demonstrating that pre-existing towers or structures located within the geographic search area as determined by a licensed engineer do not have the capacity to provide reasonable technical service consistent with the applicant's technical system, including but not limited to, applicable FCC requirements. 
(2)  An affidavit that pre-existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicable FCC requirements, or engineering requirements of the applicant. 
(3)  An affidavit that pre-existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. 
(4)  An affidavit that the applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic/radio frequency interference with antennas on pre-existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the pre-existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
(5)  An affidavit that the applicant's proposed antenna on a pre-existing tower or structure would cause interference with public safety telecommunications. 
(6)  An affidavit demonstrating that the applicant made diligent efforts but was unable to permission to install or co-locate the applicant's telecommunications facilities on pre-existing telecommunications towers or usable antenna support located within a one mile radius from the proposed site. 
(7)  An affidavit demonstrating that there are other limiting factors that render pre-existing towers and structures unsuitable. 
(5)  An engineering report, certified by a qualified radio frequency engineer licensed to practice in the State of Florida or by an engineer exempt from such requirement under Florida law, which shall include: 
(a)  Information for site plan and community appearance board review, including without limitation, a legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel if applicable, on-site and adjacent land uses, master plan classification of the site, a visual impact analysis and photo digitalization and landscaping embellishment and/or methods used for concealment or camouflage of the proposed telecommunications facilities viewed from the property line, as well as at a distance of 250 feet and 500 feet from all properties within that range, or at other points agreed upon by city staff. Due consideration must be given to potential construction details, including preliminary structural analysis for any proposed structures, such as equipment screen walls. 
(b)  If applicable based on the application, current wind-loading capacity and a projection of wind-loading capacity using different types of antennas as contemplated by the applicant. No telecommunications tower or other structure shall be permitted to exceed its wind loading capacity as provided for by the Florida Building Code, and all other applicable codes and standards, as amended from time to time. 
(c)  A statement of compliance with this section and all applicable building codes, associated regulations and safety standards as provided herein. For all telecommunications facilities attached to existing structures, the statement shall include certification that the structure can support the load superimposed from the telecommunications facility. 
(d)  A certification from a qualified radio frequency engineer that the proposed facility including reception and transmission functions, is not expected to interfere with or obstruct transmission to and from existing public safety telecommunications facilities; 
(e)  A remedial action plan, subject to the city's approval, that includes, but is not limited to, procedures to rectify any interference or obstruction with public safety telecommunications, its plans to make all necessary repairs and/or accommodations to alleviate the interference or obstruction, and a period of compliance; and 
(6)  Additional information that the city may request consistent with this section and applicable law to process the application. In the event the city requests any additional information, the time in which an application is processed shall be tolled pending receipt and further evaluation. 
C.  Applications for a telecommunications facility on any property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the city shall require a lease agreement approved by the city commission and executed by the city and the owner of the proposed telecommunications facility. The city may require, as a condition of entering into a lease agreement with a service provider, the dedication of space on the facility for public safety telecommunications purposes, as well as property improvement on the leased space. Any dedications and improvements shall be negotiated prior to execution of the lease. This requirement does not apply to city rights-of-way. 
(1)  No lease granted pursuant to this section shall convey the exclusive right, privilege, permit or franchise to occupy or to use the public lands of the city for delivery of telecommunications services or any other purpose. 
(2)  No lease granted pursuant to this section shall convey any right, title or interest in the public lands other than a leasehold interest, and shall be deemed only to allow the use of the public lands for the limited purposes and term stated in the lease. No lease shall be construed as a conveyance of a title interest in the property. 
D.  Filing fee. 
(1)  An application shall be accompanied by a cost recovery deposit as set and amended by resolution of the City Commission. 
The cost recovery deposits are in addition to the required non-refundable application fees imposed by the city's Code, such as those for site plan and community appearance review. The city commission may amend the amount of the filing fees and deposits from time to time by resolution. 
(2)  Cost recovery. The purpose of the cost recovery deposit is to defray the city's costs in processing the application. All reasonable expenses incurred by the city in considering and processing the application, including, but not limited to, consulting and legal costs, shall be off-set from the cost recovery deposit. If, however, the expenses exceed the amount of the cost recovery deposit, to the extent not prohibited by applicable law, the applicant shall pay the difference within 30 days of the date it receives notice of such additional expenses. If the additional fees are not received by the city within 30 days of the date of notice, the city shall notify such applicant and the applicant shall pay an additional late fee at the rate of 18 percent per annum of the amount unpaid or underpaid, provided, however, that such rate does not exceed the maximum amount allowed under the applicable law. In such case, the rate will be the maximum allowed by law. If the city does not receive said fee in total within 60 days of the date of notice, the city shall notify the applicant in writing and may revoke any approval. 
    814.4. Review process. 
A.  Unless otherwise authorized by state or federal law, no person shall construct, install or maintain a telecommunications facility on private property or government owned, leased or controlled property, within the city without the city's approval pursuant to this section. The city shall review and respond to an application within the time dictated by the nature and scope of the individual application, subject to the generally applicable time frames and consistent with the intent of the Telecommunications Act. This requirement shall not apply to city rights-of-way, which are regulated at Chapter 23, Article IV of the City of Miramar Code of Ordinances. 
B.  The community development department shall review the application for consistency with the city's comprehensive plan, land development regulations and compatibility of the proposed telecommunications facility with the surrounding neighborhood. For applications that are not subject to the city commission's approval pursuant to this section, the community development department shall issue a written decision either approving or denying an application. The city shall not approve an application for a proposed telecommunications facility that will interfere with any public safety telecommunications, or is otherwise not in compliance with this section. In the event the city denies an application, the reasons for denial in shall be in writing. An applicant may appeal as provided for in Section 515 of the Land Development Code. 
C.  For applications that are subject to the city commission's approval, the community development department shall issue a written recommendation to the city commission. The city commission shall consider any part of the application, the community development department's recommendation, and any additional evidence presented by the applicant and the public. 
D.  The city commission's decision either approving or denying an application shall be by resolution. Any decision of the city commission to deny an application shall authorize the city to set forth in writing the city commission's reasons for the denial. It is the intent of this section to establish a procedure for compliance with the "written decision" and "substantial evidence" requirements of the Telecommunications Act, 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(B)(iii). 
(1)  The city commission's written reasons for denial of an application may include, but are not limited to, compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood or lack thereof, compliance or noncompliance with the comprehensive plan, this section or any other provision of the City Code. 
(2)  The city commission's written reasons shall incorporate by reference the complete application, minutes of public hearings, and any recommendations and findings by the city manager and/or the city commission. 
(3)  If an application is denied because the proposed facility does not meet the requirements of section 814.5 or 814.6, the applicant may file an application for an exception pursuant to section 814.7. 
    814.5. Development standards. 
A.  General regulations. Except as otherwise provided by Section 365.172, Florida Statute, Section 6409 of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, and other applicable state and federal law, the standards listed in this section apply specifically to all antennas, towers and telecommunications facilities located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled and approved by the city (excluding rights-of-way) or located on private property. The city reserves the right to modify or waive the requirements on public property. The city shall provide access to city property. 
B.  Local, state or federal requirements. The construction, maintenance and repair of telecommunications facilities are subject to the supervision of the city to the full extent permitted by applicable law, and shall be performed in compliance with all laws, ordinances and practices affecting such facility including, but not limited to, zoning codes, building codes, and safety codes, and as provided herein. The construction, maintenance, and repair shall be performed in a manner consistent with applicable industry standards, including the electronic industries association. All telecommunication towers and antennas must meet current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, including emissions standards, and any other agency of the local, state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such applicable standards and regulations are revised and require that existing facilities adhere to such revised standards, then the owners of telecommunications towers and antennas within the city shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to comply with applicable standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the telecommunications tower or antenna at the owner's expense. 
C.  Co-location. It is the intent of the city to encourage co-location of antennas by more than one service provider on pre-existing telecommunications towers and structures. Except as provided herein, all towers shall have the capacity to permit multiple users. At a minimum, monopole towers shall be able to accommodate two users and, at a minimum, lattice or guyed towers shall be able to accommodate three users. 
(1)  Co-location incentive. To encourage such co-location, the community development department may approve an application submitted to co-locate antennas on an existing structure, pre-existing telecommunications tower, or a stealth facility, consistent with this section. The community development department may review such applications and submit a recommendation to the city commission for final approval or denial. 
(2)  All other applications shall be subject to approval or denial by the city commission. 
D.  Hierarchy of siting alternatives. Development of a telecommunications facility shall be in accordance with the following siting alternatives hierarchy. 
(1)  The order of ranking is from highest (a) to lowest (j). Where a lower ranked alternative is proposed, the applicant must demonstrate in its application that higher ranked options are not available in the manner described in section 814.3(b). The availability of a less expensive lease on a lower ranked site is not sufficient in and of itself to justify using the lower ranked alternative where a higher ranked alterative is otherwise available. 
a.  Co-location on existing stealth tower on city-owned property. 
b.  Co-location on existing telecommunications tower on city-owned property. 
c.  Attached telecommunications facility on city-owned property. 
d.  Co-location on existing structures on city-owned property. 
e.  Co-location on existing stealth tower on privately owned property. 
f.  Attached telecommunications facility on privately owned property. 
g.  New stealth tower on city-owned property. 
h.  New stealth tower on privately owned property. 
i.  New telecommunications tower on city-owned property. 
j.  New telecommunications tower on privately owned property. 
(2)  For siting of new telecommunications towers on privately owned property, the following secondary hierarchy of zoning districts from highest (i) to lowest (viii) is applicable. Where a lower ranked alternative is proposed, the applicant must demonstrate in its application that the higher ranked zoning alternative is not available pursuant to section 814.3(b). The availability of a less expensive lease on a lower ranked site is not sufficient in and of itself to justify using the lower ranked alternative where a higher ranked alterative is otherwise available. 
(i)  M-1 or PID Industrial Districts. 
(ii)  U Utilities Districts. 
(iii)  CF Community Facilities District. 
(iv)  EC Employment Center. 
(v)  B-1, B-2, or B-3 Business Districts. 
(vi)  OP Office Park District. 
(vii)  OS Recreation/Open Space District. 
(viii)  All other districts are least favored. 
To minimize the visual impact of telecommunications facilities in these other districts, only stealth facilities may be permitted. 
E.  Interference with public safety telecommunications. To the extent not inconsistent with applicable federal law, all providers of telecommunications services and telecommunications facilities, towers, and antennas shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Any telecommunications facility, tower, or antenna that causes interference with the operations of public safety telecommunications services, shall, after receiving notice, rectify the interference immediately. 
(2)  In the event that the telecommunications facility, tower, or antenna interferes with public safety telecommunications, it shall be the responsibility of the service provider that creates the interference to make all necessary repairs and/or accommodations to alleviate the problem at its expense. The city shall be held harmless in this occurrence. 
(3)  In the event that the service provider interferes with public safety telecommunications, once it rectifies the interference, it shall, within 30 days, file a report with the city by a qualified radio frequency engineer that includes, but is not limited to, the source of the interference, how the interference was rectified, and service provider's plans on preventing such interference from occurring in the future. 
(4)  To the extent not inconsistent with applicable law, if the service provider refuses to rectify interference within 24 hours of receiving notice, the city may, in addition to the remedies provided in section 814.11 herein, file a complaint with the FCC for resolution and/or seek an injunction against the service provider pursuant to Florida Statute § 843.025 that makes it unlawful for any person to deprive a law enforcement officer of his or her radio or to otherwise deprive the officer of the means to summon assistance, or pursue any other remedy authorized by applicable law. Any person who is found to have violated this section shall be punished as provided by applicable law. 
F.  Aesthetics. It is the intent of this section to provide for appropriate screening to minimize the visual impact of all telecommunications facilities located within the city. 
(1)  Telecommunications facilities and towers that are located within 300 feet of a residential district shall be of stealth design. 
(2)  Towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
(b)  At a telecommunications tower site, the design of the equipment facilities and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend them into the natural setting and surrounding buildings to minimize the visual impact yet maintaining standards as set forth by the City Code. 
(c)  The equipment facilities shall be completely surrounded by a decorative concrete block and stucco or pre-cast concrete wall, designed in a "Mediterranean Revival" architectural style. This decorative wall shall be designed at the minimum height necessary to completely screen the equipment facilities so as not to be visible from abutting public streets. 
(d)  Architectural embellishment to the decorative wall shall be integrated into the design. Adequate access shall be provided by opaque gates, such as finished solid aluminum or corrugated metal panels. Gates composed of wood or galvanized or vinyl-coated chain link material with or without slats are not permitted. The colors of the wall, gates and accessory structures shall meet the standards provided for in the community appearance board approved color palette in Section 813.3.3.3.6 of the City Code. The wall shall be designed by an architect registered in the State of Florida that is familiar with local building codes. 
(e)  This decorative wall must be surrounded by a ten-foot wide landscape buffer to include three tiers of plant material, designed by a landscape architect registered in the State of Florida. The three tiers shall include, at a minimum, native shade trees planted one tree per 30 feet on center with 14-foot minimum heights; a continuous hedge broken only where access gates are required; and groundcover including annuals. Palm trees are to be used as accent plant material. Proper irrigation must be provided and maintained for long-term maintenance of the site or parcel. The overall aesthetic appeal and relationship with the architectural design of the wall and the site will be judged by the community appearance board for compliance with these design criteria. 
(f)  Telecommunications tower sites must comply with any landscaping requirements of the City Code and all other applicable aesthetic and safety requirements of the city, and the city may require landscaping in excess of those requirements to enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses. All landscaping shall be properly maintained to ensure good health and viability at the owner's expense. Telecommunications facilities shall be landscaped as required by the city. 
(g)  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a telecommunications tower, the antenna and supporting equipment facility shall be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
(h)  No more than one telecommunications tower shall be located on a single lot or single building site. 
G.  Rooftop mounted telecommunications towers. 
(1)  The height, including the base pad and other support structures, shall not extend more than 30 feet above the height of the roofline; 
(2)  The height of the building shall be at least 30 feet; 
(3)  If a tower is installed on a building it shall be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting building and shall be screened as required by the city so as to make the tower and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
H.  Antennas on pre-existing structures. 
(1)  Any antenna which is attached to any structure other than a pre-existing telecommunications tower may be approved by the city as an accessory use to any commercial, industrial, professional, institutional, or multi-family structure provided: 
(a)  The antenna does not extend more than 30 feet above the highest point of the structure; 
(b)  The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA regulations and all applicable building codes; and 
(c)  To minimize adverse visual impacts, antennas shall be selected based upon the following priority: 
i.  Any stealth antenna (whether panel, whip or dish) 
ii.  Panel; 
iii.  Whip; or 
iv.  Dish. 
(d)  The applicant shall demonstrate, in order of priority as outlined above and in a manner acceptable to the city, why each choice cannot be used for a particular application. 
(2)  Antennas on pre-existing telecommunications towers. An antenna attached to a pre-existing telecommunications tower shall be consistent with the following: 
(a)  A telecommunications tower that is modified or reconstructed to accommodate the co-location of an additional antenna shall be of the same telecommunications tower type as the existing telecommunications tower, unless the city allows reconstruction as a monopole pursuant to this section. 
(b)  Height. An existing telecommunications tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller height to accommodate the co-location of an additional antenna, only if the modification or reconstruction is approved by the city manager and is in full compliance with this section. The additional height referred to above shall not require an additional setback or distance separation as set forth in this section. The tower's pre-modification height shall be used to calculate such setback and distance separations. 
(c)  An antenna may be mounted on an existing light, utility or power pole provided the height of the antenna does not extend more than the top of such pole. An existing light, utility and power pole may be modified, replaced or rebuilt to accommodate an antenna so long as the height of such pole is not increased by more than its existing height. 
(d)  Onsite location. A telecommunications tower that is being rebuilt to accommodate the co-location of an additional antenna may be moved onsite within 50 feet of its existing location. After the telecommunications tower is rebuilt to accommodate co-location, only one telecommunications tower may remain on the site. A relocated onsite telecommunications tower shall continue to be measured from the original telecommunications tower location for purposes of calculating separation distances between towers pursuant to this section. The relocation of a telecommunications tower pursuant to this section shall not be deemed to cause a violation of the separation requirements contained herein. 
(e)  Microwave dish antennas located below 65 feet above the ground may not exceed six feet in diameter. Microwave dish Antennas located 65 feet and higher above the ground may not exceed eight feet in diameter. Ground-mounted dish antennas must be located as required by the city and screened, at a minimum, by 20-foot landscape buffer with one tree per 30 feet as well as understory trees, plus a continuous dense hedge, so as not to be visible from abutting public streets. 
I.  Lighting. No signals, artificial lights, or illumination shall be permitted on any antenna or telecommunications tower unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. Lighting design, if required or proposed, is also under the purview of the community appearance board. Light fixtures types, if visible, shall be designed in accordance with the architectural design. Industrial type lighting such as wall packs shall be minimized, especially at a visible location. 
J.  Setbacks. Telecommunications towers must be set back from the property line a minimum distance of 110 percent of the height of the telecommunications tower or as otherwise approved by the city. For purposes of measurement, telecommunications tower setback distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities located in the city irrespective of municipal and county jurisdictional boundaries. 
K.  Separation. Any telecommunications tower shall be separated from any other telecommunications tower by a distance of no less than one mile as measured by a straight line between the bases of the towers. For purposes of measurement, telecommunications tower separation distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities located in the city irrespective of municipal and county jurisdictional boundaries. 
L.  Height. Telecommunications towers in excess of 90 feet shall have an alternative tower structure or stealth tower design and shall not be constructed at any heights in excess of those provided below: 
(1)  For a single user, up to 90 feet in height; 
(2)  For two users, up to 120 feet in height; 
(3)  For three or more users, up to 150 feet in height; 
(4)  For the purpose of determining compliance with all requirements of this section, telecommunications tower height shall be measured from grade to the highest point on the telecommunications tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna which may extend more than ten feet over the top of the telecommunications tower structure itself. 
M.  Modification of existing telecommunications facility. Minor modification of a telecommunications facility, including alteration of the antenna array shall not require an additional approval so long the modification does not change the height of the telecommunications tower, enlarge the antenna array, or enlarge the equipment facility. All other modifications shall require city manager approval. 
N.  Building codes, safety standards and inspections. 
(1)  To ensure the structural integrity of telecommunications towers installed, the owner shall construct and maintain telecommunications tower in compliance with the Florida Building Code, and all other applicable codes and standards, as amended from time to time. A statement shall be submitted to the city by a licensed engineer certifying compliance with this section upon completion of construction and/or subsequent modification. Where a pre-existing structure, including light and power poles, is requested as a stealth facility, the facility, and all modifications thereof, shall comply with all requirements as provided in this section and all other applicable standards as may be amended from time to time. Following the issuance of a building permit, the city shall require an analysis of a soil sample from the base of the telecommunications tower site. 
(2)  The city reserves the right to conduct periodic inspection of telecommunications facilities, towers, and antennas at the owner's expense, to ensure structural and electrical integrity and compliance with this section. The owner of the telecommunications facilities, towers, or antennas may be required by the city to have more frequent inspections should there be an emergency, extraordinary conditions or other reason to believe that the structural and electrical integrity of the telecommunications facility, tower, or antenna is jeopardized. There shall be a maximum of one inspection per year unless emergency or extraordinary conditions warrant additional inspections. If, upon inspection, the city concludes that a telecommunications facility, tower, or antenna fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner, the owner shall commence work within 30 days to bring such telecommunications facility, tower, or antenna into compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such telecommunications tower into compliance within 60 days of notice shall constitute grounds for the removal of the telecommunications tower, facility, or antenna at the owner's expense. 
O.  Warning signs. Notwithstanding any contrary provisions of the city's land development regulations, the following shall be utilized in connection with any telecommunications facility, tower or antenna site, as applicable. 
(1)  If high voltage is necessary for the operation of the telecommunications tower or any accessory structures, "HIGH VOLTAGE-DANGER" warning signs shall be permanently attached to the fence or wall surrounding the structure and spaced no more than 40 feet apart. 
(2)  "NO TRESPASSING" warning signs shall be permanently attached to the fence or wall and spaced no more than 40 feet apart. 
(3)  The height of the lettering of the warning signs shall be at least 12 inches in height. The warning signs shall be installed at least five feet above the finished grade. 
(4)  The warning signs may be attached to freestanding poles if landscaping may obstruct the content of the signs. 
(5)  The face of the warning signs shall be consistent with federal and state law. The trim or framing around the face of the warning signs must be designed to have a decorative appeal. 
P.  Licenses. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall certify that all business tax receipts required by law for the construction and/or operation of a wireless communication system in the city have been obtained and shall file a copy of all required business tax receipts with the city. 
Q.  Public notice. For purposes of this section, with regard to public notice, the applicant must comply with the procedures and requirements of the city's land development regulations, specifically section 501.11. If approved, upon the city's request, the owner of any telecommunications tower approved for shared use shall provide notice of the location of the telecommunications tower and the tower's load capacity to other service providers. All costs related to the public notice shall be paid by the applicant. 
R.  Signs. No signs, including commercial advertising, logo, political signs, flyers, flags, or banners, whether or not posted temporarily, shall be allowed on any part of an antenna telecommunications facility, or telecommunications tower unless required by applicable law. 
S.  Parking. Each telecommunications facility site may provide parking only for use by maintenance personnel. No vehicle storage shall occur. 
T.  Outdoor storage. No outdoor storage of vehicles or maintenance equipment is permitted on-sites approved for telecommunications facilities. 
    814.6. Equipment facilities. 
A.  Equipment facilities for a telecommunications tower and antennas mounted on a tower shall not exceed 1,000 square feet of gross floor area not including the surrounding concrete pad, or be more than ten feet in height and shall be located in accordance with the minimum yard requirements of the zoning district in which located. 
B.  Antennas mounted on structures or rooftops. Equipment facilities used in association with antennas mounted on structures or rooftops shall comply with the following: 
(1)  All equipment facilities for an array shall not exceed 600 square feet of gross floor area or be more than ten feet in height or as otherwise allowed by the city. This ten-foot height limitation shall be measured from the roofline to the highest point of the equipment facility. The base pad shall be considered part of the facility for purposes of measuring the height. In addition, for buildings and structures which are less than four stories in height, the related unmanned equipment facility, if over 100 square feet of gross floor area or six feet in height, including base pad, shall be located on the ground and shall not be located on the roof of the structure unless the building or structure is completely screened from site pursuant to the requirements of subsection F. 
(2)  Providers shall place equipment facilities inside the building or structure where technically feasible. If the equipment facility is located on the roof of a building, the area of the equipment facility and all other equipment and structures shall not occupy more than 50 percent of the roof area. Once 50 percent of the roof area has been occupied by telecommunications equipment and all other equipment and structures, additional applications for the placement of telecommunications Facilities on that particular rooftop must be approved as an exception. 
(3)  The city may require that equipment facilities installed on a building shall be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting building and shall be screened as required by the city so as to make the equipment facility as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
C.  Equipment facilities shall comply with all applicable zoning and building codes, including minimum setback requirements as provided herein. 
D.  Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a telecommunications tower shall not be stored or parked on the site of the telecommunication tower, except while repairs or inspections of the telecommunications tower are being made. 
E.  All buildings and equipment cabinets shall be unoccupied at all times except for routine maintenance. 
F.  Equipment facilities used in association with antennas mounted on utility, telephone, electric or light poles shall not be allowed in the public rights-of-way unless located on the utility or light pole itself, and shall be located in accordance with the following: 
(1)  In residential districts, the equipment facility may be located: 
(a)  In a side yard setback provided the equipment facility is no greater than six feet in height, including base pad, 16 square feet of gross floor area and the equipment facility is located a minimum of five feet from all lot lines. The equipment facility shall be screened as required by the city. 
(b)  In a rear yard setback, provided the equipment facility is no greater than six feet in height, including base pad, 16 square feet in gross floor area, and the equipment facility is located a minimum of five feet from all lot lines. The equipment facility shall be screened as required by the city. 
(2)  In commercial or industrial districts, the equipment facility shall be no greater than five feet in height, including base pad, and 25 square feet in gross floor area. The equipment facility shall be screened as required by the city. 
(3)  In all other instances, the location of equipment facility for antennas mounted on utility or light poles must be approved by the city manager or designee and shall be screened from view of all residential properties that abut or are directly across the street from the equipment facility or as may be required by city. 
    814.7. Exceptions. 
A.  Nothing in this section may prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the ability of a service provider to provide personal wireless services in violation of the Telecommunications Act. The provisions listed in this section apply only where an application for the placement of a telecommunications tower, telecommunications facility or antenna does not meet the criteria for approval as provided in sections 814.5 and 814.6 of this section. An applicant for an exception shall submit information described in section 814.3 and any other reasonable information the city may require. The city may deny the application if it does not comply with the requirements of this section. In the event of any conflict between the review provisions of section 503 of the City's Land Development Code and this section, the provisions of section 503 shall control. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of permits as exceptions: 
(1)  In the event that the applicant files for an exception, the applicant must comply with the procedures and requirements of conditional uses as stated in the City's Code, specifically section 503 of the Land Development Code, and as required in this section. 
(2)  In the event that the applicant files for an exception, the applicant shall file the appropriate application fee pursuant to this section. 
B.  Factors considered in granting an exception. In addition to any standards for consideration of permit applications pursuant to section 503 of the City's Land Development Code, the city may consider the following factors in determining whether to grant an exception: 
(1)  Availability of suitable existing telecommunications towers, other structures, or state of the art technologies not requiring the use of towers or structures. 
(2)  Height of the proposed telecommunications tower or facility; 
(3)  The setback and separation distances between the proposed telecommunications tower or facility and the nearest residential units or residentially zoned properties. 
(4)  Proximity of the telecommunications tower or facility to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
(5)  Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
(6)  Surrounding topography; 
(7)  Surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
(8)  Design of the telecommunications tower or facility, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
(9)  Proposed ingress and egress; and 
(10)  Any other factors the city determines to be relevant. 
C.  In granting a permit for an exception, the city may impose conditions to the extent the city concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effects of the proposed telecommunications tower, telecommunications facility, or antenna on adjoining properties or to protect the health, safety and welfare of the city and the residents. 
    814.8. Removal of abandoned antennas and towers. Any antenna, equipment facility, or telecommunications tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna, equipment facility, or telecommunications tower shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the city. Failure to remove an abandoned antenna, equipment facility, or telecommunications tower within the 90 days shall be grounds for the city to remove the telecommunications tower, equipment facility antenna at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single telecommunications tower or facility, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the telecommunications tower or facility. 
    814.9. Protection of the city and residents. 
A.  Indemnification. The city shall not enter into any lease agreement for city owned property until and unless the city obtains an adequate indemnity from such provider. The indemnity must at least: 
(1)  Release the city from and against any and all liability and responsibility in or arising out of the construction, operation or repair of the telecommunications facility. 
(2)  Indemnify and hold harmless the city, its trustees, elected and appointed officers, agents, servants and employees, from and against any and all claims, demands, or causes of action of whatsoever kind or nature, and the resulting losses, costs, expenses, reasonable attorneys' fees, liabilities, damages, orders, judgments, or decrees, sustained by the city or any third party arising out of, or by reason of, or resulting from or of each telecommunications facility operator, or its agents, employees, or servants negligent acts, errors, or omissions. 
(3)  Provide that the covenants and representations relating to the indemnification provision shall survive following the term of any agreement and continue in full force and effect for at least one year following the termination of the party's agreement as to the party's responsibility to indemnify. 
B.  Insurance. The city may not enter into any lease agreement for city owned property until and unless the city obtains assurance that such lessee (and those acting on its behalf) has adequate insurance. At a minimum, the following requirements must be satisfied: 
(1)  A telecommunications facility owner shall not commence construction or operation of the facility without obtaining all insurance required under this section and approval of such insurance by the city manager, nor shall a telecommunications facility operator allow any contractor or subcontractor to commence work on its contract or sub-contract until all similar such insurance required of the same has been obtained and approved. The required insurance must be obtained and maintained for the entire period the telecommunications facility is in existence. If the operator, its contractors or subcontractors do not have the required insurance, the city may order such entities to stop operations until the insurance is obtained and approved. 
(2)  Certificates of insurance, reflecting evidence of the required insurance, shall be filed with the city. For entities that are entering the market, the certificates shall be filed prior to the commencement of construction and once a year thereafter, and as provided below in the event of a lapse in coverage. 
(3)  These certificates shall contain a provision that coverage afforded under these policies will not be canceled until at least 30 days prior written notice has been given to the city. Policies shall be issued by companies authorized to do business under the laws of the State of Florida. The city may amend its requirements pertaining to insurance from time to time and may require additional provisions pertaining to such insurance in a lease. 
(4)  In the event that the insurance certificate provided indicates that the insurance shall terminate or lapse during the period of the lease agreement with the city, then in that event, the telecommunications facility operator shall furnish, at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the date of such insurance, a renewed certificate of insurance as proof that equal and like coverage for the balance of the period. 
C.  Comprehensive general liability. A telecommunications facility operator and its contractors or subcontractors engaged in work on the operator's behalf, shall maintain adequate insurance to cover liability, bodily injury and property damage in the amount to be determined by the city at the time of application. Exposures to be covered include premises, operations, and those certain contracts relating to the construction, installation or maintenance of the telecommunications facility. Coverage shall be written on an occurrence basis and shall be included, as applicable, in the lease agreement between the city and the telecommunications facility operator. Certificates of insurance reflecting evidence of the required insurance shall be filed with the city. 
    814.10. Security fund. 
A.  Prior to any construction, every service provider, whether on public or private property within the city, shall establish a cash security fund, or provide the city with an irrevocable letter of credit or security bond subject to the city attorney's approval, in the amount specified in an agreement, permit, or other authorization as necessary to ensure the provider's faithful performance of construction and compliance with this section. The minimum amount of the security fund for each telecommunications tower shall be $25,000.00 and the minimum amount for each antenna shall be $1,000.00. 
B.  In the alternative, at the city's discretion, a provider operator may, in lieu of a cash security fund or letter of credit, file and maintain with the city a bond in the same amounts as required in subsection A. The provider and the surety shall be jointly and severally liable under the terms of the bond. The bond shall be issued by a surety having a minimum rating of A-1 in Best's Key Rating Guide, Property/Casualty Edition; shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney; and shall provide that: 
"This bond may not be canceled, or allowed to lapse, until 60 days after receipt by the city, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written notice from the issuer of the bond of intent to cancel or not to renew." 
C.  The rights reserved by the city with respect to any security fund or bond established pursuant to this section are in addition to all other rights and remedies the city may have under this section, a lease, or at law or equity. 
    814.11. Penalties. 
A.  Any person, firm or corporation who breaches any provision of this section shall upon receipt of written notice from the city be given a time schedule to cure the violation. Failure to commence to cure the violation within 30 days and to complete cure, to the city's satisfaction, within 60 days, or such longer time as the city may specify, shall result in revocation of any permit or license and the city shall seek any remedy or damages to the full extent of the law. 
B.  In addition to revoking any permit or license for violation of this section, the city may enforce this section pursuant to the Local Government Code Enforcement Act, Chapter 162, F.S., as amended. The city may notify any person, firm or corporation of its of noncompliance with this section. Any person, firm or corporation shall have 30 calendar days after receipt of such notification to cure the violation or to respond with a plan satisfactory to the city to cure the violation. If the person, firm or corporation does not cure the violation or provide a satisfactory plan to cure the violation within such time-period, the city may fine that person, firm or corporation for violation of this section a maximum of $500.00 for each violation with each day of a continuing violation constituting a separate violation. The fines shall begin to accrue on the first business day after the 30-day cure period has terminated. The city may collect fines owed through any means allowed by law. 
C.  Enforcement may also be by suit for declaratory, injunctive or other appropriate relief in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 03-01, § 3, 10-2-02; Ord. No. 14-11, § 2(Exh. A), 2-5-14; Ord. No. 14-15, § 2, 7-2-14) 
Sec. 815. - Minimum criteria for all signs in city. 
    The specific provisions of Chapter 10 "Signs" of the Land Development Code shall govern as to permissible sign face area, structure area, and height, for specific sign types. However, notwithstanding any other provision of the Code, the following minimum requirements shall be met by all signs: 
(a)  Residential districts. No sign may be erected in a residential district that exceeds the following dimensions and requirements: 
1.  Maximum sign face area: 64 square feet. 
2.  Maximum sign height: 12 feet. 
3.  Maximum sign structure area: 180 square feet. 
(b)  Nonresidential and mixed-use districts (commercial, office, industrial, communal and civic areas). No sign may be erected in a nonresidential or mixed-use district that exceeds the following dimensions and requirements: 
1.  Maximum sign face area: 84 square feet. 
2.  Maximum sign height: 24 feet. 
3.  Maximum sign structure area: 180 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 12-05, § 2, 11-30-11) 
Sec. 816. - Storm drainage, water management design and floodplain management standards. 
    816.1. General administration. 
816.1.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the Floodplain Management Ordinance of the City of Miramar, hereinafter referred to as "this section." 
816.1.2. Scope. The provisions of this section shall apply to all development that is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area, as defined in subsection 816.9.2, and as specifically provided in section 816.10.1.2, including but not limited to the subdivision of land; filling, grading, and other site improvements and utility installations; construction, alteration, remodeling, enlargement, improvement, replacement, repair, relocation or demolition of buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code; placement, installation, or replacement of manufactured homes and manufactured buildings; installation or replacement of tanks; placement of recreational vehicles; installation of swimming pools; and any other development. 
816.1.3. Intent. The purposes of this section and the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code are to establish minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flooding through regulation of development in flood hazard areas to: 
1.  Minimize unnecessary disruption of commerce, access and public service during times of flooding; 
2.  Require the use of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize future flood damage; 
3.  Manage filling, grading, dredging, mining, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion potential; 
4.  Manage the alteration of flood hazard areas, watercourses, and shorelines to minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial functions of the floodplain; 
5.  Minimize damage to public and private facilities and utilities; 
6.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood hazard areas; 
7.  Minimize the need for future expenditure of public funds for flood control projects and response to and recovery from flood events; and 
8.  Meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program for community participation as set forth in the Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Section 59.22. 
816.1.4. Coordination with the Florida Building Code. This section is intended to be administered and enforced in conjunction with the Florida Building Code. Where cited, ASCE 24 refers to the edition of the standard that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. 
816.1.5. Warning. The degree of flood protection required by this section and the Florida Building Code, as amended by the city, is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This section does not imply that land outside of mapped special flood hazard areas, or that uses permitted within such flood hazard areas, will be free from flooding or flood damage. The flood hazard areas and base flood elevations contained in the Flood Insurance Study and shown on Flood Insurance Rate Maps and the requirements of Title 44, Code of Federal Regulations, Sections 59 and 60 may be revised by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, requiring the city to revise these regulations to remain eligible for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. No guaranty of vested use, existing use, or future use is implied or expressed by compliance with this section. 
816.1.6. Disclaimer of liability. This section shall not create liability on the part of the City Commission of the City of Miramar or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this section or any decision lawfully made thereunder. 
    816.2. Applicability. 
816.2.1. General. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
816.2.2. Areas to which this section applies. This section shall apply to all flood hazard areas within the City of Miramar, as established in section 816.2.3, and to other areas as specifically provided in section 816.10.1.2. 
816.2.3. Basis for establishing flood hazard areas. The Flood Insurance Study for Broward County, Florida and Incorporated Areas dated October 2, 1997, and all subsequent amendments and revisions, and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), and all subsequent amendments and revisions to such maps, are adopted by reference as a part of this section and shall serve as the minimum basis for establishing flood hazard areas. Studies and maps that establish flood hazard areas are on file at the community development department. 
816.2.3.1. Submission of additional data to establish flood hazard areas. To establish flood hazard areas and base flood elevations, pursuant to section 816.3, the floodplain administrator may require submission of additional data. Where field surveyed topography prepared by a Florida licensed professional surveyor or digital topography accepted by the city indicates that ground elevations: 
1.  Are below the closest applicable base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as flood hazard area and subject to the requirements of this section and, as applicable, the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
2.  Are above the closest applicable base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as special flood hazard area unless the applicant obtains a Letter of Map Change that removes the area from the special flood hazard area. 
816.2.4. Other laws. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. 
816.2.5. Abrogation and greater restrictions. This section supersedes any ordinance in effect for management of development in flood hazard areas. However, it is not intended to repeal or abrogate any existing ordinances, including but not limited to land development regulations, zoning ordinances, stormwater management regulations, or the Florida Building Code. In the event of a conflict between this section and any other ordinance, the more restrictive shall govern. This section shall not impair any deed restriction, covenant or easement, but any land that is subject to such interests shall also be governed by this section. 
816.2.6. Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this section, all provisions shall be: 
1.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
2.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
3.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
    816.3. Duties and powers of the floodplain administrator. 
816.3.1. Designation. The engineering services director is designated as the floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator may delegate performance of certain duties to other employees. 
816.3.2. General. The floodplain administrator is authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this section. The floodplain administrator shall have the authority to render interpretations of this section consistent with the intent and purpose of this section and may establish policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies, and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided in this section without the granting of a variance pursuant to section 816.7. 
816.3.3. Applications and permits. The floodplain administrator, in coordination with other pertinent offices of the city, shall: 
1.  Review applications and plans to determine whether proposed new development will be located in flood hazard areas; 
2.  Review applications for modification of any existing development in flood hazard areas for compliance with the requirements of this section; 
3.  Interpret flood hazard area boundaries where such interpretation is necessary to determine the exact location of boundaries; a person contesting the determination shall have the opportunity to appeal the interpretation; 
4.  Provide available flood elevation and flood hazard information; 
5.  Determine whether additional flood hazard data shall be obtained from other sources or shall be developed by an applicant; 
6.  Review applications to determine whether proposed development will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
7.  Issue floodplain development permits or approvals for development other than buildings and structures that are subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, when compliance with this section is demonstrated, or disapprove the same in the event of noncompliance; and 
8.  Coordinate with and provide comments to the building official to assure that applications, plan reviews, and inspections for buildings and structures in flood hazard areas comply with the applicable provisions of this section. 
816.3.4. Substantial improvement and substantial damage determinations. For applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures, the floodplain administrator, in coordination with the building official, shall: 
1.  Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser of the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are made; 
2.  Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or structure; 
3.  Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and 
4.  Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance with the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code and this section is required. 
816.3.5. Modifications of the strict application of the requirements of the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall review requests submitted to the building official that seek approval to modify the strict application of the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code to determine whether such requests require the granting of a variance pursuant to section 816.7. 
816.3.6. Notices and orders. The floodplain administrator shall coordinate with appropriate local agencies for the issuance of all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this section. 
816.3.7. Inspections. The floodplain administrator shall make the required inspections as specified in section 816.6 for development that is not subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall inspect flood hazard areas to determine if development is undertaken without issuance of a permit. 
816.3.8. Other duties of the floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator shall have other duties, including but not limited to: 
1.  Establish, in coordination with the building official, procedures for administering and documenting determinations of substantial improvement and substantial damage made pursuant to section 816.3.4; 
2.  Require that applicants proposing alteration of a watercourse notify adjacent communities and the State of Florida Division of Emergency Management; notify the Floodplain Management Office, and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
3.  Require applicants who submit hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses to support permit applications to submit to FEMA the data and information necessary to maintain the Flood Insurance Rate Maps if the analyses propose to change base flood elevations, flood hazard area boundaries, or floodway designations; such submissions shall be made within six months of such data becoming available; 
4.  Review required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by this section and the Florida Building Code and this section to determine that such certifications and documentations are complete; and 
5.  Notify FEMA when the corporate boundaries of the City of Miramar are modified. 
816.3.9. Floodplain management records. Regardless of any limitation on the period required for retention of public records, the floodplain administrator shall maintain and permanently keep and make available for public inspection all records that are necessary for the administration of this section and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, including Flood Insurance Rate Maps; Letters of Change; records of issuance of permits and denial of permits; determinations of whether proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by the Florida Building Code and this section; notifications to adjacent communities, FEMA, and the state related to alterations of watercourses; assurances that the flood carrying capacity of altered watercourses will be maintained; documentation related to appeals and variances, including justification for issuance or denial; and records of enforcement actions taken pursuant to this section and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. These records shall be available for public inspection at the Building Division. 
    816.4. Permits. 
816.4.1. Permits required. Any owner or owner's authorized agent (hereinafter "applicant") who intends to undertake any development activity within the scope of this section, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, which is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area shall first make application to the floodplain administrator, and the building official if applicable, and shall obtain the required permit(s) and/or approval(s). No such permit or approval shall be issued until compliance with the requirements of this section and all other applicable codes and regulations has been satisfied. 
816.4.2. Floodplain development permits or approvals. Floodplain development permits or approvals shall be issued pursuant to this section for any development activities not subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Depending on the nature and extent of proposed development that includes a building or structure, the floodplain administrator may determine that a floodplain development permit or approval is required in addition to a building permit. 
816.4.2.1. Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. Sections 59 and 60), floodplain development permits or approvals shall be required for the following buildings, structures and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code and any further exemptions provided by law, which are subject to the requirements of this section: 
1.  Railroads and ancillary facilities associated with the railroad; 
2.  Nonresidential farm buildings on farms, as provided in F.S. § 604.50; 
3.  Temporary buildings or sheds used exclusively for construction purposes; 
4.  Mobile or modular structures used as temporary offices; 
5.  Those structures or facilities of electric utilities, as defined in F.S. § 366.02, which are directly involved in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity; 
6.  Chickees constructed by the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida or the Seminole Tribe of Florida. As used in this paragraph, the term "chickee" means an open-sided wooden hut that has a thatched roof of palm or palmetto or other traditional materials, and that does not incorporate any electrical, plumbing, or other non-wood features; 
7.  Family mausoleums not exceeding 250 square feet in area which are prefabricated and assembled on site or preassembled and delivered on site and have walls, roofs, and a floor constructed of granite, marble, or reinforced concrete; 
8.  Temporary housing provided by the department of corrections to any prisoner in the state correctional system; and 
9.  Structures identified in F.S. § 553.73(10)(k), are not exempt from the Florida Building Code if such structures are located in flood hazard areas established on Flood Insurance Rate Maps. 
816.4.3. Application for a permit or approval. To obtain a floodplain development permit or approval, the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the city. The information provided shall: 
1.  Identify and describe the development to be covered by the permit or approval; 
2.  Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be conducted by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitively locate the site; 
3.  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed development is intended; 
4.  Be accompanied by a site plan or construction documents as specified below; 
5.  State the valuation of the proposed work; 
6.  Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent; and 
7.  Give such other data and information as required by the floodplain administrator. 
816.4.4. Validity of permit or approval. The issuance of a floodplain development permit or approval pursuant to this section shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any violation of this section, the Florida Building Code, or any other ordinance of this city. The issuance of permits based on submitted applications, construction documents, and information shall not prevent the floodplain administrator from requiring the correction of errors and omissions. 
816.4.5. Expiration. A floodplain development permit or approval shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the work commences. Extensions for periods of not more than 180 days each shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause shall be demonstrated. 
816.4.6. Suspension or revocation. The floodplain administrator is authorized to suspend or revoke a floodplain development permit or approval if the permit was issued in error, on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of this section or any other ordinance, regulation or requirement of this city. 
816.4.7. Other permits required. Floodplain development permits and building permits shall include a condition that all other applicable state or federal permits be obtained before commencement of the permitted development, including but not limited to the following: 
1.  The South Florida Water Management District; F.S. § 373.036; 
2.  Florida Department of Health for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems; F.S. § 381.0065 and Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C.; 
3.  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities subject to the Joint Coastal Permit; F.S. § 161.055; 
4.  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities that affect wetlands and alter surface water flows, in conjunction with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, section 404 of the Clean Water Act; 
5.  South Broward Drainage District (SBDD) for activities that affect floodways; and 
6.  Federal permits and approvals. 
    816.5. Site plans and construction documents. 
816.5.1. Information for development in flood hazard areas. The site plan or construction documents for any development subject to the requirements of this section shall be drawn to scale and shall include, as applicable to the proposed development: 
1.  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zone(s), base flood elevation(s), and ground elevations if necessary for review of the proposed development; 
2.  Where base flood elevations, or floodway data are not included on the FIRM or in the Flood Insurance Study, they shall be established in accordance with section 816.5.2(2) or (3); 
3.  Where the parcel on which the proposed development will take place will have more than 50 lots or is larger than five acres and the base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM or in the Flood Insurance Study, such elevations shall be established in accordance with section 816.5.2(1); 
4.  Location of the proposed activity and proposed structures, and locations of existing buildings and structures; 
5.  Location, extent, amount, and proposed final grades of any filling, grading, or excavation; 
6.  Where the placement of fill is proposed, the amount, type, and source of fill material; compaction specifications; a description of the intended purpose of the fill areas; and evidence that the proposed fill areas are the minimum necessary to achieve the intended purpose; and 
7.  Existing and proposed alignment of any proposed alteration of a watercourse. 
The floodplain administrator is authorized to waive the submission of site plans, construction documents, and other data that are required by this section but that are not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the proposed development is such that the review of such submissions is not necessary to ascertain compliance with this section. 
816.5.2. Information in flood hazard areas without base flood elevations (approximate Zone A). Where flood hazard areas are delineated on the FIRM and base flood elevation data have not been provided, the floodplain administrator shall: 
1.  Require the applicant to develop base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices; 
2.  Obtain, review, and provide to applicants base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source or require the applicant to obtain and use base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source; 
3.  Where base flood elevation and floodway data are not available from another source, where the available the data is deemed by the floodplain administrator to not reasonably reflect flooding conditions, or where the available data is known to be scientifically or technically incorrect or otherwise inadequate: 
a.  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices; or 
b.  Specify that the base flood elevation is at least 18 inches above the highest point of the adjacent crown of road. 
4.  Where the base flood elevation data is to be used to support a Letter of Map Change from FEMA, advise the applicant that the analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA, and that it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to satisfy the submittal requirements and pay the processing fees. 
816.5.3. Additional analyses and certifications. As applicable to the location and nature of the proposed development activity, and in addition to the requirements of this section, the applicant shall have the following analyses signed and sealed by a Florida licensed engineer for submission with the site plan and construction documents: 
1.  For development activities proposed to be located in a regulatory floodway, a floodway encroachment analysis that demonstrates that the encroachment of the proposed development will not cause any increase in base flood elevations; where the applicant proposes to undertake development activities that do increase base flood elevations, the applicant shall submit such analysis to FEMA as specified in section 816.5.4 and shall submit the Conditional Letter of Map Revision, if issued by FEMA, with the site plan and construction documents. 
2.  For development activities proposed to be located in a riverine flood hazard area for which base flood elevations are included in the Flood Insurance Study or on the FIRM and floodways have not been designated, hydrologic and hydraulic analyses that demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated flood hazard area encroachments, will not increase the base flood elevation more than one foot at any point within the community. This requirement does not apply in isolated flood hazard areas not connected to a riverine flood hazard area or in flood hazard areas identified as Zone AO or Zone AH. 
3.  For alteration of a watercourse, an engineering analysis prepared in accordance with standard engineering practices which demonstrates that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse 
4.  Will not be decreased, and certification that the altered watercourse shall be maintained in a manner which preserves the channel's flood-carrying capacity, the applicant shall submit the analysis to FEMA as specified in section 816.5.4. 
816.5.4. Submission of additional data. When additional hydrologic, hydraulic or other engineering data, studies, and additional analyses are submitted to support an application, the applicant has the right to seek a Letter of Map Change from FEMA to change the base flood elevations, change floodway boundaries, or change boundaries of flood hazard areas shown on FIRMs, and to submit such data to FEMA for such purposes. The analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
    816.6. Inspections. 
816.6.1. General. Development for which a floodplain development permit or approval is required shall be subject to inspection. 
816.6.1.1. Development other than buildings and structures. The floodplain administrator shall inspect all development to determine compliance with the requirements of this section and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
816.6.1.2. Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall inspect buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code to determine compliance with the requirements of this section and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
816.6.1.2.1. Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, lowest floor inspection. Upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the owner of a building, structure or facility exempt from the Florida Building Code, or the owner's authorized agent, shall submit to the floodplain administrator: 
1.  If a design flood elevation was used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor, the certification of elevation of the lowest floor prepared and sealed by a Florida licensed professional surveyor; or 
2.  If the elevation used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor was determined in accordance with section 816.5.3(3)(b), the documentation of height of the lowest floor above highest adjacent grade, prepared by the owner or the owner's authorized agent. 
816.6.1.2.2. Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, final inspection. As part of the final inspection, the owner or owner's authorized agent shall submit to the floodplain administrator a final certification of elevation of the lowest floor or final documentation of the height of the lowest floor above the highest adjacent grade; such certifications and documentations shall be prepared as specified in section 816.6.1.2.1. 
816.6.1.3. Manufactured homes. The floodplain administrator shall inspect manufactured homes that are installed or replaced in flood hazard areas to determine compliance with the requirements of this section and the conditions of the issued permit. Upon placement of a manufactured home, certification of the elevation of the lowest floor shall be submitted to the floodplain administrator. 
    816.7. Variances and appeals. 
816.7.1. General. The city commission shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of this section. Pursuant to F.S. § 553.73(5), the city commission shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
816.7.2. Appeals. The city commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the administration and enforcement of this section. Any person aggrieved by the decision of city commission may appeal such decision to the Circuit Court, as provided by Florida Statutes. 
816.7.3. Limitations on authority to grant variances. The city commission shall base its decisions on variances on technical justifications submitted by applicants, the considerations for issuance in section 816.7.6, the conditions of issuance set forth in section 816.7.7, and the comments and recommendations of the floodplain administrator and the building official. The city commission has the right to attach such conditions as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this section. 
816.7.3.1. Restrictions in floodways. A variance shall not be issued for any proposed development in a floodway if any increase in base flood elevations would result, as evidenced by the applicable analyses and certifications required in section 816.5.3. 
816.7.4. Historic buildings. A variance is authorized to be issued for the repair, improvement, or rehabilitation of a historic building that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 11 Historic Buildings, upon a determination that the proposed repair, improvement, or rehabilitation will not preclude the building's continued designation as a historic building and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the building. If the proposed work precludes the building's continued designation as a historic building, a variance shall not be granted and the building and any repair, improvement, and rehabilitation shall be subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
816.7.5. Functionally dependent uses. A variance is authorized to be issued for the construction or substantial improvement necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, as defined in this section, provided the variance meets the requirements of section 816.7.3.1, is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, and all due consideration has been given to use of methods and materials that minimize flood damage during occurrence of the base flood. 
816.7.6. Considerations for issuance of variances. In reviewing requests for variances from this section, the city commission shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all other applicable provisions of the Florida Building Code, this section, and the following: 
1.  The danger that materials and debris may be swept onto other lands resulting in further injury or damage; 
2.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
3.  The susceptibility of the proposed development, including contents, to flood damage and the effect of such damage on current and future owners; 
4.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed development to the community; 
5.  The availability of alternate locations for the proposed development that are subject to lower risk of flooding or erosion; 
6.  The compatibility of the proposed development with existing and anticipated development; 
7.  The relationship of the proposed development to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area; 
8.  The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
9.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and debris and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
10.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges. 
816.7.7. Conditions for issuance of variances. Variances shall be issued only upon: 
1.  Submission by the applicant of a showing of good and sufficient cause that the unique characteristics of the size, configuration, or topography of the site limit compliance with any provision of this section or the required elevation standards; 
2.  Determination by the city commission that: 
a.  Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the land that render the lot undevelopable; increased costs to satisfy the requirements or inconvenience do not constitute hardship; 
b.  The granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances; and 
c.  The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; 
3.  Receipt of a signed statement by the applicant that the variance, if granted, shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the court in such a manner that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land; and 
4.  If the request is for a variance to allow construction of the lowest floor of a new building, or substantial improvement of a building, below the required elevation, a copy in the record of a written notice from the floodplain administrator to the applicant for the variance specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the proposed elevation of the lowest floor, stating that the cost of federal flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced floor elevation (up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage), and stating that construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property. 
    816.8. Violations. 
816.8.1. Violations. Any development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this section that is performed without an issued permit, that is in conflict with an issued permit, or that does not fully comply with this section, shall be deemed a violation of this section. A building or structure without the documentation of elevation of the lowest floor, other required design certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this section or the Florida Building Code is presumed to be a violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
816.8.2. Authority. For development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this section and that is determined to be a violation, the floodplain administrator is authorized to serve notices of violation or stop work orders to owners of the property involved, to the owner's agent, or to the person or persons performing the work. 
816.8.3. Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a notice of violation or a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove or remedy a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
    816.9. Definitions. 
816.9.1. General. 
816.9.1.1. Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this section, have the meanings shown in this section. 
816.9.1.2. Terms defined in the Florida Building Code. Where terms are not defined in this section and are defined in the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in that code. 
816.9.1.3. Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined in this section or the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
816.9.2. Definitions. The following definitions shall apply within this section: 
Alteration of a watercourse. A dam, impoundment, channel relocation, change in channel alignment, channelization, or change in cross-sectional area of the channel or the channel capacity, or any other form of modification which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the riverine flow of water during conditions of the base flood. 
Appeal. A request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this section or a request for a variance. 
ASCE 24. A standard titled Flood Resistant Design and Construction that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. ASCE 24 is developed and published by the American Society of Civil Engineers, Reston, VA. 
Base flood. A flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] The base flood is commonly referred to as the "100 year flood" or the "one percent-annual chance flood." 
Base flood elevation. The elevation of the base flood, including wave height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Basement. The portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Design flood. The flood associated with the greater of the following two areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
1.  Area with a floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any year; or 
2.  Area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
Design flood elevation. The elevation of the "design flood," including wave height, relative to the datum specified on the community's legally designated flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO, the design flood elevation shall be the elevation of the highest existing grade of the building's perimeter plus the depth number (in feet) specified on the flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO where the depth number is not specified on the map, the depth number shall be taken as being equal to two feet. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, tanks, temporary structures, temporary or permanent storage of equipment or materials, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavations, drilling operations or any other land disturbing activities. 
Encroachment. The placement of fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or other development into a flood hazard area which may impede or alter the flow capacity of riverine flood hazard areas. 
Existing building and existing structure. Any buildings and structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before December 1, 1977 [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before December 1, 1977. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The federal agency that, in addition to carrying out other functions, administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land from: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
1.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
2.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood damage-resistant materials. Any construction material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Flood hazard area. The greater of the following two areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
1.  The area within a floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any year. 
2.  The area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The official map of the community on which FEMA has delineated both special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Flood Insurance Study (FIS). The official report provided by FEMA that contains the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (if applicable), the water surface elevations of the base flood, and supporting technical data. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Floodplain administrator. The office or position designated and charged with the administration and enforcement of this section (may be referred to as the floodplain manager). 
Floodplain development permit or approval. An official document or certificate issued by the community, or other evidence of approval or concurrence, which authorizes performance of specific development activities that are located in flood hazard areas and that are determined to be compliant with this section. 
Floodway. The channel of a river or other riverine watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Floodway encroachment analysis. An engineering analysis of the impact that a proposed encroachment into a floodway is expected to have on the floodway boundaries and base flood elevations; the evaluation shall be prepared by a qualified Florida licensed engineer using standard engineering methods and models. 
Florida Building Code. The family of codes adopted by the Florida Building Commission, including: Florida Building Code, Building; Florida Building Code, Residential; Florida Building Code, Existing Building; Florida Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Plumbing; Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas. 
Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, including only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities; the term does not include long term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls or foundation of a structure. 
Historic structure. Any structure that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood hazard area requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 11 Historic Buildings. 
Letter of Map Change (LOMC). An official determination issued by FEMA that amends or revises an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study. Letters of Map Change include: 
1.  Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA): An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective Flood Insurance Rate Map and establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area. 
2.  Letter of Map Revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features. 
3.  Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F): A determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard area. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with the community's floodplain management regulations. 
4.  Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a Letter of Map Revision may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. 
Light-duty truck. As defined in 40 C.F.R. 86.082-2, any motor vehicle rated at 8,500 pounds Gross Vehicular Weight Rating or less which has a vehicular curb weight of 6,000 pounds or less and which has a basic vehicle frontal area of 45 square feet or less, which is: 
1.  Designed primarily for purposes of transportation of property or is a derivation of such a vehicle, or 
2.  Designed primarily for transportation of persons and has a capacity of more than 12 persons; or 
3.  Available with special features enabling off-street or off-highway operation and use. 
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area of a building or structure, including basement, but excluding any unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, other than a basement, usable solely for vehicle parking, building access or limited storage provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the non-elevation requirements of the Florida Building Code or ASCE 24. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is eight feet or more in width and greater than 400 square feet, and which is built on a permanent, integral chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle" or "park trailer." [Also defined in 15C-1.0101, F.A.C.] 
Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Market value. The price at which a property will change hands between a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither party being under compulsion to buy or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts. As used in this section, the term refers to the market value of buildings and structures, excluding the land and other improvements on the parcel. Market value may be established by a qualified independent appraiser, Actual Cash Value (replacement cost depreciated for age and quality of construction), or tax assessment value adjusted to approximate market value by a factor provided by the property appraiser. 
New construction. For the purposes of administration of this section and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after December 1, 1977 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after December 1, 1977. 
Park trailer. A transportable unit which has a body width not exceeding 14 feet and which is built on a single chassis and is designed to provide seasonal or temporary living quarters when connected to utilities necessary for operation of installed fixtures and appliances. [Defined in F.S. § 320.01] 
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle, including a park trailer, which is: [Defined in F.S. § 320.01(b)] 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Special flood hazard area. An area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are shown on FIRMs as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, V1-V30, VE or V. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 1612.2.] 
Start of construction. The date of issuance for new construction and substantial improvements to existing structures, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement is within 180 days of the date of the issuance. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns. Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing, grading, or filling), the installation of streets or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations, the erection of temporary forms or the installation of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main buildings. For a substantial improvement, the actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 1612.2.] 
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a building or structure whereby the cost of restoring the building or structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the damage occurred. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 1612.2.] 
Substantial improvement. Any repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a building or structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the improvement or repair is started. If the structure has incurred "substantial damage," any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 1612.2.] 
1.  Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
2.  Any alteration of a historic structure provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Variance. A grant of relief from the requirements of this section, or the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, which permits construction in a manner that would not otherwise be permitted by this section or the Florida Building Code. 
Watercourse. A river, creek, stream, channel or other topographic feature in, on, through, or over which water flows at least periodically. 
    816.10. Flood resistant development. 
816.10.1. Buildings and structures. 
816.10.1.1. Design and construction of buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Pursuant to section 816.4.2.1, buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code, including substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage of such buildings, structures and facilities, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of ASCE 24. Structures exempt from the Florida Building Code that are not walled and roofed buildings shall comply with the requirements of section 816.10.7. 
816.10.1.2. Specific methods of construction and requirements. 
816.10.1.2.1. Elevation requirements. New buildings and substantial improvements of buildings shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the elevation required in the Florida Building Code, the base flood elevation plus one foot, or 18 inches above the highest point of the road crown elevation of the centerline of the adjacent street as established in section 816.10.1.2.3, whichever is higher. New nonresidential buildings and substantial improvement of nonresidential buildings proposed to be dry floodproofed shall be designed to be protected to or above the elevation required in the Florida Building Code, or 6 inches above the highest road crown elevation of the centerline of the adjacent street, as established in section 816.10.1.2.3, whichever is higher. 
816.10.1.2.2. Elevation requirements outside of flood hazard areas. The minimum elevation of the lowest habitable floor outside the flood hazard areas identified by FEMA in its flood insurance study and flood insurance rate maps shall be elevated as follows: 
1.  Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated 18 inches above the highest point of the road crown elevation of the centerline of the adjacent street, as established in section 816.10.1.2.32. Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated six inches above the highest point of the road crown elevation of the centerline of the adjacent street, as established in section 816.10.1.2.3. 
816.10.1.2.3. Establishment of minimum elevation (centerline of adjacent street). In those areas west of University Drive and in the boundaries of the South Broward Drainage District, the minimum elevation (centerline of street) shall be as established by the design of the major drainage facilities for the particular area by the engineer for the developer, as required by South Broward Drainage District standards, and subject to approval of the Engineering Services Director. In areas east of University Drive, the minimum elevation (centerline of street) shall be as established in compliance with the city's floodplain management criteria. In no case shall the minimum elevation be lower than the elevation required by this section. 
816.10.1.2.4. Enclosures. In addition to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, enclosed areas below the base flood elevation shall meet the following: 
1.  Have no electrical, plumbing, and other utility connections below the base flood elevation; 
2.  Have the minimum access necessary for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage for maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator; and 
3.  Have no interior partitions or finishing into separate rooms. 
816.10.1.2.5. Stormwater management. All stormwater drainage systems shall be designed in accordance with the requirements of the South Broward Drainage District's publication entitled "Stormwater Management Regulations, Standards, Procedures," latest edition, the South Florida Water Management District's Permit Manual "Management and Storage of Surface Waters," latest edition, and the city's floodplain management criteria. 
816.10.2. Subdivisions. 
816.10.2.1. Minimum requirements. Subdivision proposals, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be reviewed to determine that: 
1.  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
2.  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
3.  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
816.10.2.2. Subdivision plats. Where any portion of proposed subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, lies within a flood hazard area, the following shall be required: 
1.  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zones, and design flood elevations, as appropriate, shall be shown on preliminary plats and final plats; 
2.  Where the subdivision has more than 50 lots or is larger than five acres and base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM, the base flood elevations determined in accordance with section 816.5.2(1) or (2); and 
3.  Compliance with the site improvement and utilities requirements of section 816.10.3. 
816.10.3. Site improvements, utilities and limitations. 
816.10.3.1. Minimum requirements. All proposed new development shall be reviewed to determine that: 
1.  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
2.  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
3.  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
816.10.3.2. Sanitary sewage facilities. All new and replacement sanitary sewage facilities, private sewage treatment plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems), and on-site waste disposal systems shall be designed in accordance with the standards for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems in Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the facilities and discharge from the facilities into flood waters, and impairment of the facilities and systems. 
816.10.3.3. Water supply facilities. All new and replacement water supply facilities shall be designed in accordance with the water well construction standards in Chapter 62-532.500, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. 
816.10.3.4. Limitations on sites in regulatory floodways. No development, including but not limited to site improvements, and land disturbing activity involving fill or regrading, shall be authorized in the regulatory floodway unless the floodway encroachment analysis required in this section demonstrates that the proposed development or land disturbing activity will not result in any increase in the base flood elevation. 
816.10.3.5. Limitations on placement of fill. Subject to the limitations of this section, fill shall be designed to be stable under conditions of flooding including rapid rise and rapid drawdown of floodwaters, prolonged inundation, and protection against flood-related erosion and scour. In addition to these requirements, if intended to support buildings and structures (Zone A only), fill shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
816.10.4. Manufactured homes. 
816.10.4.1. General. All manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed by an installer that is licensed pursuant to F.S. § 320.8249, and shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15C-1, F.A.C. and the requirements of this section. Manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes shall be placed only in an existing manufactured (mobile home) park or subdivision. 
816.10.4.2. Foundations. All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed on permanent, reinforced foundations that are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code Residential Section R322.2 and this section. 
816.10.4.3. Anchoring. All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This anchoring requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for wind resistance. 
816.10.4.4. Elevation. Manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved shall be elevated such that the bottom of the frame is at or above the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A). 
816.10.4.5. Enclosures. Enclosed areas below elevated manufactured homes shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322 for such enclosed areas. 
816.10.4.6. Utility equipment. Utility equipment that serves manufactured homes, including electric, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322. 
816.10.5. Recreational vehicles and park trailers. 
816.10.5.1. Temporary placement. Recreational vehicles and park trailers placed temporarily in flood hazard areas shall: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, which means the recreational vehicle or park model is on wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanent attachments such as additions, rooms, stairs, decks and porches. 
816.10.5.2. Permanent placement. Recreational vehicles and park trailers that do not meet the limitations in section 816.10.5.1 for temporary placement shall meet the requirements of section 816.10.4 for manufactured homes. 
816.10.6. Tanks. 
816.10.6.1. Underground tanks. Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty. 
816.10.6.2. Above-ground tanks, not elevated. Above-ground tanks that do not meet the elevation requirements of section 816.10.6.3 shall be permitted in flood hazard areas provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris. 
816.10.6.3. Above-ground tanks, elevated. Above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be attached to an elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement during conditions of the design flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area. 
816.10.6.4. Tank inlets and vents. Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be: 
1.  At or above the design flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during conditions of the design flood; and 
2.  Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood. 
816.10.7. Other development. 
816.10.7.1. General requirements for other development. All development, including man-made changes to improved or unimproved real estate for which specific provisions are not specified in this section or the Florida Building Code, shall: 
1.  Be located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
2.  Meet the limitations of section 816.10.3.4 if located in a regulated floodway; 
3.  Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood; 
4.  Be constructed of flood damage-resistant materials; and 
5.  Have mechanical, plumbing, and electrical systems above the design flood elevation, except that minimum electric service required to address life safety and electric code requirements are permitted below the design flood elevation provided it conforms to the provisions of the electrical part of building code for wet locations. 
816.10.7.2. Fences in regulated floodways. Fences in regulated floodways that have the potential to block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, shall meet the limitations of section 816.10.3.4. 
816.10.7.3. Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways in regulated floodways. Retaining walls and sidewalks and driveways that involve the placement of fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of section 816.10.3.4. 
816.10.7.4. Roads and watercourse crossings in regulated floodways. Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water crossings and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel from one side of a watercourse to the other side, that encroach into regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of section 816.10.3.4. Alteration of a watercourse that is part of a road or watercourse crossing shall meet the requirements of section 816.5.3(3). 
(Ord. No. 13-15, § 4, 8-21-13) 
Chapter 9 - LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS AND TREE CONSERVATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 04-16, § 3, adopted April 21, 2004, amended Ch. 9, in its entirety, to read as herein set out in §§ 901-905. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Ch. 9 pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 901. - Landscaping requirements. 
    901.1. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide regulations for: the installation, maintenance, protection and conservation of landscaping and landscaped open space and trees; to utilize landscaping, landscaped open space and trees as an effective means of conserving energy; to preserve open space, and to maintain and improve the aesthetic quality of the City of Miramar, thereby promoting the health and general welfare of the citizenry. In addition, it is the policy of the city commission that every effort shall be made to preserve and maintain natural vegetation within the City of Miramar, as identified in the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
    901.2. Landscape definitions. In construing the provisions of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
Accessway: A means of vehicular ingress or egress, which area shall be excluded from the perimeter required to be landscaped pursuant to this Code. However, this definition does not apply to single-family driveways. 
Area at breast height (ABH): The area in square inches at breast height (four and one-half feet above ground level) of a tree according to the formula where "r" is the radius of the tree in inches at breast height diameter. 
Bond: Security in a form acceptable to and payable to the City of Miramar in an amount equal to the fair market value of the replacement tree(s) to be relocated or whose dripline may be encroached upon, and given by the applicant as guarantee of replacement for a period of the community development department each year and based upon published trade wholesale price lists with the appropriate multiplier representing maintenance, installation, warranty and other costs factored in. 
Bufferyard: An area of landscaping and open space around the perimeter of a development parcel or an area adjacent to a parking lot which is used to screen differing land uses from each other. 
Building footprint: The portion of the lot, parcel or plot upon which buildings are to be place. 
Building pad: The building footprint plus the five-foot distance from each of its sides. 
Caliper: Diameter of a dicot or conifer tree trunk as measured at the height as follows: six inches above the ground on trees up to four inches in caliper; 12 inches above the ground for larger trees; caliper of a monocot is the diameter as measured one foot above the ground line. 
Clear trunk: The point above the rootball along the vertical trunk or trunks of a tree at which lateral branching or fronds begin. 
Common area: Area under common ownership of a subdivision (e.g. recreation area, open space) excluding rights-of-way. 
Conifer: Cone bearing seed plant. 
Crown thinning: The thinning of mature shade tree crowns for the purpose of improving light infiltration or the reduction of wind resistance. Not more than one quarter of the crown may be removed in any given year (ANSI A-300, 5.3.1.4), and one-half of the foliage shall remain evenly distributed in the lower two-thirds of the crown (ANSI A-300, 5.3.1.5). 
Diameter at breast height (DBH): The measurement of a tree's trunk diameter in inches at breast height (four and one-half) feet above ground level). For trees with less than four and one-half feet of clear trunk, diameter shall be of the largest leader measured four and one-half feet above ground level. For multi-trunk trees it shall be the sum of the diameter of the individual trunks measured four and one-half feet above ground level. 
Designated for conservation: Trees which have been determined for conservation by resolution of the City Commission of Miramar as shown on the approved tree permit or areas within Miramar which have been determined by Broward County or the City of Miramar as subject to conservation and as stated specifically within the tree permit as defined herein. 
Dicotyledonous (Dicot) tree: A tree having a woody stem and branches and leaves with net venation and having a separate, distinct outer bark which can be peeled from the tree. 
Dripline: The natural outside end of the branches of a tree projected vertically to the ground. 
Dripline encroachment: Any activity that has the effect of causing soil compaction, injury to lower limbs, grade change, contamination of soil, or damage to the root system. Specifically, this definition shall include acts such as parking of vehicles, use of heavy earth moving or grading equipment, placement of construction materials, excavation and filling, trenching and the exposure of paints, oils or chemicals within a tree's dripline. Specifically excluded from this definition are routine maintenance activities such as mowing or walking within the tree's dripline. 
Dripline encroachment plan: This plan shall be presented as part of the tree permit and shall be required for all trees whose dripline is planned to be encroached upon by any construction, excavation, fill or other activities associated with the development of the site. It shall include: (i) designation of each tree subject to any dripline encroachment, (ii) the reasons for the encroachment, (iii) detailed description of the proposed efforts to protect the tree from damage due to the encroachment, and (iv) a plan to ensure it survivability per Builder's Manual of Department of Agriculture. 
Dumpster: A refuse container of one cubic yard or larger. 
Equivalent replacement: The replacement of a removed or damaged tree to compensate for that tree's removal or its damage either with one tree the same diameter or a combination of smaller trees that will equal that removed tree's DBH as defined herein. The minimums established in the landscape code of the City of Miramar for tree planting may not count toward the equivalent replacement amount established here. The replacement species shall be trees of similar species to those removed as approved by the community development department. 
Equivalent value: An amount of money, which reflects the fair market value of the required replacement trees. The current market price of replacement trees shall be established by the community development department annually. 
Excessive lifting/overlifting: The pruning of lower branches of a tree so that the middle one-third of the overall height of the tree contains less than 50 percent of the foliage. 
Facer plant: A low shrub or groundcover used in front of a hedge or taller plant grouping. 
Gray wood: The portion of the palm trunk which is mature, hard wood measured from the top of the rootball to the base of the new, green, soft, terminal growth or fronds. 
Groundcover: Plant material which normally reaches a maximum height of not more than 18 inches. 
Hedge: An evenly spaced planting of shrubs to form a compact, dense, visually opaque living barrier or screen. Plantings designated or required as "hedges" must consist of plants spaced so that they will be tip to tip within six months of the time of planting. 
Historic tree: A tree which has been determined by the city commission to be of notable historic interest because of its age, type, size or historic association and has been so designated as part of the official records of the city. 
Irrigation: The supply of water to landscaped areas by an automatic sprinkler system. 
Land clearing: The indiscriminate removal of trees, shrubs and/or undergrowth by stripping or any other process, with the intention of preparing real property for non-agricultural development purposes. This definition shall not include: the selective removal of non-native tree and shrub species when the soil is left relatively undisturbed; removal of dead or nuisance trees; or normal mowing operations. 
Landscape island: A 16-foot long curbed greenspace of varying width within a parking lot for the purpose of accommodating a shade tree to ameliorate the temperature in the parking lot. Islands created to accommodate fire hydrants or related utilities may not be counted towards the landscape island requirement unless they are the 16-foot in width. 
Landscape manual: Document prepared by the community development department pursuant to this section of the Land Development Code, which provides an illustrative interpretation of landscape standards and a suggested guide for landscaping in accordance with the above standards. 
Landscaping material: Any of the following or a combination thereof such as, but not limited to: Grass, ground cover, shrubs, vines, hedges, trees or palms; other materials such as mulch, rocks, pebbles, but not including paving. 
Large shrub: A shrub that exhibits a mature height of ten feet or more, or small tree with too many stems to qualify as a small tree as defined in this code section. Large shrubs may be utilized in lieu of small trees to satisfy the small/ornamental tree requirement provided that they are a minimum of eight feet in height at the time of planting. 
Map of environmentally sensitive lands: Map, prepared by the community development department that identifies areas of native vegetation within the City of Miramar. 
Monocotyledonous (Monocot) tree: A tree having fronds with parallel venation and no true woody bark. 
Mulch: An organic material that does not contain arsenic products, such as wood chips, pine straw or bark placed on the soil to reduce evaporation, prevent erosion, control weeds, enrich the soil and lower soil temperature. 
Native tree: Tree of a species approved by the community development department or identified as native to this area by the Association of Florida Native Nurseries as may be amended from time to time, and incorporated herein by reference. 
Natural area: An area identified on an approved site plan containing natural vegetation which will remain undisturbed when the property is fully developed. 
Nuisance plants: Certain non-native trees, often termed exotic, specifically Schinus terebinthifolius (Brazilian Pepper and Florida Holly), Metopium toxiferum (Poison Wood), Melaleuca quinquenervia (Punk Tree, Cajeput or Paper Bark), Casuarina spp. (Australian Pine, all specie), Brassaia actinophylla (Schefflera), Acacia auriculaeformis (Earleaf Acacia), Bischofia javanica (Bishopwood), ) and Ricinus communis (Castor Bean). 
Ornamental tree: See "Small tree." 
Optional cash payment: Fee equal to the fair market value of the required replacement tree(s) which may be paid by the applicant after determination from the community development department that replacement of trees on-site or off-site is not feasible. 
Palm: A monocot tree which normally attains an overall height of at least 20 feet. 
Planned residential development: Single-family or Multi-family home development proposals consisting of three or more homes. 
Plant: An organism of the vegetable kingdom having cellulose cell walls, growing by synthesis of inorganic substances, and lacking the power of locomotion. 
Planting soil: Planting soil is defined as 50 percent sand and 50 percent organic material with a pH between 6.5 and 7.0. 
Protected tree: A tree which has been determined by resolution of the city commission to be of high value because of its type, size or other criteria and which has been so designated as part of the official records of the city. 
Prune: The removal of dead, dying, diseased, weak or objectionable branches in a manner consistent with the National Arborist Association standards as incorporated herein, and as may be amended from time to time. 
Quality of plants: Plants installed pursuant to this chapter shall conform with or exceed the minimum standards for Florida # 1 as provided in the current edition of "Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants" prepared by the state of Florida Department of Agricultural and Consumer Services. 
Retention area: An area designed and used for the temporary or permanent storage of stormwater runoff, which may be either dry or wet retention. 
Rootball: The earthen ball encompassing the root system of a tree or plant. 
Setback and yard areas: The front, side and rear areas or yards as established and required under this chapter and within the zoning district requirements applicable thereto. 
Shade tree: A dicot or conifer tree, usually with one vertical stem or main trunk which naturally develops a more or less distinct and elevated crown and provides at maturity a minimum shade crown of 35 feet in diameter. 
Shaping or shearing: The illegal practice of routinely making pruning end cuts on tree branches of one inch diameter or less for the purpose of controlling the size or shape of the tree canopy. 
Shrub: A bushy, woody plant, usually with several permanent stems, and usually not over ten feet in height at its maturity. 
Small tree: Any self-supporting wood perennial plant which at maturity normally attains an overall height between ten to 25 feet. Trees with a multiple trunk growth characteristic shall have no more than three main trunks. These trees along with tall shrubs shall provide the mid-level landscaping within the specified height range. 
Specimen tree: Any dicot tree which has a diameter at breast height (DBH) of 18 inches or greater, and any monocot tree which is 18 inches or greater DBH, and is also 35 feet or greater in height. Specimen trees must be well shaped and in good health as verified through inspection by a certified forester or the City of Miramar's Landscape Inspector provided however that the following trees are not specimen trees: 
(1)  Fruit trees that are cultivated for the specific purpose of producing edible fruit, including but not limited to: mangos, avocados, or species of citrus. 
(2)  Ficus species except F. aurea, F. rubiginosa, F. jacquinifolia, and F. religiosa. 
(3)  Phoenix species and multi-trunk palms less than 15 feet in overall height. 
Storage area: Any exterior area used for the keeping of garbage or trash cans, dumpsters, newspaper containers, oil and bottled gas tanks, swimming pool equipment, air conditions and mechanical appurtenances; including outdoor storage of merchandise; i.e., lumber, etc. 
Street tree: Street trees are those shade trees listed in Table 5 of this chapter as acceptable to the City for street tree usage, and which are located in swale areas of rights-of-way. 
Swale: All unpaved portions of a right-of-way located between the edge of pavement and the property line or an open space easement located on property adjacent to the right-of-way line. 
Top soil: A medium composed of naturally occurring mineral particles and 30 percent organic matter which provides physical, chemical and biological properties necessary for plant growth. 
Trafficway: A street designed to function as a collector or higher functional classification. 
Tree: Any living, self-supporting woody perennial plant which at maturity attains a trunk diameter of at least three inches or more when measured at a point four and one-half feet above ground level and which normally attains an overall height of at least 15 feet, usually with one main stem or trunk and many branches. 
Tree abuse: Any pruning or other maintenance operations that are not in conformance with standards found in American National Standards Institute's documents A-300 and A-133. Tree abuse includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Improper pruning that reduces the height or spread of a tree that has not attained a height or spread of 30 feet, by altering the dominant stem(s) within the tree crown to such a degree as to remove the natural canopy of the tree; or 
(2)  Improper pruning that leaves stubs (hatracking) or results in a flush cut; or splitting of limb ends; or 
(3)  Peeling or stripping of bark; or the removal of bark to the extent that, if a line is drawn at any height around the circumference of the tree, over one-third of the length of the line falls on portions of the tree where bark no longer remains; or 
(4)  Using nails, climbing spikes, or hooks, except for purposes of total tree removal; or 
(5)  Destroying the natural habit of growth which causes irreparable damage and permanent disfigurement to a tree such that, even with re-growth, the tree will never regain the original characteristics of its tree species, or is a danger to the public or property; or 
(6)  Improper pruning that results in flat-cutting the top or sides of a tree, to sever the leader or leaders or to prune a tree by stubbing off mature wood (not at a growth node), or 
(7)  Exception: The removal of diseased or dead portions of a tree (such as palm fronds), the removal of an interfering, obstructing or weak branch shall not constitute tree abuse under this section. Interference with or obstruction of street lights, stop signs or traffic signals is an example of pruning which, if accomplished by ANSI A-300 and A-133, is not a violation of this section. 
(8)  Nuisance trees including the following are not exempt from tree abuse regulation: Schefflera, Melaleuca, Brazilian Pepper (Florida Holly). Australian Pine and Norflok Island Pine may be topped provided that the upper branches are progressively tipped so as to duplicate the natural form. 
Tree credit: The utilization of native dicotyledons measured at inches of caliper or native palm trees of equal size for off-site replacement trees for sites being developed. This credit only applies for a five-year period from date of planting of trees to be utilized for tree credit. This credit is for the inches at planting and is available only for off-site replacement. 
Tree permit: Consists of the application and all necessary information relating to existing trees on site and proposed installation, relocation, removal, dripline encroachment and barricading. Except for nuisance species, this permit shall not be approved prior to city approval of the underlying project. 
Tree relocation: To transplant a tree from one location to another either horizontally or vertically. 
Tree removal: To permanently remove the trunk and/or root system of a tree. 
Tree survey: A sealed survey prepared by a Florida licensed Landscape Architect or land surveyor which shows, in addition to all boundary information, the exact location, size, botanical and common name, and diameter of all trees at least three inches in diameter measured four and one-half feet above ground level within the area affected by the development except that groups of nuisance trees as defined herein may be designated as "clumps", with the predominant type shown. The tree species noted on the tree survey shall be certified by a landscape architect. The expense of the survey shall be borne by the applicant. 
Tree-for-tree replacement: Replacing a removed tree with a tree or trees with a minimum of three inches in trunk diameter at breast height and a minimum of 12 feet in height so as to equal the diameter at breast height of the removed tree(s). 
Trim: To reduce, shorten or diminish gradually a plant or parts of a plant without altering the natural shape. 
Understory: The plant life existing under a tree canopy including ferns, bushes and groundcovers. 
Undeveloped land: Land which is unimproved, in that no principal building or structure has been constructed upon it. 
Vines: Plants which normally require support to reach mature form. 
Visual foil: A physical obstruction used to separate two areas or uses which is at least 60 percent opaque. Visual foils shall be living plant material, natural or manmade construction material or any combination thereof. 
Visual screen: A physical obstruction used to separate two areas or uses which is at least 90 percent opaque. Visual screens shall be living plant material, natural or manmade construction material or any combination thereof. 
Xeriscape: A type of landscaping utilizing native plants and ground cover which minimizes the use of water, and which is detailed in the South Florida Water Management District publication, Xeriscape, Plant Guide II, incorporated herein by reference. 
    901.3. Special provisions for all zoning districts. 
901.3.1. For all site plan submittals (see Chapter 5), provide the applicable landscape data table (Tables 1a and 1b) on the landscape plan. 
901.3.2. Species limitations. 
(a)  Hurricane pruned Sabal Palms are not permitted. 
(b)  Washingtonia palms are not permitted on single family or multi-family lots. 
901.3.3. Landscape material shall be placed on all areas not covered by main and accessory structures, walks and vehicular use areas. 
(a)  Landscape material shall extend to any abutting street pavement edge and to the mean water line of any abutting canal, lake or waterway. 
(b)  Where the slope does not exceed 2:1, and the angle of repose permits, landscape material shall be used and installed in such a manner as to allow reasonable maintenance. Where existing slopes are steeper than 2:1, they shall be cut back at time of construction to result in a slope of 2:1 or less. No slope shall be changed without approval of the city engineer and water control district having jurisdiction. 
(c)  Perimeter landscaping, street trees, irrigation, and sod, at a minimum, is required for all demolition projects in the city. All unbuilt parcels and outparcels of retail or office projects must be treated with such landscaping prior to issuance of the first certificate of occupancy (C.O.) on the site or within 30 days of a completed demolition on land cleared for retail or office development. Retail and office outparcels which are not anticipated to be developed within one year may be sodded with Bahia sod without irrigation. 
901.3.4. No landscaped area shall be constructed with more than ten percent of the total area of gravel, stone, concrete, asphalt, or other similar material, excepting necessary walks and vehicular use areas. 
901.3.5. The community development department may grant special written permission to allow the planting of trees or shrubs less than the required sizes outlined in this section under the circumstances listed below upon reception of a written request from the Landscape Architect of Record. Special Written Permissions may be granted if quality plants, such as Florida Department of Agriculture "Florida Fancy" grade, are used; or if a greater number of plants than the minimum number required by the ordinance are planted. However, the increased number of trees that may be required shall not exceed 25 percent of those otherwise required by this chapter, and all planting changes are subject to the following limitations. 
(a)  No such permitted small (ornamental) tree shall be less than six feet in height, 
(b)  Nor shall any permitted spreading shrub be less than 12 inches in height by 18 inches in width at the time of planting. 
(c)  Written approval from the landscape inspector for such deviation shall be obtained prior to the planting of such trees and/or shrubs. 
901.3.6. In all districts active recreation play courts must be screened on all sides visible from off site with a contiguous hedge at least two feet in height at time of planting and three feet in one year. Such plantings shall be outside the fence enclosure (where one exists) or a minimum of six feet off the court outside edge. 
901.3.7. Common areas within residential zoning districts, such as amenity centers, project entries, and miscellaneous open spaces including but not limited to tot lots and recreation areas, shall have a minimum of one tree and 20 shrubs for each 2,000 square feet of site area or portion thereof, not utilized for structures or vehicular use areas. 
    901.3.8. Common areas within. 
901.3.8. All ground-mounted mechanical equipment, storage areas, walls, fences, and common trash receptacles shall be screened from view using trees, shrubs, and/or hedges in addition to the common area requirement noted above. 
901.3.9. Waiver of requirements. In accordance with Section 506.3, a development waiver from one or more requirements of this chapter may be requested from the community development director. Waivers for trees will require the utilization of one or more of the alternate planting solutions found in Section 901.7. 
    901.4. Minimum landscape requirements for all zoning districts. Refer to Tables 1a, 1b, 2, 3, and 4. 
901.4.1. Pedestrian Landscape Zones along building facades. 
(a)  Principal buildings in all multi-family, business, and Planned Industrial zoning districts shall contain a pedestrian landscape zone along the full length of each facade that fronts parking or other vehicular use areas (truck courts not included). The depth of the zone and degree to which it is landscaped shall be determined by the building height in business and office zoning districts. The depth of the pedestrian zone for PID and multi-family zoning districts is fixed at ten feet in width for landscaping, exclusive of any sidewalks parallel to the building. 
(b)  The width of pedestrian landscape zone for retail and office zoning districts shall be 50 percent of the height of the building or ten feet, whichever is greater. Height for this purpose shall be measured to the top of a parapet wall or one-half the roof height for a mansard or pitched roof. The maximum required pedestrian landscape zone width is 20 feet. 
(c)  Paved areas parallel to the building and adjacent to the pedestrian landscape zone shall be not less than six feet in width, and may be located abutting the building only in those locations that are under arcades. 
(d)  One shade tree (or group of three palms, or one palm tree that qualifies for 1:1 usage) is required for every 60 lineal feet of the pedestrian zone along the frontage and sides that front public parking. These trees can be grouped where appropriate. A minimum of ten shrubs and 30 ground cover plants shall also be planted for every 40 feet feet of facade length. If palm trees are used in the pedestrian zone, at least 30 percent of them must be tall enough to extend above the roof line where tree availability permits. 
(e)  Installed sizes of trees shall relate to the building height. Building heights up to 25 feet require 12-foot height trees, building heights between 26 feet and 35 feet require 14 foot height trees, and buildings over 35 feet high require 16 feet height trees. 
(f)  Pedestrian landscape zones in shopping centers shall only be broken by access points from pedestrian spines or 15 feet widths centered on the drive aisles if they are perpendicular to the building, however, pedestrian landscape zone square footage may be reduced by up to 30 percent by substituting additional landscape islands on a square foot for square foot basis. Wider access points for shopping center anchors may be approved administratively by the community development director. 
(g)  Dicot trees that mature at 35 feet or taller located in the pedestrian landscape zone may be planted no closer to the building than eight and one-half feet for building heights more than 35 feet without written permission from the landscape inspector who will make species dependant decisions. 
    901.5. Accessway landscaping. The intent of this section is to provide an enriched landscape at the public entrances to non residential projects including industrial, office, and retail projects. The street tree requirement may be combined with the accessway planting requirements in the entryways to provide well integrated design solutions. The following requirements are in lieu of the perimeter bufferyard requirement of three trees per 40 lineal feet with at least one being a shade tree, and a continuous hedge. 
901.5.1. Accessway zone: The accessway zone extends from the paving edge of the entry drive (not radius) for a distance equal to half the right-of-way width of the roadway on both sides of the entry. The zone also extends perpendicularly 25 feet from the right-of-way of the adjacent roadway along the entry drive and includes medians where provided. A minimum zone length of 40 feet per side is required for rights-of-way of less than 80 feet wide. 
901.5.2. Accessways affected: All accessways designed for public entry are included. Service drives used exclusively for service access are exempted from this regulation 
901.5.3. Planting requirements: The accessway zone requires two shade trees and four small trees per 40-foot section of the zone. The use of premium (1:1) palms is encouraged. Large shrubs may be substituted for the small tree requirement in the accessway zones. Entryway medians require three trees, as well shrubs or groundcovers which cover the entire zone. A minimum ten-foot wide planting bed containing low shrubs and/or ground cover must also be provided fronting the taller plantings in the accessway zone, and must extend a minimum of five feet beyond the small tree/large shrub mass. Alternate design schemes that meet the intent of this section may be approved at the discretion of the community development director. 
    901.6. Street trees. 
901.6.1. Street trees shall be shade trees, and are required at the time of road construction or at the time of infill development where the streets are pre-existing, regardless of whether the roads are public or private, and placed in rights-of-way by the developer or builder prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and maintained in accordance with this article. On roadways that contain medians, the street tree requirement includes trees, sod, and irrigation in the median. In those situations where there are different owners on opposite sides of the street, the first applicant to apply for a permit shall contribute one-half of the cost of the median plantings and irrigation to the city's tree trust account. 
(a)  Variety and specie shall be according to the recommended list maintained by the community development department, or as approved. 
(b)  Minimum size shall be in accordance with the standards set forth in this article for the zoning of the project for which the trees are required. 
901.6.2. One tree shall be required for every 30 feet of street frontage and shall be a shade tree selected from the approved street tree list (Table 5). Street trees are also required at one tree per each 30 feet of median, where medians exist. The cost of trees, irrigation, and sod in medians is to be borne equally by both abutting rights-of-way property owners where the abutting properties are under different ownership. The first entity per median affected by this requirement shall make a contribution to the city's tree trust fund equal to the dollar value of the required work in lieu of performing the work. 
901.6.3. Accessways, permitted in accordance with the Land Development Code from the public right-of-way through all such landscaping, shall be permitted to access the parking or other vehicular use areas. Such accessways, and single-family driveways, may be subtracted from the lineal dimensions used to determine the number of trees required. 
901.6.4. In all zoning districts, with the exception of the Miramar Scenic Corridor where the requirement is integrated into the corridor plan, street trees are required in addition to all other landscaping requirements and shall be a minimum of 12 feet overall height with a spread of six feet and a minimum of four and one-half feet clear trunk immediately after installation. No dicot street trees shall be located closer than 12 feet from street lights, no palms may be closer than seven feet. The spacing of trees from electric utility lines must follow those guidelines established by Florida Power and Light publication "Right Tree, Right Place, available from the city clerk's office. Trees shall be planted no further apart than 60-foot intervals and no closer than 18 feet apart. 
901.6.5. All street trees are to be placed in a location in accordance with the requirements of the city engineer in order to accommodate location of utilities and street widening and will require the use of root barriers to protect the sidewalk and utilities from root damage or whenever trees are located within three feet from a paving edge. The root barrier shall be installed per manufacturer's recommendations. 
901.6.6. If insufficient rights-of-way exists or insufficient safe clear recovery zones exist for street tree installation, these requirements may be handled with a waiver from the community development director as provided for in Section 506.3. This will require that one or more of the options provided in Section 901.7 be utilized. This waiver process may also be utilized for on site trees where deemed appropriate by the community development director. 
901.6.7. In accordance with subsection 506.3, a development waiver from these street tree requirements may be requested. As part of any such request, the applicant shall provide an alternative consisting of one or more of the following: 
(a)  Utilize fewer but larger trees, based upon an equivalent dollar value or canopy coverage or equivalent caliper (or combination thereof), at the community development director's discretion; or 
(b)  Donate an equivalent dollar value for the trees not planted to the city's tree trust fund for the landscaping of public property in the City of Miramar, which equivalent value shall include the cost of the trees and installation. This value is established at $300.00 for two caliper inches as amended from time to time; or 
(c)  Donate an equivalent number of trees to be installed on public property in the city of Miramar, which equivalent value shall include the trees and cost of installation. 
901.6.8. The community development department may grant an extension of time for the planting of street trees which are required with the construction of a roadway if such trees would be disrupted or destroyed by construction of a future phase of the same roadway. This extension may only be granted if it is determined that the future phase of construction will not occur more than three years in the future. The responsible party shall be required to post a bond in an amount equal to 125 percent of the costs of purchase and installation of landscaping required pursuant to this section as security for the required plantings. The responsible party shall provide a reasonable timeframe for the future phases of road construction and the installation of required street trees. 
The required plantings shall be installed as part of the future road construction. The trees which shall be required at the time of planting shall be based on the requirements which were in effect at the time of the original postponement plus an adjustment in the size or number of trees planted to account for the natural growth which would have occurred had the trees been planted at the time originally required. Upon reasonable notice, the community development department may require the responsible party to install all required landscaping if it is determined that the additional phases of road construction will be significantly postponed or not completed. 
    901.7. Miramar Parkway Scenic Corridor Landscape Standards. The following standards shall apply to the landscape easement. Refer to Section 812 for corridor width standards. Landscape plans shall be prepared by a State of Florida registered landscape architect and shall be signed and sealed. The requirements of this section shall be in lieu of the required front perimeter buffer and Miramar Parkway street tree requirements. 
901.7.1. Earth berm standards: Earth berms shall be employed to the extent possible within the landscape easement. In no instances shall less than 75 percent of the lineal frontage of the landscape easement along Miramar Parkway be devoted to berming. 
For frontages west of I-75, the minimum height of the low point at the center of all berms shall be four feet above the paving edge adjacent to the berm area on the public side of the berm; the minimum height of the berm top shall be at least seven feet measured likewise. Berms shall be smooth, transitional, and large in scale. 
For frontages east of I-75, the minimum height of the low point at the center of all berms shall be two and one-half feet as measured from the adjacent paving edge on the public side, and a minimum five one-half feet to the top. Berms shall be smooth, transitional, and large in scale. 
For frontages where master drainage plans preceded the creation of the scenic corridor, the east of I-75 berm requirement and planting requirements shall substitute for the front perimeter buffer and street tree requirement on individual building sites or lots. Under no circumstances shall the toe of the berm on the private sector side of the corridor extend more than 52 feet from the ultimate Miramar Parkway paving edge. 
901.7.2. Minimum Planting Requirements. Refer to Table 6. 
901.7.3. Landscape treatment of the ground. The ground within the landscape easement not used for trees, shrubs, or other landscape elements shall receive appropriate landscape treatment in the form of one or more of the following: 
(a)  Ground cover. Ground cover may be used within planting beds around trees and shrubs. Ground cover shall provide a minimum of 75 percent coverage immediately upon planting and 100 percent coverage within one growing season after planting. 
(b)  Mulch. Mulch may be used within planting beds in conjunction with ground cover. Mulch shall be renewed and maintained as required to maintain a three-inch depth at the time of final inspection. Mulch around tree root balls not planted in a planting area shall be three inches deep at the perimeter of the root ball. See Figures 1 and 2 at the end of the chapter. 
(c)  Grass. Areas within the landscape easement not used for trees, shrubs, ground cover, mulch, or other landscape elements shall be planted with solid sod of St. Augustine Floratam or Palmetto and shall be irrigated. 
901.7.4. General standards for planting and maintenance. The following standards shall be the minimum requirements for the installation and maintenance of all landscaping within the landscape easement: 
(a)  Quality of plants. Plants installed pursuant to this section shall conform with, or exceed, the minimum standards for Florida Number 1 as provided in the most current edition of "Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants," prepared by the State of Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services. 
(b)  Sabal Palms. Hurricane pruning of Sabal palms is prohibited. No hurricane pruned sabal palms will be accepted for new installations. 
(c)  Continuing maintenance. The property owner, homeowner's association or the owner's successors in interest, assignees or agents, shall be jointly and severally responsible for maintaining all landscaping in the easements in good condition and in a manner that presents a healthy, neat and orderly appearance. 
(d)  Irrigation required. All landscaped areas, including adjacent rights-of-way and street medians where they exist, shall be provided with an automatically operating underground irrigation system. The irrigation system must be designed to have a minimum of 100 percent coverage, with 50 percent minimum overlap in grass and groundcover areas and 50 percent minimum overlap. 
(e)  Plant Palette west of Interstate 75. A signature planting design scheme has been established for the Miramar Parkway corridor located west of I-75. Copies may be obtained from the community development department and the species are listed on Table 6. 
(f)  Prohibited plant species. The plant species listed as nuisance plants in the landscaping standards of this Code shall not be planted in the Scenic Corridor or other location in the City of Miramar. 
901.7.5. Curbing or wheel stops required. 
(a)  Where the landscape easement abuts onsite vehicular use areas such as traffic lanes, the landscape easement shall be separated from the traffic lanes by continuous concrete curbing with an 18-inch depth below grade. Extruded curbing installed on top of the paving is prohibited. 
(b)  Where the landscape easement abuts onsite parking spaces, the landscape easement shall be separated from the parking spaces by anchored, concrete wheel stops or non-mountable, reinforced concrete curbing. 
    901.8. Parking lots: Non-residential parking lot landscaping shall be installed in landscaped areas designed and arranged for the purposes of controlling traffic, providing shade, screening unnecessary views into and within the vehicular use areas, and separating the parking circulation and service areas. Ten-foot wide landscaped parking bay dividers are required every third bay for all parking lots containing 300 or more cars, and may be provided to help meet the 15 percent interior parking lot green space requirement for smaller parking lots. However, if trees are planted in the divider to meet the tree requirement, the bottom of the landscape divider shall be not less than six inches below the adjacent paving edge. 
901.8.1. Minimum interior landscaped area: Fifteen percent of the total paved vehicular use area, not including truck yards or entry/exit drives must be landscaped green space. Credit for landscaped green space located adjacent to the parking lot and not counted towards the minimum requirement for plot or perimeter bufferyards may be granted for the interior parking lot landscaped area requirement for small parking lots consisting of one double loaded drive aisle or less. 
901.8.2. Minimum requirements: 
(a)  Required shade trees in parking lots must be planted in landscape islands which are a minimum of 12 feet wide, and 16 feet in depth as measured from back of curb to back of curb, except where they are located contiguous with a perimeter buffer or landscaped parking bay divider, in which case they may be ten feet in width as measured back of curb to back of curb. 
(b)  No landscaped area shall have any dimension less than five feet with the exception of trees planted in paved areas with tree grates. 
(c)  Landscape islands shall be as specified below and located at the ends of all parking rows and interspersed within the rows as required. Islands directly abutting building facades may have an average spacing of one every ten spaces provided no two islands are more than 16 parking spaces apart. Additionally, islands are not required in truck yards even if they are converted to car parking use. Flexibility in the spacing of interior landscape islands is permitted in retail centers to facilitate "view corridors" to anchor tenant's pedestrian entries, provided the total required interior island plant count is provided and the spacing of shade trees to frame the view is not more than 45 feet. Tree islands are required to be a maximum of ten parking spaces apart. See (d) below for islands containing utility or fire connections. 
(d)  Each landscape island shall contain at least one tree in the outer half of the landscape island. Islands created to accommodate utilities and fire safety related items such as fire hydrants, siamese connections, and six-inch or larger double check valves must be 16 feet wide from back of curb to back of curb, and the water line to the appurtenance must be routed immediately behind the curb to accommodate the tree planting. 
(e)  A minimum of 75 percent of trees installed in parking islands or landscaped parking bay dividers shall be shade trees. 
(f)  Islands shall be excavated to 36 inches, and filled with clean fill and topsoil at least to the top of the curb. Manipulation of the grade behind the curbing to create small scale mounding is encouraged. 
(g)  Islands to be protected by continuous curbing type "D" or "F." 
(h)  Minimum clearance between trees and light poles is 15 feet for shade trees, and seven and one-half feet for small trees and palms. Light poles may be located on cross points of head to head parking. 
    901.9. Other vehicular use areas: All yard areas and areas used for the display or parking of any and all types of vehicles or equipment, whether such vehicles or equipment are self-propelled or not, and all land upon which vehicles traverse the property as a function of the primary use, heretofore referred to as "other vehicle uses," including but not limited to, activities of a drive-in nature, such as service stations, grocery and dairy stores, banks, restaurants, new and used car lots, and the like, shall conform to the minimum landscaping requirements herein provided, including areas used for parking or other vehicular uses and parking areas serving residential dwellings. Streetfront vehicle display areas may limit front landscaping to 24 inches in height. 
    901.10. Temporary real estate sales structures and related parking area(s). 
901.10.1. Plot area: The plot area(s) to be landscaped shall be the area of the sales structure and associated parking area plus the following: 
(a)  Fifteen feet on the sides and rear of the proposed sales location, as measured from the side of the building or perimeter of the parking lot where the parking lot extends beyond the side of the building, and from the rear of the building. 
(b)  Twenty-five feet immediately in front of the proposed sales location if not located on a street frontage, and to the paving edge of the street if located on a street frontage. 
(c)  Minimum plot size shall be 5,000 square feet. 
901.10.2. Landscaping requirements. 
(a)  Three trees for 1,000 square feet of plot area or fraction thereof. 
(b)  One shrub for every 100 square feet of plot area or fraction thereof. 
(c)  A continuous hedge shall be provided around all vehicular use areas except at points of vehicular and pedestrian ingress and egress. 
(d)  All landscaping shall be kept in a healthy growing condition at all times. 
    901.11. Plant material and installation requirements: All required plant materials shall conform to the Grades and Standards for Florida No. 1 or better as given in Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants, (current edition) by the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services Division. 
901.11.1. Permit required: A landscape permit is required for all landscape installations including new single family homes that are not part of a planned community. No trees or other plant material may be planted in public rights-of-way (swale areas) without a permit from the city. No shrub species with a mature height that will block the clear sight zone from 30 inches in height to six feet in height will be approved in swale areas. 
901.11.2. Standards: All required trees shall be installed in accordance with the standards of ANSI A-300 and Z-133. All other elements of landscaping shall be installed so as to meet all other applicable City Code requirements. The Miramar Landscape Manual is an illustrative interpretation and guide for landscaping in accordance with the standards required (copies of the manual are available at the city clerk's office). All elements of landscaping shall be installed so as to meet all other applicable ordinances and Code requirements. Landscaped areas abutting front-end parking shall require protection from vehicular encroachment by placing curbing (type "D" or "F") or car stops at perimeter parking at least two feet from the edge of such landscaped areas. Other landscaped areas abutting curved or angular drives shall be curbed. Landscaped areas or islands shall contain clean fill and topsoil to at least the top of the curb. 
901.11.3. Dimensions: All minimum dimensions of landscape material refer to dimensions at the time of planting. 
901.11.4. Topsoil: Topsoil shall be clean and free of construction debris, weeds, rocks, noxious pests and diseases, and exhibit a pH of 6.5 to 7.0. The topsoil for planting areas shall be amended with horticulturally acceptable organic material. All soils used shall be suitable for the intended plant material. The source of the topsoil shall be known to the applicant and shall be acceptable to the city. 
(a)  The minimum planting soil depth shall be six inches for ground covers, flowers, shrubs and hedges. 
(b)  Trees shall receive 12 inches of planting soil around the root ball. 
(c)  Native topsoil on the site shall be retained on-site and used when there is sufficient quantity to cover at least some of the on-site landscaped areas. 
(d)  Clean sand shall be used to backfill arid climate palms. 
901.11.5. Use of organic mulches: A three-inch minimum thickness of approved organic mulch material, at the time of final inspection, shall be installed in all landscaped areas not covered by buildings, pavement, sod, decorative stones, preserved areas and annual flower beds. Each tree shall have a ring of organic mulch at the perimeter of the root ball. 
901.11.6. Stabilization: All trees and palms planted as trees shall be securely guyed, braced and/or staked at the time of planting until establishment. All stabilization systems shall be clearly marked (flagging, painted, etc.) to prevent hazards and shall be capable of adjusting tension so as to maintain trees in a vertical and plumb position during the staking period. An approved stabilization detail is contained in the City's Landscape Manual. Trees shall be restaked in the event of blow over or other failures of the staking and guying. The use of nails, unprotected wire, rope, or any other methods which damage the tree or palm is prohibited. Palm staking shall be in accordance with the detail provided in the City's Landscape Manual. 
901.11.7. Installation: All plants shall be installed so that the top of the root ball remains even with the soil grade. All guys and staking material should be removed when the tree is stable and established but in no case more than one year after initial planting of the tree. Stabilization shall be in accordance with ANSI A-300 and Z-133. 
901.11.8. Protection of public infrastructure: All shade trees installed within six feet of public infrastructure shall utilize a root barrier system, as approved by the city. 
901.11.9. Fertilization: All plantings shall be properly fertilized at the time of installation with at least a minimum of 25 percent organic 6-6-6 with trace elements or better fertilizer. 
901.11.10. Ground cover: Ground covers shall be planted with a minimum of 75 percent coverage, with 100 percent coverage occurring within three months of installation. 
901.11.11. Vines: Vines shall be a minimum of 30 inches in supported height immediately after planting and may be used in conjunction with fences, visual screens or walls. 
901.11.12. Native species required: Ten percent of the trees required shall be water-conserving, native plant material indigenous to South Florida. Thirty percent of shrubs required shall be installed as native plant material. 
901.11.13. Nuisance vegetation (exotics): The eradication of nuisance vegetation (exotics) existing on site is required on all sites, including abutting rights-of-way, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Privately owned natural areas shall be included in this requirement. Ficus benjamina and Ficus nitida may be used for hedge material with a five-foot separation from water lines. Ficus hedges may not be planted in utility easements. 
901.11.14. Growth of plant material: Growth of plant material at maturity shall be considered prior to planting, where future conflicts such as views, signs, overhead and underground utilities, security lighting, fire access, drainage easements and traffic circulation, might arise. Street/shade trees must be located a minimum of 15 feet from street lights, and palms and small trees located a minimum of seven and one-half feet. 
901.11.15. Small/ornamental trees: As defined herein, the minimum planting height for small/ornamental trees shall be eight feet overall planting height at time of installation. However, if a small tree is not commercially available at that height, the community development department may, prior to planting and with written permission, approve the placement of a small tree with a minimum overall planting height of six feet. Trees with a multiple trunk growth characteristic shall have no more than three main trunks. All small trees shall have a minimum of 30 inches of clear trunk at the time of planting. 
901.11.16. Palms: All palms that have significant gray wood characteristics at maturity shall have a minimum of eight eet of gray wood with the exception of Foxtail Palms which must have five feet. All other palms must have an installed height of 16 feet as measured to one-half the height of the most vertical frond. 
901.11.17. Shade trees/street trees: Only those shade trees specifically indicated as street trees (Table 5) are permitted for street tree use. 
901.11.18. Shrubs: 
(a)  Shrubs shall be considered in accordance with standards set forth in the current official "Landscape Manual" available at the community development department. shrubs classified as "spreading type" shall have a minimum height of 12 inches with a minimum spread of 24 inches, and those classified as "upright type" shall have a minimum height of 24 inches with a spread of 18 inches, when measured immediately after planting. All others must have a minimum height of 24 inches with a spread of 24 inches. 
(b)  Hedges, where required, shall be planted so as to be tip to tip within six months of planting and maintained so as to form a continuous visual screen. Shrubs used as hedges shall be Florida Department of Agriculture Grade No. 1 or better with a minimum height of 24 inches and a minimum spread of 18 inches, when measured immediately after planting and shall be a minimum of three feet in height within two years from the date of planting. Hedges shall be planted with branches touching, within six months of planting so as to create a solid screen with no visual spaces between plants at that time. Plant spacing may be adjusted according to plant sizes so long as the preceding is achieved. 
(c)  Where perimeter hedges are required and an adjacent property has an existing perimeter hedge, facer plants may be utilized in lieu of duplicating the hedge. 
901.11.19. Grass areas. Grass areas shall be sodded with a cultivar of St. Augustine grass that will survive as a permanent lawn in Broward County (assuming adequate watering and fertilizing). Sod provided must be viable, reasonably free of weeds, and capable of growth and development. In general, sod strips shall be aligned with tightly fitted joints and no overlap of butts or sides. Subgrade of lawn areas shall be reasonably free of all stones, sticks, roots and other matter prior to the placement of sod. However, grass areas on recent demolitions and developments which are phased may have outparcels seeded and hydro mulched with Bahia to meet these requirements provided that the area presents a finished appearance and complete coverage is established before a certificate of occupancy is issued. Perimeter buffers of projects must be sodded with a St. Augustine cultivar and irrigated prior to the issuance of the first building Certificate of Occupancy for the project site. Ground covers used in lieu of grass in whole or in part shall be planted in such a manner as to present a finished appearance and complete coverage within one growing season. Rural, Estate, and RS-1 zoning districts shall have a minimum of 10,000 square feet of sod and irrigation surrounding any residence. 
901.11.20. Final inspection. The landscape architect of record shall provide a certification letter to the city certifying that the landscaping was installed according to the plans and specifications before the landscape inspector makes the final inspection for all non-residential and planned community residential projects. 
    901.12. Clear sight distance. 
901.12.1. Landscaping within clear sight triangles: All proposed landscaping within clear sight triangles, as required in Section 804.8., shall provide unobstructed cross-visibility at a level between 30 inches and six feet, provided that the plantings are located so as not to create a traffic hazard, with the following exceptions: 
(a)  Trees or palms having foliage trimmed in such a manner that no foliage extends into the cross- visibility area. 
(b)  Horizontal rail fences. 
(c)  Required grass or ground covers. 
901.12.2. Measuring clear sight triangles: See Section 804.8 
    901.13. Berms: Berms, if utilized outside the scenic corridor area shall meet the following standards: 
901.13.1. Berms without hedges shall be a minimum of four feet in height and have a maximum slope of three to one. Berms shall be smooth, transitional, without awkward grade changes, and shall be both undulating and meandering. 
901.13.2. Berms with hedges shall be a minimum of three feet in height, and shall have a hedge of a minimum two feet in height at time of planting. 
901.13.3. The height of a berm shall be measured from the grade of the adjacent paving on the public side (i.e., sidewalk, or road crown). 
    901.14. Maintenance requirements: All landowners, or their agents, shall be responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping. This includes mowing and maintaining abutting rights-of-way, swales, lakes and canal banks. Landscaping shall be maintained in a good condition so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance at least equal to the original installation and shall be mowed or trimmed in a manner and at a frequency so as not to detract from the appearance of the general area. Landscaping shall be maintained to minimize property damage and public safety hazards, including removal of living, dead or decaying plant material, removal of low hanging branches and those obstructing street lighting and maintenance of clear sight distance standards. Landscaping shall be maintained in accordance with the following standards: 
901.14.1. Insects, disease, etc.: Landscaping shall be kept free of visible signs of insects and disease and appropriately irrigated and fertilized to enable landscaping to be in a healthy condition. 
901.14.2. Mulching: Three inches of clean, weed-free, approved organic mulch containing no arsenic products shall be maintained over all areas originally mulched at all times until landscaped area matures to 100 percent coverage with the exception of tree root balls which shall be mulched according to Figures 1 or 2. 
901.14.3. Turf edge trimming: All roadways, curbs and sidewalks shall be edged to prevent encroachment from the adjacent turfed areas. Line trimmers shall not be used to trim turf abutting trees or other plant material. 
901.14.4. Irrigation systems: Irrigation systems shall be maintained to eliminate water loss due to damaged, missing or improperly operating sprinkler heads, emitters, pipes and all other portions of the irrigation system and shall not be installed or operated to overspray onto roads or pedestrian walkways. All landscaped areas except preserve areas shall have an underground irrigation system designed to provide 100 percent coverage with 50 percent overlap except in residential zoning districts for lot areas beyond the required 10,000 square foot minimum sod requirement adjacent to the home. Rain sensors must be maintained in operable condition. In addition, development of properties located west of Palm Avenue may be required to connect with the city's water reuse distribution system. 
901.14.5. Control of nuisance species: All areas developed after the effective date of this ordinance shall be maintained free of nuisance species. This shall include natural areas within developed property. 
901.14.6. Replacement requirements: An owner is responsible to ensure that living material and trees which are required to be planted by the city are installed pursuant to this code and are replaced if the material or trees die or are abused following the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Preserved vegetation which dies following the issuance of the certificate of occupancy shall be replaced with equivalent living material or trees. Nuisance tree species are not required to be replaced. 
901.14.7. Removal of root systems: Removal of root systems which show evidence of destroying public or private property is required. Root barriers of appropriate depth shall be utilized in lieu of removal where upheavals do not create safety problems or structural damage to buildings. 
901.14.8. Tree abuse: Tree abuse is prohibited in the city. Abused trees shall not be counted toward fulfilling minimum landscape requirements and shall be replaced. 
901.14.9. Tree pruning: 
(a)  All developers, developer agents or contractors or their agents, and homeowners, must prune trees in accordance with standards set forth in American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A-300, and Z-133, current edition. If the pruning is tree abuse and causes tree removal, a permit for tree removal shall be required from the city. 
(b)  Any pruning performed without conformance to ANSI A-300 and Z-133 Standards shall be subject to enforcement by the city. No live palm fronds initiating above the horizontal plane, as defined in the above noted reference, may be removed. All tree pruners which provide services in Miramar shall hold a valid tree trimmers license from Broward County, and a certified arborist must be on site at all times. 
(c)  Failure to remove or properly prune a tree damaged by a natural disaster within 30 days shall be a violation. 
(d)  The Hazard Pruning Standards and the Crown Reduction Standards of ANSI A-300 and Z-133, current edition, apply to utility companies and their contractors. A penalty will be assessed in the amount of $500.00 plus the value of the tree determined to be lost as established by the methodology contained in the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers "Guide for Plant Appraisal", current edition, for each violation. 
(e)  The removal of diseased or dead portions (such as palm fronds) of a tree or the removal of an interfering, obstructing or weak branch of a tree which is a threat to public safety or to adjacent property is allowed. Pruning to reduce or eliminate interference with or obstruction of street lights, stop signs or traffic signals is an example of an allowed pruning activity, provided tree abuse does not occur. 
(f)  Crowns of mature shade trees may be thinned to allow for more light penetration and less wind resistance, however, not more than one-quarter of the growth in the crown may be removed in any given year (ANSI A-300, 5.3.1.4), and one-half of the foliage shall remain evenly distributed in the lower two-thirds of the crown (ANSI A-300, 5.3.1.5). 
(g)  Excessive lifting: Lifting may be performed to eliminate a hazard to pedestrians or to protect the tree from vehicular damage only, not for visibility to signage in lieu of crown thinning. What is regarded as excessive is species dependant, however under no circumstances may the middle one-third of the overall height of the tree contain less than 50 percent of the foliage. 
    901.15. Maintenance of swales. 
901.15.1. Maintenance responsibility: It shall be the responsibility of the adjacent property owner to maintain the swale area to the following minimum standards: 
(a)  Free of debris; and 
(b)  Grass and or weeds cut no higher than six inches and edged away from the sidewalk; and 
(c)  Shrubs shall be kept trimmed to a height not to exceed three feet and provide unrestricted visibility at driveways and street intersections; and 
(d)  Overhanging branches of trees shall be pruned to a height of 14 feet above grade for mature specimens; and 
(e)  The swale shall be kept free and clear of prohibited species, as defined in this code. 
(f)  Tree root barriers shall be installed at the sidewalk edge in those circumstances where tree roots are causing or potentially causing a trip hazard because of lifting of some portions of a public sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 3, 4-21-04) 
Sec. 902. - Designation of protected trees, specimen trees and historic trees. 
    902.1. Purpose: The city commission may designate by resolution protected trees, specimen trees, and/or historic trees as defined herein. Any tree which has been declared to be a protected tree shall not be removed unless approved by the community development department. 
(a)  When a protected tree is on a site which cannot be put to any significant use without the removal of the protected tree, removal of the protected tree will be allowed with all such conditions being imposed as are appropriate pursuant to the guidelines applying to the removal of non-protected trees and to the special status of the protected tree. 
(b)  When a protected tree is on a site to be developed or redeveloped, the owner, developer, or contractor shall take all reasonable measures to prevent damage to the tree and root system out to the natural drip line. The extent of the drip line will be based on caliper and species without respect to previous pruning activities. 
    902.2. Existing plant material credit. Where healthy plant material exists on a site and is to be retained, the community development director may adjust the application of the minimum landscaping requirements to allow credit for such plant material, if such an adjustment is consistent with and furthers the intent of this chapter. 
(a)  When allowances are given, in no case shall the quantities of existing plant materials retained be less than the quantities required in this chapter. 
(b)  In such cases, a survey shall be provided specifying the species, approximate height and caliper, as well as the location and condition of any plant material used as a basis for requesting the adjustment. As applicable, this information shall be included with a complete landscape plan submittal meeting all technical requirements. 
(c)  Any adjustment shall be based on the unique circumstances of the subject property and support the objective of preserving existing vegetation and maintaining a tree canopy. 
(d)  Every effort shall be made to design around existing, large desirable trees. Parking spaces that are lost because of saved trees and supporting root system pervious area may be counted as spaces at the discretion of the community development director, up to ten percent of the required count. 
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 3, 4-21-04) 
Sec. 903. - Tree protection and conservation. 
    903.1. Purpose. Owing to the many benefits provided by trees, it is the intent of the City to protect this valuable resource through permitting for land clearing and tree removal. While the destruction of one tree may not have a significant environmental impact, there can be a significant deterioration of the quality of life with the removal of trees. In the evaluation of a tree removal permit, priority shall be given to protected trees for the preservation or relocation, replacement, and/or payment into the tree trust fund. 
    903.2. Permit requirements. 
903.2.1. Tree permit: A tree permit shall be required prior to any person, natural or corporate, encroaching upon a tree dripline, or cutting down, destroying, removing, relocating or destructively damaging any tree or causing any tree to be encroached upon (within the tree's dripline), cut down, destroyed, removed or relocated or destructively damaged. 
903.2.2. Protected trees: Prior to the removal of any protected tree or any land clearing activity, a property owner or his designated agent shall obtain a permit from the community development department subject to the conditions of this Code. Protected vegetation includes street trees, perimeter vegetation, vegetation in parking and vehicular use areas, historical trees, any tree in a city area of particular concern, any special status category tree, and any specimen tree. 
903.2.3. Wetlands: Prior to any land clearing activity in a potential wetlands area, as designated on the City's "Floodplains and Wetlands" map of the Comprehensive Plan, a property owner shall be responsible for obtaining the necessary permits from all jurisdictional agencies in addition to the permit required by this Code. 
903.2.4. Application for permit. Application for a tree removal permit or land clearing permit shall be made to the community development department and shall include a legal description of the property and a map showing the size and location of the site where the tree removal or land clearing activities are to be conducted. The department requires the submission of a tree survey designating all trees over three inches in caliper which are proposed to be preserved, relocated, or removed. 
903.2.5. Land clearing and tree removal permit. No permit shall be issued for land clearing or tree removal unless one of the following conditions exists: 
(a)  A site plan submitted by the applicant shows that a proposed structure, permissible under all applicable laws and regulations, can be situated on the subject parcel only if specific trees are removed or relocated; or 
(b)  The tree is in such proximity to existing or proposed structures that the utility or structural integrity of such structures is materially impaired; or 
(c)  The tree materially interferes with the location, servicing or functioning of public utility lines or service, or 
(d)  The tree obstructs views of oncoming traffic or otherwise creates a substantial traffic hazard; or 
(e)  The tree is diseased, injured, or in danger of falling; or 
(f)  Any law or regulation requires removal of the tree; or 
903.2.6. Permit duration. This permit, if approved, shall be granted for a maximum of six months and shall be posted in a protected conspicuous place on the site. 
903.2.7. Sign. A sign with the minimum dimensions of two feet by three feet shall be posted along each road frontage of the site, be readable from the road, and shall state: 
TREES ON THIS SITE BEING REMOVED ACCORDING TO PERMIT NO. ____________ PURSUANT TO CITY OF MIRAMAR CODE. 
For those permits not requiring tree removal, the sign may read: 
TREES ON THIS SITE BEING PROTECTED ACCORDING TO PERMIT NO. ____________ PURSUANT TO CITY OF MIRAMAR CODE. 
903.2.8. Application fee. The city has adopted a fee schedule that establishes the permit fees associated with the implementation of this section. 
    903.3. Replacement trees. A removed tree shall be replaced with its equivalent diameter inches at breast height (DBH). The replacement tree(s) shall be a species that has shade potential and other positive values at least equal to that of the tree being removed, and replacement trees shall be a minimum of 12 feet in height and two and one-half inches in caliper when planted. The value of specimen trees shall be established by the methodology contained in The Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers "Guide for Plant Appraisal", current edition. 
903.3.1. Species diversification. For tree replacement requirements of one to five trees, a minimum of one species must be utilized. For six to ten replacement trees, a minimum of two species are required; for 11 to 20 replacement trees, a minimum of three species is required, and for more than 20 replacement trees, a minimum of five species are required. 
903.3.2. Exceptions. 
(a)  On lots to be developed for single-family or duplex, trees within the building pad or area reserved for the individual driveway leading to that unit, (excluding circular drives) shall be replaced on a caliper for caliper basis. 
(b)  Within multifamily development, trees within the building pad defined herein shall be replaced on a caliper for caliper basis. 
(c)  Within nonresidential properties, trees within the building pad shall be replaced on a caliper for caliper basis. 
903.3.3. Maintenance of relocated and replacement trees. Trees must be relocated or replaced as specified by this section within 60 days of the approval for tree removal; provided however, if the trees are to be removed to facilitate construction or development activities, said relocation or replacement must be completed prior to the issuance of certificate of occupancy on the construction, development site or phase of development, as applicable. The trees to be relocated or replaced on-site or off-site on private property must be maintained in a healthy growing condition and guaranteed for a period of at least one year. Trees to be relocated or replaced on public property must be guaranteed. The guarantee period shall end one year from the date of acceptance by city staff of any relocated or replaced trees. 
    903.4. Optional cash payment. An optional cash payment equal to the fair market value of the required replacement tree(s) paid by the applicant after approval from the community development department staff that replacement of trees on-site pursuant to this subsection is not feasible. 
    903.5. Credit for existing landscaping materials. Existing trees may be credited as provided below toward required landscaping provided they are designated for preservation on the final site plan and approved by the city. In no case shall trees located within areas required to be preserved by law be credited toward required landscaping. 
Height of Tree Credit Under 20 feet Credit for 1 required tree 20 to 40 feet Credit for 3 required trees Over 40 feet Credit for 5 required trees  
    903.6. Bond for Tree Relocation, Replacement, or Dripline Encroachment. A bond shall be held by the City of Miramar for one year to insure tree replacement in the event that tree relocation or dripline encroachment results in the death of any tree subject to a tree permit or for any tree damaged or destroyed in any pre-development or development activities such as surveying. Such bond amount shall be assessed at the fair market value of the required replacement tree(s) or for tree replacement which cannot be effected prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the underlying project. If the developer/builder desires, it may employ a landscape architect to supply revised bonding amount for city review and approval if the landscape architect determines that the trees or palms subject to relocation or dripline encroachment are unlikely to die as a result of the pre-construction or construction activities. Tree bond amounts of under $1,500.00 are to be guaranteed through a letter of guarantee rather than through a posting of a cash bond. 
    903.7. Tree trust fund. 
903.7.1. Establishment. A tree trust line item (hereinafter referred to as the Miramar Tree Preservation Account or the "trust") is hereby established as a depository for tree removal fees and penalty money. Such money shall be utilized solely for the purpose of funding tree replacement on public property within the City of Miramar. 
903.7.2. Term of existence. The Miramar Tree Preservation Account shall be self-perpetuating from year to year unless specifically terminated by the city commission. 
903.7.3. Trust assets. All money received pursuant to the provisions of this section from public or private concerns shall be placed in trust for the use and benefit of the City of Miramar and its successors and assigns in interest. 
903.7.4. Trust administration. Trust funds shall be expended, utilized and disbursed only for the purpose designated by the budget of the City of Miramar to administer the tree preservation program pursuant to this code. 
903.7.5. Disbursal of assets. Trust funds shall be used to obtain trees, landscaping, sprinkler systems and any other items or materials necessary and proper for the preservation, maintenance, relocation or restoration of tree ecosystems, on any public land in the City of Miramar. This money may also be utilized to engage support elements, such as landscape architects and may also be used to cover the expense of relocation of trees in the City of Miramar. 
    903.8. Standards for tree protection during development. The following are minimum standards necessary to protect trees designated for preservation from damage during development activities after the tree permit has been approved. 
903.8.1. Protection of existing trees. Prior to any clearing of improved, vacant or unimproved land, unless specifically exempted from this section (including land designated for conservation by Broward County or the City of Miramar), existing trees shall have barriers constructed around them by the developer to prevent physical damage from heavy equipment and other activities incidental to development. Required barriers shall be subject to inspection by the city as a condition of permit approval and prior to any such clearing. 
(a)  Barriers or barricades. The barriers or barricades shall be: 
1.  Large enough to include the entire area inside the outer edge or dripline of the tree; and 
2.  Conspicuous enough and high enough to be seen easily by operators of trucks and other equipment; and 
3.  Constructed of sturdy, orange, plastic barricading as approved by the community development director based on professional judgment that the intent of this provision will be met. 
4.  Constructed as a condition of the issuance of any land clearing, building or other development permit and prior to any construction or other development activities and required to remain in place throughout the construction period. Barriers or barricades shall be completely removed from the site at the end of the construction period (immediately prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the city), unless otherwise stipulated in the approved tree preservation plan. 
903.8.2. Clearing trees and vegetation. 
(a)  Clearing by hand. Within the dripline of trees designated for preservation, only clearing by hand is permissible, unless otherwise stipulated in the approved tree permit. 
(b)  Storage. Trees and vegetation cleared during construction or other development activities shall be stored in an area designated by the city with such area noted on the clearing and grubbing permit application. 
(c)  Removal. All trees and vegetation cleared and stored pursuant to this section shall be removed within two weeks after completion of the clearing. 
903.8.3. Other required protection of trees and understory. Developer shall protect the trees and understory plants designated for preservation in the approved tree permit from chemical poisoning, excavation and grade changes to at least the following minimum standards: 
(a)  Utility line trenches. Utility line trenches shall be routed away from trees to an area outside the dripline to the maximum extent possible. 
(b)  Grade changes. Retaining walls and dry wells shall be utilized where needed to protect trees from severe grade changes. For shallow fills, the fill material shall be gently sloped down to the level of the tree roots leaving the tree in a depression larger than the spread of its crown. 
(c)  Parking and storage on site during construction or development activities. No parking, vehicle maintenance, storage of construction materials or debris, or cleaning of equipment shall take place within areas marked for preservation specifically including, but not limited to, within the dripline of any individual trees. The developer or contractor shall establish regular parking and storage areas under the supervision of the city to facilitate compliance with the above standard. 
(d)  Encroachment. Encroachment into any barricaded area is prohibited, with the exception of activities specifically permitted by the approved tree permit, including a dripline encroachment plan as established herein. 
903.8.4. Pruning of trees and vegetation. The developer shall be permitted to cut or prune branches and roots of trees designed for preservation only under the supervision of a certified arborist. The standards for pruning as established by the American National Standards Institute (Publication ANSI A-300 and Z-133) and as outlined in the landscape manual shall be utilized in the pruning of trees within the City of Miramar. 
903.8.5. Root system protection. The root systems of trees shall be protected as follows: 
(a)  Excavation within the dripline. The community development department director may approve a dripline encroachment plan (a request to excavate within the dripline of a tree) when included as part of a tree permit. 
(b)  Standards for root protection. The city may establish additional standards for root protection consistent with this code. If roots are exposed, the developer shall provide temporary earth cover mixed with peat moss and wrapped with burlap to prevent exposed roots from drying out before permanent backfill is placed. The developer shall also water, maintain in moist condition, and otherwise temporarily support and protect the tree or root from damage until the tree or root is permanently covered with earth. 
(c)  Protection of the tree root system. The developer shall protect tree root systems from damage due to noxious materials in solution caused by runoff, or spillage during mixing and placement of construction materials, or drainage from stored materials. The developer shall also protect root systems from flooding, erosion or excessive wetting resulting from dewatering operations. 
903.8.6. Trees damaged during construction. The developer shall have trees damaged by construction repaired by a professional arborist in a manner acceptable to the city. The monetary value of the tree(s) before the damage and after the damage will be determined using the methodology established by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers "Guide For Plant Appraisal", current edition. An additional fine equal to the difference in valuation between the before and after condition using the above noted methodology will be assessed in addition to the standard violation fine which does not exceed $500.00. 
(a)  Immediate notification of city. The community development department must be notified immediately after any damage to any tree damaged by construction operations. 
(b)  Prompt repair. Such repairs as necessary shall be made promptly after damage occurs to prevent progressive deteriorations of damaged trees. 
(c)  Removal and replacement of damaged trees. The developer shall remove trees which are determined by the community development department to be incapable of restoration to normal growth pattern. Such trees shall be subject to replacement under the provisions of this code. 
(d)  Any tree designated for preservation which is damaged by development activities in violation of this code (not including bonded trees in a dripline encroachment plan) and which dies as a result of this damage shall be subject to the tree replacement or removal requirements contained herein. 
903.8.7. Exemptions. 
(a)  Damaged trees. Trees destructively damaged or destroyed by an act of God or an act of war are exempt from this code. 
(b)  Licensed plant and tree nurseries. Licensed plant and/or tree nurseries shall be exempt from the terms and provisions of this article only in relation to those trees planted and growing on site for wholesale and/or retail sale purposes in the ordinary course of said licensee's business. 
(c)  Governmental and private nurseries. All governmental and private nurseries, with respect to trees which have been planted and are growing for future relocation, are exempt from this code. 
(d)  Emergency conditions. During emergency conditions caused by a hurricane or other disaster, or to protect the public safety, the provisions of this section may be suspended by direction of the city manager. 
(e)  Nuisance trees. Nuisance trees as defined herein are exempt from the provisions of this code except for pruning standards and the requirement to obtain a permit prior to their removal. However, no fee shall be assessed for this removal permit. 
(f)  Small trees. Trees less than three inches in caliper. 
(g)  Planted trees. Trees planted on vacant residential property may be relocated but not subjected to dripline encroachment. A relocation permit is required for all trees with a DBH of three inches or larger. All tree removal shall require a permit pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 3, 4-21-04) 
Sec. 904. - Administration, enforcement, violations, and penalties. 
    904.1. Permits. Landscape permits are required for all landscaping done in the City of Miramar with the exception of existing single family homes that are not part of a planned community on individual lots. All planned residential developments must obtain a landscape permit for the individual lots, and a separate landscape permit for the common areas including the street trees. All tree removals for trees three inches or larger in caliper, regardless of location, require a permit. No tree removal permit fee will be required for those species verified as nuisance trees by the city's landscape inspector. 
    904.2. Enforcement. City staff enforces the terms of this chapter by making necessary inspections. This includes promptly stopping any work attempted to be done without, or contrary to, any development approval required under this code, and ensuring that any work not performed in accordance with a development approval is corrected to comply. 
    904.3. Violation and penalties. Each violation of this code, or any of its subsections, is deemed a separate and distinct infraction of the Land Development Code. Each violation of this code shall be punishable by a fine of no more than $500.00 plus the cost of replacement of the trees removed from the site, the costs associated with investigation and prosecution, together with the cost of replacement tree(s) as established in Section 903. The removal, relocation or destruction, including dripline encroachment, of each tree for which a tree permit is required in violation of this code shall constitute a separate offense under this code. Each tree to be protected may be the subject of individual enforcement. The owner of any property where a tree or trees have been cut down, destroyed, removed, relocated or destructively damaged shall be held strictly liable for a violation of this code unless it can be proven that the damage was caused by: 
(a)  An act of God; 
(b)  An act of war; 
(c)  Development activities on the property pursuant to an approved tree permit; or 
(d)  The owner alleges that the damage was caused by vandals or trespassers and the owner of the property has filed a police report for the incident and had taken reasonable security measures to prevent unauthorized access to the property. 
    904.4. Stop-work order. The city reserves the right to issue an order to cease and desist any work being performed in violation of this chapter or any permit conditions established under this code. Upon notice of such violation, no further work shall take place until appropriate remedial action is instituted, as determined by the city. 
    904.5. Withholding or revocation of city permits. Failure of any party to follow the procedures as required by this code shall constitute grounds for withholding or revoking development approval(s), building permits, occupancy permits or any other city approvals necessary to continue development. Such extraordinary sanctions, however, shall be instituted immediately upon the direction of the city manager and with the approval of the city commission at its next regular or special meeting. This approval shall be considered a public hearing and be subject to the applicable procedural requirements. All interested parties shall have notice and an opportunity to be heard and to be represented by legal counsel. 
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 3, 4-21-04) 
[Sec. 905. - Landscape Tables.] 
TABLE 1a 
NON-RESIDENTIAL LANDSCAPE DATA TABLE 
CODE REQUIREMENTSLineal

Feet (l.f.) 

or Square 

Feet (s.f.)Amount or

% of 

Plantings 

RequiredAmount or

% of 

Plantings 

ProvidedShade

Trees 

Required [3]Shade

Trees 

ProvidedNative

Trees 

Required 

10% [4]Native

Tree 

Species 

Provided Native

Shrubs 

Required 

30% [4]Native

Shrubs 

ProvidedPlot [1] s.f. Trees 1/1,000 s.f. Shrubs 5/1,000 s.f. North Bufferyard [2] [7] l.f. Trees 3/40 l.f. Shrubs continuous East Bufferyard [2] [7] l.f. Trees 3/40 l.f. Shrubs continuous South Bufferyard [2] [7] l.f. Trees 3/40 l.f. Shrubs continuous West Bufferyard [2] [7] l.f. Trees 3/40 l.f. Shrubs continuous Veh. Use Area, Excl. Truck Courts s.f. 15% % 75% Accessway Plantings [8] Street Trees [6] l.f. Pedestrian Zone Plantings [9] l.f. Monument Sign Plantings [10] s.f. 1. PID requirement is 1/3,000 sf. 

2. Omit accessway zones from calculations. Do not duplicate bufferyard length at corners. 

3. 1 shade and 2 ornamental trees per 40 ft. section for buffer yard, 1 per landscape island, parking lots. 

4. Total of all categories must comply, not individual categories. 

5. A single, double loaded parking bay or less may include adjacent green spaces provided that the space is not already counted towards other category minimums. 

6. Accessways may be deducted from lineal dimension. 

7. 2 shade trees per 40 l.f. in PID for buffers adjacent to non-industrial uses, 1/40 for interior; all shade trees 

8. See code section 901.5, Crow is for one accessway, add rows for each additional accessway. 

9. See code section 901.4 

10. See code section 1005.5  
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 3, 4-21-04) 
TABLE 1b 
RESIDENTIAL LANDSCAPE DATA TABLE 
CODE REQUIREMENTS Lineal Feet (l.f.) or

Square Feet (s.f.)Amount or Percentage

of Plantings RequiredAmount of

Plantings ProvidedShade Trees

Required 

(50%; 100% Street)Shade

Trees 

ProvidedNative

Trees 

Required (10%) [3]Native

Trees 

Provided [3]Native

Shrubs 

Required (30%) [3]Native

Shrubs 

Provided [3]Common Area Plot [1] s.f. Trees 1 per 2,000 s.f., 50% shade Shrubs 20 per 2,000 s.f. Project Perimeter Bufferyard [6] l.f. Trees 3 per 40, 1 shade Shrubs continuous hedge or shrub mass Residential Lots RL Zone Trees 10 trees Shrubs 50 shrubs E, RS 1, RS 1B, Zones Trees 4 trees (min. 2 shade), front half; 2 trees (min. 1 shade) rear half. Shrubs 20 shrubs, front half; 10 shrubs, rear half RS 3 to RS 7 Zones Trees 3 trees (min. 1 shade), front half; 1 shade tree, rear half Shrubs 15 shrubs, front half; 10 shrubs, rear half Corner Lot additional Trees 1 tree on street-side Shrubs 10 shrubs on street-side RS 3 to RS 7 Lots over 12,000 s.f. Additional Trees 1 tree per 2,000 s.f.; 50% shade Shrubs 10 shrubs per 2,000 s.f. Multi-Family Building Plots [2] Trees l.f. total of all building facades 1 per 30 l.f., 50% shade incl. Pedestrian Zone Shrubs s.f. Street Trees [2,6] l.f. 1 per 30 l.f., 100% shade Vehicular Use Areas [4] s.f. 15% % Useable Open Space [2,5] Play Lot(s) required in RS6, RS 7, & Multi-Family Zoning Districts s.f. greater of 6% or 30 sq. ft. per unit. Monument Sign Plantings s.f. Pedestrian Zone, Multi-Family Districts ____________ l.f. of 10 foot width for all facades that provide public access to building. full coverage with shrubs and ground cover within 3 months of inspection. ____________ shrubs, ____________ ground cover Acessway Plantings [6] l.f. l.f. 1. Do not include lake maintenance easement. 

2. Plant counts are not to be included in "common area plot." 

3. Total of all categories must comply, not individual categories. 

4. Vehicular use areas include drive aisles and parking areas for multi-family projects. 

5. 50% of play lot sq. footage must be a tot lot, with a minimum of 1,500 sq. ft. & 3 pieces of equipment for the 2-6 age range. Remaining can be court games, pool, or useable field space. 

6. See code section 901.5 for standards and deduct from lineal footage. Accessway zones may be deducted. Do not double count corners. Row is intended for one accessway, add rows for each additional accessway.  
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 3, 4-21-04) 
TABLE 2: MINIMUM LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL ZONING DISTRICTS 
District(s) NUMBER OF

TREES 2 % SHADE

TREESNUMBER OF

SHRUBS 3 % NATIVE

SPECIES 

TREES/ 

SHRUBSOTHER RESIDENTIAL 1 - - - 10%/30%   - Rural (RL) 10 - 50 Minimum total landscape area of 10,000 sq. ft. (sod, etc.) Estate (RS1) 

front 1/2 plot 4 50% 20   - rear 1/2 plot 2 50% 10   - plot > 43,560 sq. ft. 1 50% 5 per each 7,260 sq. ft. over 43,560 sq. ft. 3 corner plot 1 100% 4 street side yard area. 4 Single-Family R1B, RS3, RS4, RS5, RS6 

front 1/2 plot 3 33% 15   - rear 1/2 plot 1 - 10 use of small tree prohibited. plot > 12,000 sq. ft. 1 50% 5 per each 2,000 sq. ft. over 12,000 sq. ft. 3 corner plot 1 - 4 street side yard area. 4 Single-Family RS7, Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND; House Use) 

front 1/2 plot 3 - 15 2 trees may be small. rear 1/2 plot 1 - 10 - corner plot 1 - 4 4 Multi-Family RM-1, RM-2, RM-3, Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND; Rowhouse Use) 

per plot (except SF plot) 1 50% 6 per 2,000 sq. ft. plot area not used for structures or vehicle use. multi-family buildings - - - foundation plantings. corner plot (RM-1 only) 1 - 4 street side yard area. 4 single-family plot - - - use RS7 SF district standards. NON-RESIDENTIAL - - - 10%/30% See Section 901.4.1 Neighborhood Business (B1), Community Business (B2), Heavy Business (B3), Light Industrial (M1), Office Park (OP), Community Facilities (CF), Employment Center (EC), Commercial Recreation (CR), Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND; Shopfront Use & Civic Use) 

plot 1 50% 5 per 1,000 sq. ft. plot area not used for structures or vehicle use. Planned Industrial (PID) 

plot 1 50% 15 per 3,000 sq. ft. plot area not used for structures, outdoor storage or vehicle use. Recreation/Open Space (OS), Utilities (U), Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND; Public Use, except streets) 

plot 1 50% 5 per 1,000 sq. ft. plot area not used for structures, play fields and areas, courts, golf course, waterbodies or vehicle use.  
1  Individual single-family lots in planned communities may not be landscaped alike if they are adjacent or across the street from each other. In these cases, alternative landscape plans must be submitted for approval with the site plan submittal for the project. 
2  Palms may be used at a rate of 3 palms = 1 tree. The average height of a palm at planting shall be 12 feet (base to bud). Clusters of 3 palms shall be staggered in height. Palms with substantial gray wood at maturity shall have a minimum of 2 feet of gray wood at time of planting. No palms shall be located closer than 1.5 times the average mature frond length for the species from overhead utility lines and lights meant to illuminate parking lots, streets, accessways (right-of-way or non right-of-way), sidewalks, walkways, or paths. 
3  Shrubs used to screen accessory structures do not count toward meeting these requirements. 
4  Requirement is in addition to other required landscaping. 
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 3, 4-21-04) 
TABLE 3: PERIMETER BUFFERYARD WIDTH REQUIREMENTS 1 
ADJACENT LAND USE PROPOSED

LAND USE Residential Commercial 2 Heavy

CommercialOffice 2 Industrial Community

FacilityPark/Open

SpaceWater-

body Major

Street 4 
; FPL

Transmission 

EasementSingle-

FamilyMulti-

Family< 25,000

sq. ft.> 25,000

sq. ft.out-

parcel< 50,000

sq. ft.> 50,000

sq. ft. Active 3 Passive 3 Residential   Single-Family A C C D C D C D D B C A A B B   Multi-Family C B B B B D C C D B C A A B B Commercial 2   < 25,000 sq. ft. C B A B A 5 B A B B B A A A B A   > 25,000 sq. ft. D B B A B 5 C B A B C A A A B A   Outparcel C B A 5 B 5 A 5 B B B B B A A A B A Heavy Commercial D D B C B B C C B C A A A B A Office 2 < 50,000 sq. ft. C C A B B C A B B B A A A B A > 50,000 sq. ft. D C B B B C B C B B A A A B A Industrial D D B B B B B B A C A A A B A Community Facility B B B C B C B B C A A A A B A Park/Open Space   Active 3 C C A A A A A A A A A A A B B Passive 3 B B B B B B B B B B B A A B D  
REQUIRED WIDTH: 
A = 10 feet 
B = 20 feet 
C = 30 feet 
D = 35 feet 
1  Exception may apply to development within the Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND) zoning district. Refer to the TND regulations. 
2  Gross building square footage. 
3  Active: generally characterized by recreation facilities or improvements (e.g., ballfields, play equipment). 
Passive: generally characterized by preservation of the site in its natural state, with few recreation-related improvements. 
4  Except where the perimeter is subject to the terms of the Miramar Parkway Scenic Corridor requirements. 
5  Required width may be divided equally (50%/50%) between outparcels and between outparcel(s) and main shopping center parcel, provided that each entity installs the required full buffer plant count and coordinates the planting design with the adjacent user(s). Where 1 of the uses exists and has provided less than 50% of the required width, the adjacent site shall be required to provide the remaining width when developed. 
6  For multi-family projects, the B width requirement becomes an A width if the units are not placed on the perimeter of the project. 
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 3, 4-21-04) 
TABLE 4: PERIMETER BUFFERYARD LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS 1 & 2 
Development Type/

Zoning District Bufferyard Width Number of

Trees 3 % Shade Trees 4 % Native Species Trees/ Shrubs Other RESIDENTIAL - - - 10%/30% - Single-Family Refer to Table 2 3/40 linear feet 67% A hedge, other durable landscape barrier or wall with a minimum height of 4 feet. Walls and fences must have a continuous hedge on the exterior side. Remaining area shall be in grass, ground cover or other landscaping treatment. Multi-Family Refer to Table 2 3/40 linear feet 67% Same as single-family requirement. NONRESIDENTIAL - - - 10%/30% - All zoning districts except PID Refer to Table 2 3/40 linear feet 33% Same as single-family requirement. PID District Refer to Table 2 3/40 linear feet 33% Same as single-family requirement.  
1  Except where the perimeter is subject to the terms of the Miramar Parkway Scenic Corridor landscaping requirements. 
2  Exception may apply to development within the Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND) zoning district. Refer to the TND regulations. 
3  Palms used shall count on a 3 to 1 basis and shall be planted in groups of 3. 
4  Planted at a maximum of 60-foot intervals and no less than 18 feet apart. 
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 3, 4-21-04) 
TABLE 5

CITY OF MIRAMAR RECOMMENDED PLANT LIST 

SHADE TREES 

ONLY TREES MARKED WITH AN ASTERISK MAY BE USED FOR STREET TREES
TREES MUST BE PLANTED AT 12' MINIMUM HEIGHT WITH MINIMUM 2 1/2" CALIPER 
Botanical Name: Common Name: Bauhinia blakeana* Hong Kong Orchid Caesalpinia granadillo Bridal Veil Tree Chorisia speciosa Silk-Floss Tree - East of I-75 only Ficus citrifolia Shortleaf Fig - Large open areas Jacaranda acutifolia Jacaranda Khaya nyasica African Mahogany - Large open areas - East of I -75 only Koelreuteria elegaus(formosana) Golden Raintree Manilkara zapota Sapodilla - East of I -75 only Mastichodendron foetidissimum Mastic Nectandra coriacea Lancewood Pinus elliotti var. densa Florida Slash Pine Pongamia pinnata Pongam Simaruba glauca* Paradise Tree Syzgium cumini Jambolan Plum - Large open areas Taxodium distichum Bald Cypress Tamarindus indica* Tamarind Terminalia catappa Tropical Almond  
TABLE 5 (Cont'd.)

SHADE TREES
Botanical Name: Common Name: Bucida buceras* Black Olive Bursera simaruba* Gumbo Limo Calophyllum brasiliense* Brazilian Beautyleaf Calophyllum inophyllum* Indian Laurel/Mastwood Chrysophyllum oliviforme* Satin Leaf - East of I-75 only Cassia fistula* Golden Shower - East of I -75 only Coccoloba diversifolia* Pigeon Plum Delonix regia* Royal Poinciana - East of I-75 only Ficus rubiginosa* Rusty Fig Guapira discolor* Blolly Harpullia pendula* Tulipwood Lysiloma latisiliqua* (bahamensis) Wild Tamarind Manilkara zapota* Sapodilla - East of I -75 only Mimusops elengi* Spanish Cherry Peltophorum spp.* Copperpod/Yellow Poinciana Persea borbonia* Red Bay Piscidia piscipula* Jamaican Dogwood - East of I-75 Quercus virginiana* Live Oak Swietenia mahogani* West Indian Mahogany  
TABLE 5 (Cont'd.)

SHADE TREES
SMALL TREES/ ORNAMENTAL TREES 
Trees on the small tree list shall be used under power lines, and shall conform to FPL publication "Right Tree, Right Place. 
TREES MUST BE PLANTED AT MINIMUM OF 8' HEIGHT AND 1 1/2? CALIPER 
Botanical Name: Common Name: Annona glabra Pond Apple Acacia farnesiana Sweet Acacia Ardisia escallonoides** Marlberry Averrhoa carambola Carambola - East of I-75 only Bulnesia arborea Bulnesia - East of I -75 only Caesalpinia mexicana Mexican Caesalpinia Caesalpinia pulcherrimma Dwarf Poinciana Callistemon rigidus Upright Bottlebrush Callistemon viminalis Weeping Bottlebrush Cassia surattensis Glaucous Cassia - East of I - 75 only Citharexlum fruitcosum Fiddlewood Clusia rosea Pitch Apple Concoarpus erectus sericeus** Silver Buttonwood Cordia boisseri White Geiger Cordia sebestena Orange Geiger - East of I - 75 only Eriobotrya japonica Loquat Eugenia spp. ** Stoppers Filicium decipiens Japanese Fern Tree Ilex spp. Dahoon Holly, East Palataka Holly, etc. Juniperus silicicola Southern Red Cedar Krugiodendron ferreum Black Ironwood Lagerstroemia indica** Crape Myrtle Lagerstroemia speciosa Queen Crape Myrtle Ligustrum lucidum** Glossy Privet Lysiloma sabicu Sabicu Myrcianthes fragrans** Simpson's Stopper Myrsine guianensis** Myrsine Noronhia emarginata Madagascar Olive Pimenta dioica Allspice Plumeria rubra Frangipani Prunus myrtifolia West Indian Mahongany Psidium littorale (cattleianum) Cattley Guava Tabebuia caraiba Silver Trumpet Tree Tabebuia heterophylla Pink Trumpet Tree Tecoma stans Yellow Elder Tibouchina granulosa Purple Glory Tree  
** Must have three (3) trunks or less to be counted as small tree. Otherwise must be counted as large shrub. 
TABLE 5 (Cont'd) 

PALMS 
Note: Palms with asterisk may be used on a one-for-one basis to meet minimum landscape requirements. Other multi-trunked palms do not count as one-for one. 
Botanical Name: Common Name: Acoelorrhaphe wrightii* Paurotis or Everglades Palm Bismarkia nobilis* Bismark Palm Butia capitata Pindo Palm Carpentaria acuminata Carpentaria Palm Coccothrinax argentata Silver Palm Cocos nucifera* Malayan or Maypan Coconut Palm Dypsis decari Triangle Palm Livistona chinensis Chinese Fan Palm Macarthurii rivularis MacArthur Palm Pandanus utilis Screw Pine Phoenix reclinata* Senegal Date Palm Phoenix canariensis* Canary Island Date Phoenix dactylifera* Medjool or Zehedi Date Palm Ptychosperma elegans Solitaire Palm Ravenea rivularis Majesty Palm - East of I -75 only Roystonea elata* Royal Palm Sabal palmetto Cabbage Palm Thrinax morrisii Key Thatch Palm Thrinax radiata Thatch Palm Trachycarpus fortunei Windmill Palm Veitchia mcdanielsii Sunshine Palm Veitchia winin Winin Palm Washingtonia robusta Washingtonia Palm Wodyetia bifurcate* Foxtail Palm  
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 3, 4-21-04) 
TABLE 6: MIRAMAR PARKWAY SCENIC CORRIDOR LANDSCAPE PLANTING REQUIREMENTS 1, 5 
STANDARD STREET TREES SHRUBS PERIMETER BUFFER

TREES Total Number 1/30 linear feet 2 10/10 linear feet in double row or mass 2 1/30, shade + 2/30 ornamental 2 Type See Plant List See Plant List See Plant List Minimum shade 100% N/A N/A Maximum ornamental 0% N/A N/A Minimum native 10% 30% 10% Palms See footnote 3 N/A See footnote 3 Planting Specifications Minimum number in group N/A 4 9 4 N/A Maximum spacing (on center) 45 feet per species 45 ft./15 ft. Minimum height (at planting) 12 feet per species 12 ft./8 ft. Minimum crown 6 feet N/A 6 ft./4 ft. Minimum Caliper 21/2 inches N/A 21/2?/11/2?  
1  A signature design scheme is established for the corridor west of Interstate 75. Please contact the Community Development Department for information. 
2  The width of the accessways should be deducted from the total length and treated acording to section 901.5, accessway zones. 
3  Palms shall be installed in groups of at least 3. Where a species is used that typically grows in clumps, each clump shall count as 1 tree. 
4  Trees may be planted singly or in clusters. Shrubs shall be planted as either clusters or in hedge formation. 
5  The design intent is to cretae a layered look using ground cover, low & medium shrubs, large shrubs or small trees & shade trees. 
(Ord. No. 04-16, § 3, 4-21-04) 
Chapter 10 - SIGNS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 12-05, § 3(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 30, 2011, repealed the former Ch. 10, §§ 1001-1014, and enacted a new Ch. 10 as set out herein. The former Ch. 10 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 03-05, § 3, adopted Dec. 4, 2002; Ord. No. 04-04, § 3, adopted Nov. 19, 2003; Ord. No. 06-03, § 2, adopted Oct. 19, 2005. 

Sec. 1001. - Purpose. 
    These sign regulations are intended to define, permit, and control the placement of signs within the city. The city commission has adopted these regulations in order to achieve the following community goals and objectives: 
(a)  Protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public; 
(b)  Safeguard the public use and nature of the streets and sidewalks; 
(c)  Protect and enhance the visual environment of the city; 
(d)  Minimize visual distractions to motorists using the public streets; 
(e)  Promote an aesthetically pleasing environment for Miramar residents; 
(f)  Promote the economic growth of Miramar by creating a community image that is conducive to attracting new business and industrial development; 
(g)  Allow legible and effective signs and prevent their over-concentration, improper placement, and excessive height, bulk, density, and area; 
(h)  Promote the safety of persons and property by requiring that signs not create a hazard due to collapse, fire, decay, or abandonment; 
(i)  Ensure that signs do not obstruct fire-fighting efforts, and do not create traffic hazards by confusing or distracting motorists or by impairing drivers' ability to see pedestrians, obstacles, or other vehicles or to read traffic signs; 
(j)  Allow the identification of commercial and noncommercial uses, ideas, products and services in the community; and 
(k)  Control visual clutter and encourage high professional standards in sign design and display. 
(Ord. No. 12-05, § 3(Exh. A), 11-30-11) 
Sec. 1002. - Definitions. 
    It is the intention of this section to classify all types of signs. If a sign is not specifically mentioned herein, the city manager or said manager's designee, shall choose the most appropriate classification(s) for that sign. 
    Activity sign: A sign used to identify a nonprofit use (such as a place of worship or school or governmental/public facility) and the activities it hosts or sponsors. It may be attached or freestanding. 
    Address sign: An attached sign indicating the address of the structure, dwelling unit, or business to which it pertains. It may be attached to a wall, freestanding monument, directional information sign or to an awning. 
    Advertising sign: A sign that specifies, either directly or indirectly, a good or service either sold or offered for commercial gain. It may be attached or freestanding. 
    Animated sign: A sign located on private property that uses motion of any part, by any means, including wind power, or displays flashing, oscillating or intermittent lights. It may be attached or freestanding. 
    Apex: The highest point of a sign as measured from the point on the ground where the sign base is located, or, if no sign structure is present, from the point on the ground directly below the sign itself. 
    Architectural sign: A permanent sign that is integral to the design of a doorway, column, cornice, or parapet and the materials of which are integral to the surface of the building façade. 
    Architectural sign cluster: One or more signs attached to or integrated with one or more landscape elements, such as a wall or fountain, to form a unified entry feature. 
    ATM sign: An attached sign that identifies the name of the machine or the business entity that owns an automatic teller machine and that identifies the financial services networks that are accepted at that automatic teller machine. 
    Attached sign: A sign painted on or attached to and supported by a building or other structure. 
    Attention attracting device: Any streamer, pennant, propeller, inflatable sign, tethered balloon, portable sign, bunting or other artificial device, figure, shape, color, sound, light or exhibit, whether live, animated or still, that is intended to attract attention to the use or business being conducted on a site. 
    Awning: Any movable roof-like structure, cantilevered or otherwise entirely supported from a building, so constructed and erected as to permit it to be readily and easily moved. 
    Awning sign: A sign either painted on or attached to an awning, with the lettering/logos applied directly on the valance or other vertical portion of an awning, and which contains only the business name, logo, and/or street address. 
    Band identification sign: A sign that is attached flat on the exterior front, rear or side wall of any building or other structure, and which provides information consisting only of the name and/or logo of the business, and shall not list products, sales, or other promotional messages, or contact information. (Synonym: Fascia or wall sign). These signs are commonly used at office and shopping center buildings. 
    Banner sign: An advertising sign that cannot be considered a flag, having characters, letters or illustrations applied to cloths, paper, plastic, or fabric of any kind, with only such material for backing. 
    Bench sign: A sign that is attached to, painted on or incorporated into a bench of any fashion, size, or construction. 
    Blade sign: A sign mounted on the building façade, projecting at a 90-degree angle. 
    Blade identification sign: A sign mounted on the building façade, projecting at a 90-degree angle which provides only the name and/or logo of the establishment. (Synonym: projecting sign) 
    Box sign: An attached sign where the face is enclosed, bordered, or contained within a box-like structure, frame or other device. Also known as a cabinet sign. 
    Building frontage: The length of the front façade of a building. 
    Bulletin board: A board on which pedestrian-scaled notices are posted. It may be attached or freestanding. 
    Bus shelter sign: A sign that is painted on or incorporated into the material structure of a bus shelter. 
    Canopy sign: A non-illuminated pedestrian-oriented sign that is attached to the underside of a canopy structure either parallel or perpendicular to the façade when such canopy structure is attached to or supported by another structure. It is typically known as a colonnade sign. 
    Changeable copy sign: A sign or portion thereof on which the copy or symbols change either electronically or manually through placement of letters or symbols on a panel mounted on a track system. 
    Channel letter sign: A sign comprised of individually illuminated removable formed, three-dimensional letters and graphics, with each letter or graphic made up of a U-channel base, with colored or clear Plexiglas face. 
    Channel letter sign, reverse: A sign comprised of individually illuminated letters or graphics made of metal faces and returns (sides of letters) with a clear plastic backing, designed to be mounted a short distance away from the wall and create a halo-lit effect. Also known as a back-lit letter sign. 
    City public information sign: A sign erected by the city for the purpose of providing noncommercial public announcements of city-sponsored meetings, events, and activities to the community. It is a freestanding sign that includes an electronic message board with animated text within the sign's structure. 
    Clearance: The height above the walkway or ground surface, of the bottom edge of an element. 
    Clock: A device that displays the current time. It may be attached or freestanding. 
    Community information sign: A sign, located on and relating to, an activity on or near the premises upon which the sign is located. Examples include: "Children at Play," "Crime Watch Area," "Drug Free School Zone," and "Adopt a Highway." It may be attached or freestanding. 
    Contractor sign: A sign denoting the architect(s), engineer(s), contractor(s) or sub-contractor(s) on the premises of work under construction. 
    Copy: The words or message displayed on a sign. 
    Courtesy notice sign: A sign required per Land Development Code ("LDC") Section 501.11. 
    Development sign: A freestanding sign placed on a property outlining the name and type of development that is proposed for the site per an approved site plan. 
    Digital clock: An electronic sign that displays only the time, date, or temperature. It may be attached or freestanding. 
    Digital menu board: A sign that utilizes electronic display, including, but not limited to, liquid crystal (LCD) plasma display or project images at a drive-thru facility and is not readable from off the premises of the drive-thru facility. It may be an attached or freestanding sign. 
    Digital menu board preview monument sign: A sign that precedes the location of the primary menu board within the vehicular stacking lanes which utilizes electronic display, including, but not limited, to liquid crystal (LCD) plasma display or project images which is located at a drive-thru restaurant and not readable from off the premises of the restaurant. It may be an attached or freestanding sign. 
    Digital sign: A sign that utilizes an electronic display, including, but not limited to, liquid crystal (LCD) plasma display or projects images, to show content. Permitted digital signs include digital menu boards, digital menu preview monument sign, menu board preview monument signs at gasoline service stations, wall signs, or city public information signs and message boards for non-profit uses. All other digital signs are prohibited. 
    Directional sign: A sign relating to navigation on the property on which it is located, that provides directional information to pedestrian and vehicular traffic, such as "Entrance," "Exit," "Parking," "Drive-thru," "Loading," or that identifies the name of a place or location on the property on which it is located with a directional symbol. It may be attached or freestanding. 
    Director: The director of community development, or his or her designee. 
    Directory sign: An attached index consisting of the names of tenants of an office building, shopping center, or other multi-tenant business complex. 
    Electric sign: Any sign containing or using electrical wiring. 
    Elevation: See "Façade." 
    Entrance feature sign: A sign with embellished architectural features that identifies a residential community. Such embellished architectural features include piers, columns, trellises, finials, ornaments, metalwork, light fixtures, and similar design and decorative elements that enhance the attractiveness of the structure. Also known as a "Residential Community Identification Monument Sign." 
    Exempt sign: A sign exempt from the permitting requirements, but not the other requirements of this chapter or other provisions of applicable codes. 
    Façade: The entire vertical building face of a building, including any parapet. 
    Family event sign: A sign on a residential lot indicating a family event such as birthday, wedding, anniversary, or family reunion, are examples of family events. It may be attached or freestanding. 
    Flag: A piece of fabric with a color or pattern representing a government or other noncommercial organization or idea. It may be attached or freestanding. 
    Font: A set of letters, numerals and shapes that conform to a specific set of design criteria. 
    Freestanding sign: A self-supported structure not attached or affixed in any way to a building or any other structure. 
    Gasoline advertising sign: Any advertising or promotional sign attached to the pumps at a gasoline service station not exclusively relating to the price of gasoline or diesel fuel. 
    Gasoline price sign: An attached sign used solely for the purposes of stating the price of gasoline or diesel fuel (incorporated into a monument identification sign). 
    Gasoline service station identification sign: An attached sign used solely for the purposes of identifying the brand or company name and/or logo of the service station establishment, and not including advertising information. 
    Grand opening sign: A sign which is temporary in nature that is used to denote the fact that a new business or residential development is present. 
    Handheld sign: A sign which is temporary in nature that is held by an individual person and used to identify an establishment or activity located on or in immediate proximity to the location where the sign is displayed. 
    Hazardous sign: A sign that approximates a traffic sign and is not placed for a legitimate public safety reason, or which may include words such as "Stop," "Danger," "Caution," "Look," or similar words. It may obscure a traffic sign or a directional sign. It may be attached or freestanding. 
    Identification sign: A sign that indicates the name and/or logo of a business or group of businesses, organization, activity, residence, or residential development, and shall not list products, sales, or other promotional messages, or contact information. It may be attached or freestanding. 
    Illegal sign: A sign erected in violation of any ordinances in effect at the time of the sign's erection or installation. 
    Illuminated sign, external: A sign having the characters, letters, figures, designs or outlines illuminated by electric lights or neon gas where the light source is visible. This does not include illumination from a source other than the sign. It may be attached or freestanding. 
    Illuminated sign, internal: An illuminated sign whose light source is concealed or contained within the sign. It may be attached or freestanding. 
    Individual building monument identification sign: A monument sign which identifies one establishment occupying a single premises, which may incorporate and identify up to two additional tenants. 
    Leasing advertising banner sign: A temporary sign erected on a building by the property owner or his/her agent, indicating that the property on which it is located or existing structures on that property are for sale, rent, or lease. This term shall include signs that indicate that a property is for sale or is available for inspection, such as signs containing the words "open house." 
    Leasing freestanding identification sign: A sign erected by the property owner or his/her agent, indicating that the property on which it is located or existing structures on that property are for sale, rent, or lease. This shall include signs that indicate that a property is for sale or is available for inspection, such as signs containing the words "open house." It may include existing tenant names and businesses. 
    Logo: An item of information or graphic used to signify an organization, corporation or the like. 
    Major roadway monument identification sign: A monument identification sign located at the intersection of two arterial roads, but within the limits of a property, that identifies such property. 
    Mansard sign: A sign attached to or erected against a mansard of a building, with the face horizontally parallel to the building wall. 
    Marquee sign: An attached sign that is used by theaters to advertise show times. 
    Master sign plan: A sign plan for a multiple establishment center setting forth standards for uniform sign area, letter style, sign design, letter height and sign colors. 
    Memorial sign: An attached sign or tablet used to denote the name of a building and date of erection and other related information. 
    Menu board: A sign that is located at a drive-thru restaurant, and is not readable from off the restaurant premises. It may be an attached or freestanding sign. 
    Menu board preview monument sign: A sign structure that precedes the location of the primary menu board within the vehicular stacking lanes at a drive-thru restaurant and is not readable from off the restaurant premises. It may be attached or freestanding and may have a digital display (see digital menu board preview sign definition). 
    Message board: A sign with changeable text. Manual changeable copy message boards typically consist of letters attached to a surface within a transparent display case. Electronic Message Boards consist of any sign that is capable of displaying illuminated words, symbols, figures, or images that can be electronically changed by remote or automatic means, excluding any digital clock as defined in this chapter. 
    Model sign: A temporary sign that designates particular dwelling units and is used to depict other residential units of similar design that are for sale. It may be attached or freestanding. 
    Monument sign: A freestanding, self-supported structure not attached or affixed in any way to a building or any other primary structure, with concealed means of support that is built into the ground and could not be construed to be a pole sign. 
    Multiple establishment center: A commercial shopping center, industrial center, employment center, town center, or other similar center. 
    Nameplate sign: An attached sign, consisting of either a panel or individual letters applied to a building indicating the name, profession, or address of a persons or persons residing on or tenants legally occupying the premises. 
    Noncommercial sign: A sign containing only noncommercial copy. "Noncommercial" shall mean not-for-profit or commercial gain. Regardless of the content of the copy, a noncommercial sign shall not be construed to be an off-premises sign. 
    Nonconforming sign, illegal: A sign located within the city limits on the effective date of this Code or existing in an area annexed by the city after the effective date of this Code (or amendments hereto), which by its height, type, area, design, colors, materials, location, use, or structural support, did not conform to the city's sign regulations that were in effect prior to August 19, 1998, or the date of amendments hereto (or Broward County's regulations if in an area that was annexed by the city) and does not conform to the requirements of this Code. 
    Nonconforming sign, legal: A sign located within the city limits on the effective date of this Code or existing in an area annexed by the city after the effective date of this Code (or amendments hereto) which, by its height, type, area, design, colors, materials, location, use, or structural support, conformed to the city's sign regulations that were in effect prior to August 19, 1998, or the date of amendments hereto, but does not conform to the requirements of this Code. This shall include signs that had been granted variances that were approved, and signs that were issued a construction permit by the city (or Broward County if in an area that was annexed by the city), prior to August 19, 1998, or the date of amendments hereto. 
    Off-premises sign: A sign that directs attention to a commercial business, commodity, service, product, or activity not conducted, sold, offered, or available on the premises where such sign is located, the copy of which may be intended to be changed periodically. An off-premises sign is the principal use of the property on which it is located. It may also be referred to as a "billboard." It includes a sign displayed on a trailer or the bed of a truck that advertises something other than the identity of the truck, the driver or its contents. Synonyms: Billboards/outdoor advertising. 
    On-premises sign: A sign that is located on the premises of the occupant, business, or property identified on the sign. The occupant, business, or property is the principal use of the property, and the sign is an accessory use of the property on which it is located. 
    Outdoor display case: A sign consisting of a lockable metal or wood framed cabinet with a transparent window or windows, mounted onto a building wall or freestanding support. It allows the contents, such as brochures, menus, maps, or posters, to be maintained and kept current. 
    Painted wall sign: A type of sign that is painted on to a flat, solid stucco or finished surface of a building. 
    Parapet: A wall extension above the roofline of the building. 
    Parapet sign: A sign installed on a parapet of a building. 
    Pole sign: A sign erected upon a pole, poles, post, or "pole-like" structure that are visible and wholly independent of any building or structure for support. 
    Political sign: A sign that indicates the name, cause or affiliation of anyone seeking public office, or that indicates any political issue. It may be attached or freestanding. 
    Portable sign: A movable sign not secured or attached to the ground or a structure, and not including a handheld sign as defined in this section. 
    Primary street frontage: The length of a street (not including limited-access highways or other elevated roadways) that is adjacent to the required front yard of a lot, parcel, or tract. 
    Principal entrance: An entrance to a building that is normally used by both clients and customers. Employees may also typically use this entrance. 
    Projecting sign: A sign attached to and supported by a building or other structure, which extends more than eight inches therefrom. 
    Pylon sign: A freestanding sign with a visible support structure, which may or may not be enclosed by a pole cover. 
    Raceway: An electrical conduit enclosure that may also serve as a mounting structure for a sign. 
    Real estate sign: A sign erected by the property owner or his/her agent, indicating that the property on which it is located or existing structures on that property are for sale, rent, or lease. This shall include signs that indicate that a property is for sale or is available for inspection, such as signs containing the words "open house." It may be attached or freestanding. 
    Return: The sides of a channel letter. 
    Reveal: An indented detail on a sign. 
    Roadside memorial marker: A sign used to memorialize people who have died as a result of a vehicle-related accident. 
    Roof sign: A sign erected over or on the roof of a structure. Does not include a sign attached to a parapet. 
    ROW: Right-of-way. 
    S.F.: Square foot or square feet. 
    Shed awning: An awning with two short sides in addition to the main canopy. 
    Sidewalk sign: A portable, freestanding sign, typically double-sided, placed on a sidewalk at an entrance to a business to attract pedestrians. Variations: Sandwich board, A-frame sign. 
    Sign: A device or representation for visual communication that is used for the purpose of making something known. Signs include, but are not limited to, figures, letters, logos, devices, flags, pennants, emblems, and pictures. 
    Sign area: See Section 1006 "Measurement of sign area and sign height." 
    Sign face: That part of the sign that is or can be used to identify, advertise, and communicate information or for visual representation, which attracts the attention of the public for any purpose. Sign face includes any background material, panel, trim, color, and internal or external illumination used that differentiate the sign from the building, structure, backdrop surface or object upon or against which the sign is placed. 
    Sign structure: The supporting or surrounding structure of a freestanding sign, with or without a sign thereon, situated upon or attached to the premises, upon which any sign may be fastened, affixed, displayed, or applied. This definition shall exclude a building, fence, bridge, freestanding perimeter wall, or distinct architectural or structural element. 
    Snipe sign: A sign that is not otherwise authorized by this chapter, and is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued, or otherwise fastened or attached to a wire frame and posted in the ground, or attached directly to trees, poles, stakes, fences or any other support device. 
    Special event sign: A temporary sign intended to advertise a special event. Festivals, art shows, decennial business anniversary celebrations, and homeowner association meetings are examples of special events. It may be attached or freestanding, and may be a banner. 
    Standard pedestrian entrance: An entrance to a building that is normally used by both employees and customers, and shall also include car wash, automobile, maintenance or loading entrances. 
    Street frontage: The length of a street (not including limited-access highways or other elevated roadways) that is adjacent to a property. 
    Street sign: A sign that specifies the name of a street that is placed adjacent to such street. It may be attached or freestanding. 
    Temporary sign: Any sign to be displayed for a limited period shall be deemed a temporary sign. Temporary signs shall include signs capable of being mounted on the ground through use of supports made of wood, plastic or metal, or leaned or affixed to a structure or similar object, hand-carried signs, signs attached or mounted on vehicles, or in the window of any vehicle, but shall not include bumper stickers placed on vehicle bumpers. It may be attached to a principal building or freestanding. 
    Tower entrance feature wall sign: Any wall identification sign(s) attached to the surface of an ornamental clock tower for the purpose of way finding that identify the name of a residential community, commercial center, or mixed-use development as well as a limited number of tenants located therein. 
    Traffic sign: A sign that specifies vehicular and traffic information, rules or regulations and is placed for a legitimate public safety reason. It may be attached or freestanding. 
    Valance: The portion of an awning that hangs perpendicular to the sidewalk. 
    Vehicle sign: A sign permanently or temporarily painted on or affixed to a vehicle, including but not limited to automobile, truck, boat, bus, trailer, or camper, whether the vehicle is parked or moving. 
    Warning sign: A sign whose purpose is to notify the public of a possible danger or policy that affects a property or to provide instructions at active construction sites, such as "Beware of Dog," "No Trespassing," "Men at Work," "No Parking," "Customer Parking Only," and "Caution." It may be attached or freestanding. 
    Window: An opening constructed in a wall that is spanned with glass and may additionally be framed with another, distinct material. 
    Window sign: An attached sign located on the inside of a window or within a building or other enclosed structure, where the sign face is visible and legible from the exterior through a window or other opening. A window sign may be one or all of the following: 
(a)  Identification sign: A sign attached to or painted on an establishment window identifying the occupant and its address and telephone number. 
(b)  Message sign: A sign containing a message. 
(c)  Hours of operation sign: A sign stating hours and days of operation. 
(d)  Advertising sign. 
    Yard sale sign: A temporary sign erected by the owner of the property or authorized agent of such owner that indicates that tangible goods are for sale at a certain time on the property on which it is located. It may be attached or freestanding. 
(Ord. No. 12-05, § 3(Exh. A), 11-30-11; Ord. No. 14-08, § 2(Exh. A), 11-18-13; Ord. No. 17-17, § 3, 9-19-17; Ord. No. 19-07 , § 4, 11-28-18) 
Sec. 1003. - Applicability, substitution and severability. 
(a)  Applicability. All signs shall be erected, placed, established, created, or maintained in the city only in conformance with the standards, procedures, exemptions, and other requirements of this chapter. All permanent signs are subject to the design requirements set forth in this is chapter as well as the established design standards referenced and community appearance standards set forth in LDC Section 813, "Community Appearance Board". All signs must be placed in compliance with the Florida Building Code 2007 Edition and the Florida Fire Prevention Code 2007 Edition. Signs that are not permitted or specified within the permanent sign, temporary sign, or exempt sign sections of this chapter are prohibited. 
(b)  Substitution of noncommercial for commercial speech. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, to the extent that this chapter permits a sign containing commercial copy, it shall permit a noncommercial sign to the same extent. The noncommercial message may occupy the entire sign area or any portion thereof, and may substitute for or be combined with the commercial message. The sign message may be changed from commercial to noncommercial, or from one noncommercial message to another, as frequently as desired by the sign's owner, provided that the sign is not prohibited and the sign continues to comply with all requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  Severability. 
(1)  Generally. If any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this chapter is declared unconstitutional by the final and valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, this declaration of unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this chapter. 
(2)  Severability where less speech results. This subsection (2) shall not be interpreted to limit the effect of subsection (1) above, or any other applicable severability provisions in the LDC or any adopting ordinance. The city commission specifically intends that severability shall be applied to these sign regulations even if the result would be to allow less speech in the city, whether by subjecting currently exempt signs to permitting or by some other means. 
(3)  Severability of provisions pertaining to prohibited signs. This subsection (3) shall not be interpreted to limit the effect of subsection (1) above, or any other applicable severability provisions in the LDC or any adopting ordinance. The city commission specifically intends that severability shall be applied to Section 1009 "specifically prohibited signs," so that each of the prohibited sign types listed in that section shall continue to be prohibited irrespective of whether another sign prohibition is declared unconstitutional or invalid. 
(4)  Severability of prohibition on off-premises signs. This subsection (4) shall not be interpreted to limit the effect of subsection (1) above, or any other applicable severability provisions in the LDC or any adopting ordinance. If any or all of Chapter 10 "Signs" or any other provision of the city's LDC is declared unconstitutional or invalid by the final and valid judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction, the city commission specifically intends that that declaration shall not affect the prohibition of off-premises signs in Section 1009(j). 
(Ord. No. 12-05, § 3(Exh. A), 11-30-11) 
Sec. 1004. - Sign permit process. 
    1004.1. Sign permit. 
(a)  Permit required. No permanent or temporary sign shall be erected, installed, displayed, enlarged, relocated, or modified without the appropriate permit being issued by the city, except as provided for in LDC Section 1010, exempt signs. All permanent signs, even those that are exempt from permitting requirements, are subject to the established design standards incorporated herein as well as in Section 813.3.2.1.2. Temporary signs, even those that are exempt from permitting requirements, are subject to the established design standards incorporated herein as well as in Section 813.3.2.1.2 and shall be constructed of high-quality materials and professionally designed. 
(b)  Application. Before any permit is issued, a written application, in the form provided by the city, shall be filed together with such drawings and specifications as may be necessary to fully advise the city with the location, construction, materials, colors, size, manner of illuminating, method of securing or fastening, the number of signs applied for, the consent of the property owner, duration of use, and the wording of the sign. Every application for a sign permit shall include the square footage and location of all existing signs on the property, a photograph of all building facades and any other necessary information relating to the proposed sign in order for the city to determine compliance with all requirements of this chapter. In addition, applications for a monument sign and all other non-exempt freestanding signs shall include an accurate and up-to-date survey of the property indicating the lot dimensions, the proposed location of the sign(s) with all setbacks to relevant property lines, a general site plan, and a landscaping plan, if required. 
(c)  Electrical signs. All signs that are electrically illuminated shall require a separate electrical permit and inspection. This shall include signs that are illuminated from an external source (such as a monument sign illuminated by a separate spotlight fixture). 
(d)  Completeness. Upon the submission of an application, staff shall have ten business days to determine whether it is complete. If staff finds that the application is not complete, they shall provide the applicant with written notice of the deficiencies within the ten business day period. Upon resubmission of the application, staff shall have five additional business days to determine whether the applicant's revisions are sufficient to complete the application. If they are not, staff will again inform the applicant of any remaining deficiencies in writing. This process shall continue until the applicant has submitted a complete application, or demands that the application be reviewed "as is." 
(e)  Compliance with master sign plan. All applications must conform to any master sign plan or document of similar nature that applies to the property. 
(f)  Fees. A non-refundable permit fee is due and payable after the permit application is approved and before it is ready to be issued. More than one sign on one building or group of buildings located on the same parcel of land should be applied for at the same time, but will be issued separate, but related, permits. 
(g)  Permit review. Based on the application, the director of community development (or his or her designee) shall approve or deny the sign permit based on whether it complies with the requirements of this chapter. The director shall approve or deny the sign permit within 30 days after the city's receipt of a complete application. The director shall prepare a written notice of the decision, describing the applicant's appeal rights, and send it by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant. The applicant may file a written notice of appeal to the city commission within 15 days after the date of receipt of the city's written notice. The city commission shall hear the appeal at the next available commission meeting that is at least 30 days after the date of receiving the written notice of appeal. If the city commission does not grant the appeal, then the appellant may seek relief in the Circuit Court for Broward County, as provided by law. 
(h)  Failure to commence. Every sign permit issued by the city shall become null and void if installation is not commenced within 180 days from the date of such permit. If work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for 180 days in accordance with the Florida Building Code any time after the work is commenced, a new permit shall be first obtained to do so, and the fee will be the full amount required for a new permit for such work. 
(i)  Revocation. The city may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under provisions of this chapter whenever the permit is issued on the basis of a misstatement of fact or fraud. The written revocation shall describe the appeal process. The city shall send the revocation by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the sign owner. Any person having an interest in the sign or property may appeal the revocation by filing a written notice of appeal with the city commission within 15 days after receipt of the written notice of revocation. The city commission shall hear the appeal at the next available commission meeting that is at least 30 days after the date of receiving the written notice of appeal. If the city commission does not grant the appeal, then the appellant may seek relief in the Circuit Court for Broward County, as provided by law. 
(j)  Inspection. After the issuance of the appropriate permit(s), the applicant may install and display the approved sign(s). Once installed, the city shall inspect the sign(s) for conformance with the approved permit(s) and the standards contained herein. 
(k)  Removal of sign on occupant's vacation of the premises. Within 30 days after an occupant vacates a lot or structure, the owner shall remove the occupant's sign. 
(l)  Appeals. Any appeal from any decision of the city relating to enforcement of these sign regulations shall be made according to the following requirements. The city shall prepare a written notice of its decision, describing the applicant's appeal rights, and send it by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant, no later than ten days after the decision. The applicant may file a written notice of appeal to the city commission within 15 days after the date of receipt of the city's written notice. The city commission shall hear the appeal at the next available commission meeting that is at least 30 days after the date of receiving the written notice of appeal. If the city commission does not grant the appeal, then the appellant may seek relief in the Circuit Court for Broward County, as provided by law. 
    1004.2. Sign variances. Persons seeking a variance from any requirement of this chapter shall apply for a variance pursuant to Section 506 of the LDC, and demonstrate compliance with each of the applicable standards in Section 506.7. In no event shall any variance be granted to allow any sign listed in Section 1009 (prohibited signs). 
    1004.3. Master sign plan approval. 
(a)  Applicability. No permit shall be issued for a sign within any multiple establishment center, unless and until the director has first approved a master sign plan for the development within which the sign will be erected. No sign shall be erected, placed, painted, modified or maintained, except in accordance with such master sign plan, and such plan may be enforced in the same way as any provision of this chapter. In case of any conflict between a provision of a master sign plan and any provision of this chapter, this chapter shall control. 
(b)  Master sign plan content requirements. The master sign plan application shall provide the following information: 
(1)  A fully-dimensioned site plan, or in the absence of a site plan, a fully dimensioned as-built survey. The plan shall identify the exact location of each present and future sign, except that window signs and required signs (traffic markings, fire lane, etc.) do not need to be shown. At a minimum, dimensions shall be provided for all buildings, structures, vehicular use areas, and landscaped areas, existing signs, proposed signs, and distances between all signs and street lines, property lines, vehicular use areas, clear sight distance triangles, buildings, structures, other proposed signs and existing signs to remain, and any other dimensions necessary to demonstrate compliance with all requirements of this chapter; 
(2)  Computation of the proposed and allowable total sign area, individual sign area, sign height(s), lettering height if applicable, and quantity of signs with such computations following the applicable formulae set forth in this chapter; 
(3)  Design specifications of the signage that will be permitted within the development including signage types, color, style, location(s), number of signs per occupant space, materials, method of illumination, if any, and any other limitations that will apply. 
(c)  [Amendments to plan.] A master sign plan must be approved before any permit will be issued for a principal building within the development to which the plan pertains. A master sign plan may be amended by filing a new master sign plan that conforms with all requirements of this chapter, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 12-05, § 3(Exh. A), 11-30-11) 
Sec. 1005. - Design, maintenance, and general standards. 
    All signs, whether permanent, temporary, or exempt, as defined by this chapter, shall comply with the design criteria and community appearance standards and shall be used to enhance, not detract from, the buildings or site upon which they are placed. 
    1005.1. General guidelines. Any sign displayed in the city shall comply with the following: 
(a)  All provisions of this chapter and the community appearance standards set forth in Section 813, "community appearance board"; 
(b)  All applicable provisions of the Building and Fire Prevention Code(s) and the city Code and all amendments thereto; and 
(c)  All state and federal regulations pertaining to the display of signage; and 
(d)  If any two or more sections of the above referenced regulations are in conflict, the most restrictive standard shall apply; and 
(e)  Signs shall be limited to a maximum of two faces. 
    1005.2. Sign location. Signs or their supports shall not be placed in such position or manner as to obstruct or interfere, either physically or visually, with any backflow preventer, fire hydrant, fire alarm, police alarm, traffic signal or sign, transformer, or any devices maintained by or under public authority; or with vehicular or pedestrian ingress or egress to or from any public or private ROW, roadway, driveway, or sidewalk. Where applicable, signs shall be erected only at locations shown on plans approved by the city, and maintain a clear site triangle as provided in Section 804.8.2. Written consent from the easement holder(s) shall be submitted to the city for location within any easement. 
    1005.3. Construction and materials. 
(a)  Structural and design requirements for signs are as follows: 
1.  All structural, electrical, and mechanical members utilized in the construction, erection, and operation of signs shall be concealed, except for vertical supports of other supporting members which are designed and arranged so as to be an integral part of the aesthetic composition of a sign. 
2.  All lettering or graphic characters one foot or larger on permanent signs shall extrude from or intrude into the sign face a minimum of three-eighths of an inch. 
3.  Concrete block and stucco construction is recommended for all permanent monument signs. Structural components shall not be covered by a material that is high gloss, reflective, or illuminated. 
4.  All wood shall be rot and termite resistant. Marine wood may be used; however, the supports must be obscured from view. Routing or incising is encouraged. The wood must meet specifications in accordance with the standards of the American Wood Preservation Association, the applicable building code, or any other open-cell preservation treatment approved by the city's building division. 
5.  Face jumping or wires that are visibly connected to individual letters are prohibited. 
6.  Permanent attached wall signs may not be flat mounted (except for flat panel letters, nameplates and memorial signs), where composed of metallic or wooden panels, boxes or cabinets; flush-mounted wall signs must be of the following types: individual channel, reverse channel, or pin-mounted letters, engraved band signage, or projecting blade or awning signs. 
7.  External raceways are not permitted. 
8.  Boxes and cabinets are not permitted. 
(b)  Permanent and temporary signs shall be made of durable materials, not paper or other short-lived materials. Signs shall be professionally designed and constructed. 
(c)  Illumination: 
1.  Wall signs may be internally illuminated or illuminated from an external light source such as a decorative wall-mounted light fixture. External neon tubing or strip lighting is prohibited. Ground-mounted signs may be internally illuminated or illuminated from an external light source that is appropriately visually screened by landscaping and must be submitted with the original sign permit application and design for approval. For permitted colors and illumination, see Section 813.2.1.2. An illuminated sign shall not be erected within 100 lineal feet of any portion of a residential district, except for monument entrance feature signs. Energy-efficient technology shall be used for all sign illumination, for signs receiving initial sign permits following the date of this amendment to this chapter (November 30, 2011). Replacement of existing bulbs with LED-light emitting diode bulbs is encouraged. 
2.  An electronic message board sign, if specifically permitted to be included within a conforming on-premises sign type allowed by this chapter, shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  An electronic message board sign shall not exceed a maximum luminance intensity of 5,000 nits (candelas per square meter) during daylight hours and a maximum luminance of 500 nits between 15 minutes after sunset and 15 minutes before sunrise as measured from the sign face at maximum brightness. Sign copy may change only at intervals of not less than 60 seconds. Continuous scrolling, animation, or flashing of lights is prohibited. 
b.  Sign copy may change only at intervals of not less than 60 seconds. The entire electronic sign face shall appear and disappear uniformly and simultaneously. Copy shall not fade-out or fade-in, or appear or disappear in any pattern, spiral or movement, or migrate from a side, top or bottom. Any such effects shall cause the sign to be considered a prohibited sign. 
c.  An electronic message board sign shall not interfere with the effectiveness of, or obscure an official traffic sign, device or signal. 
d.  An electronic message board sign shall have a disconnecting switch located in accordance with the provisions of the National Electric Code. The sign shall include an automatic shutoff device which renders a blank screen in the event of a malfunction. 
e.  An electronic message board sign shall require both a sign permit and an electrical permit prior to installation. 
3.  A digital menu board preview monument sign, if specifically permitted to be included within a conforming on-premises sign type allowed by this chapter, shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Digital menu board preview monument sign copy and images may change at intervals of not less than 60 seconds. 
b.  The entire digital menu board preview monument sign face shall appear and disappear uniformly and simultaneously. Copy shall not fade-out or fade-in, appear or disappear in any pattern, spiral or movement, or migrate from a side, top or bottom. 
c.  A digital menu board preview monument sign shall not interfere with the effectiveness, or obscure a traffic sign, device, or signal. 
d.  A digital menu board preview monument sign shall have a disconnecting switch located in accordance with the provisions of the National Electric Code and the Florida Building Code, as amended from time to time. The sign shall include an automatic shutoff device which renders a blank screen in the event of malfunction. 
e.  A digital menu board preview monument sign shall require both a sign permit and an electrical permit prior to installation. 
f.  A digital menu board preview monument sign shall require energy efficient LED-light emitting diode lighting. 
g.  A digital menu board preview monument sign shall have a powder-coating and be UV-ultraviolet resistant. 
4.  A digital menu board, if specifically permitted to be included within a conforming on-premises sign type allowed by this chapter, shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Digital menu board sign copy and images may change at intervals of not less than 60 seconds. 
b.  The entire digital menu board face shall appear and disappear uniformly and simultaneously. Copy shall not fade-out or fade-in, appear or disappear in any pattern, spiral or movement, or migrate from a side, top or bottom. 
c.  A digital menu board sign shall not interfere with the effectiveness, or obscure a traffic sign, device, or signal. 
d.  A digital menu board sign shall have a disconnecting switch located in accordance with the provisions of the National Electric Code and the Florida Building Code, as amended from time to time. The sign shall include an automatic shutoff device which renders a blank screen in the event of malfunction. 
e.  A digital menu board sign shall require both a sign permit and an electrical permit prior to installation. 
f.  A digital menu board sign shall require energy efficient LED-light emitting diode lighting. 
g.  A digital menu board sign shall have a powder-coating and be UV-ultraviolet resistant. 
(d)  Colors for sign copy, lettering, and logos are subject to city approval and conformance with an established master sign plan. Colors for sign backgrounds or sign structures should be contrasting with sign copy and are subject to city approval for conformance with the design standards established by the community design plan (LDC Section 813). 
(e)  Federally-registered trademark logo designs utilized for identification shall be respected unless doing so violates any provision of this chapter. The director shall determine whether a corporate logo is incompatible with the architectural design. Trademark logo colors shall be consistent with the applicable master sign plan. The building design shall not serve as an element of corporate advertising. 
(f)  These restrictions are not intended to hamper design creativity; however, consistency with professional standards and the city's established architectural design standards have priority. 
    1005.4. Maintenance. Every sign, together with its framework, braces, angles, or other supports, shall be well maintained in appearance and in a good and safe condition. The sign shall be properly secured, supported, and braced, and able to withstand wind pressures as required by the applicable building code or any other regulatory code or ordinance in effect within the municipal limits. In the event that an attached sign is removed, all anchor holes shall be filled and covered, by the owner of the property, in a manner that renders the anchor holes non-discernable with the wall. This shall be done within 30 days of removal. All lights and luminous tubes illuminating a sign shall be maintained in working condition. All replacement bulbs and lenses shall be of the same wattage and color as the light it is replacing, unless a change is required to meet existing code requirements. Rust inhibitors must be implemented to prevent staining of freestanding signs and walls. 
    1005.5. Landscaping. The following landscaping standards shall apply to all monument signs of at least 20 square feet, in accordance with Figure 1 and with general landscaping requirements of LDC Section 901.7. Other freestanding signs require landscaping treatment as well; refer to Sign Tables and the following standards for design guidelines. Applicants are encouraged to exceed the minimum monument sign landscaping requirements with an attractive landscaping design. 
(a)  A landscape area shall be provided, in addition to all other landscaping present or proposed on-site. 
(b)  The total required landscape area shall be derived from the following chart (Figure 1), based on a consideration of the area and height of the sign. Figure 1 estimates approximate sign structure areas and the minimum amount of required landscaping. The minimum number of trees and shrubs are rounded up to the nearest whole number. The landscape area shall be as approved in conjunction with the associated sign permit, is not necessarily required to completely encircle the sign and is intended to enhance the aesthetic value of the sign, not to obstruct its visibility or readability. 
(c)  A minimum of one tree or three palms shall be provided per monument sign, except Royal Palms are equivalent to three palms. Ground cover and annuals should be used to enhance the design. 
Figure 1: Monument Sign Landscaping Chart Monument Sign 
Square Footage 1 Height 
(ft.) Number of Trees 2 Number of Shrubs 2 20 2-4 1 10 4+ 1 16 45 4-6 2 20 6+ 3 24 60 4-6 4 24 6+ 6 27 72 4-6 6 28 6+ 6 32 84+ For each additional 20 square feet, add two trees and five shrubs  
1  Based on minimum total sign structure area. 
2  The minimum number of trees and shrubs is always rounded up to the next highest number. 
(Ord. No. 12-05, § 3(Exh. A), 11-30-11; Ord. No. 14-08, § 2(Exh. A), 11-18-13; Ord. No. 19-07 , § 5, 11-28-18) 
Sec. 1006. - Measurement of sign area and sign height. 
    1006.1. Sign area. Measurement of sign area shall be as follows: 
(a)  Freestanding signs: The total area within the smallest rectangle, circle, or triangle, which will completely enclose the sign face. The sign structure must be designed proportionally with the sign face and may not exceed three times the area of the sign face, inclusive of the area of the sign face, excluding architectural embellishments 
(b)  Attached (wall) signs: The total area within the smallest rectangle, circle, or triangle, which will completely enclose the sign face. 
(c)  All signs: When a sign has two faces, the area of all sides shall be included in determining the area, unless they are placed back-to-back. If back-to-back, then the sign area shall be taken as the area of either side, and if the sides are of unequal area, the larger shall determine the area. 
(d)  Exclusion of sign structure: The sign structure shall not be included as a portion of the sign face, provided that no message, symbol, or anything that can be construed as part of the sign face is displayed on or designed as part of the sign structure. 
    1006.2. Sign height. Sign height shall be measured from the crown of the nearest road (not including limited-access highways or other raised roadways) or paved area adjacent to the sign to the highest point of the overall sign structure, excluding architectural embellishments. 
    1006.3. Formula for calculating maximum wall sign area not specifically limited by permanent sign standards in Section 1007 and permanent sign table (Table 1): Maximum of 25 percent of linear building frontage of the establishment on the façade where the sign is located, multiplied by one square foot (or a base of 30 square feet, whichever is greater), plus distance and height bonus as applicable. Bonus factors include (1) distance from nearest common access way (as measured from the edge of pavement) or street (as measured from the ROW) to the façade on which the sign is located; and (2) height of building. 
(1)  Distance bonus: Multiply maximum sign area (linear frontage calculation) by: 
(a)  1.2 for distances of at least 100 feet and less than 200 feet; 
(b)  1.3 for distances of at least 200 feet and less than 300 feet; 
(c)  1.4 for distances of at least 300 feet and less than 500 feet; 
(d)  1.67 for distances of at least 500 feet and less than 750 feet; 
(e)  2.0 for distances of at least 750 feet. 
(2)  Height bonus: Multiply maximum sign area (with or without distance bonus applied) by 1.25 for each 15 feet of height measured to top of parapet or to median point of sloped roof, excluding towers that project beyond the primary building height. 
(3)  Maximum total sign area: Maximum total sign area for all wall signs may not exceed 200 square feet, even if the permitted area may be calculated to exceed this amount and even if the area of more than one permitted sign is specifically permitted to be combined. 
    1006.4. Formula for calculating maximum monument sign structure area not specifically limited by permanent sign standards in Section 1007 and/or permanent sign table (Table 1): 
(1)  Maximum base area of 60 square feet for parcels with at least 100 feet of linear lot frontage where the sign is located, multiplied by the following acreage bonus factors: 
(a)  1.2 for gross site area of at least two and one-half acres and less than five acres; 
(b)  1.3 for gross site area of at least five acres and less than ten acres; 
(c)  1.4 for gross site area of at least ten acres and less than 15 acres; 
(d)  1.67 for gross site area of at least 15 acres and less than 20 acres; 
(e)  1.8 for gross site area of at least 20 acres and less than 25 acres; 
(f)  2.4 for gross site area of at least 25 acres and less than 40 acres; 
(g)  3.0 for gross site area of at least 40 acres. 
(2)  Height bonus: Multiply maximum height allowance in permanent sign table by 1.25 for each ten acres of gross site area, up to a maximum of 12 feet in height. 
(3)  Maximum allowance: Maximum total monument sign structure area may not exceed 180 square feet and sign height may not exceed 12 feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 12-05, § 3(Exh. A), 11-30-11) 
Sec. 1007. - Permanent signs. 
    The signs specified in the permanent signs table (Table 1) are permitted to be erected or maintained upon any structure, building lot, plot or parcel of land, subject to the standards listed in Table 1, the limitations of this chapter and the issuance of the appropriate permit, unless specifically required to obtain additional approval. If it is possible to define a sign using more than one of the definitions contained in Section 1002, and one of the corresponding sign types is referenced in Table 1, then the sign type that provides the most restrictive standard shall apply. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, to the extent that this section permits a sign containing commercial copy, it shall permit a noncommercial sign to the same extent. In any instance where the provisions of Table 1 conflict with the textual provisions of this section, the textual provisions shall govern. 
    1007.1. General intent. The intent of regulating signs that are visible from the public frontage is to ensure proper dimensioning and placement with respect to existing or planned architectural features, to maintain or improve public safety, to maintain or improve the aesthetic character of the context in which they are located, and to provide legible information for pedestrians, as well as motorists and cyclists. 
    "Residential property" shall refer to the RL, E, RS-1, R1-B, RS-3, RS-4, RS-5, RS-6, RS-7, RM-10, RM-16, RM-25 districts or any other residential zoning district. "Nonresidential property" shall refer to the TND, TOC, B-1, B-2, B-3, OP, M-1, PID, EC, CR, CF, OS, U or any other nonresidential or mixed use zoning district. Parcels, tracts, or lots that are located within a residential zoning district, but are dedicated to nonresidential uses, shall be regulated as if they were in a nonresidential zoning district. References in both the permanent and temporary sign tables to locations where such signs are permitted include RS, Residential Single-Family Homes (including RL, E, RS-1, R1-B, RS-3, RS-4, RS-5, RS-6, RS-7 districts); RM, Residential Multi-Family (including RM-10, RM-16, RM-25 districts); MU, Mixed Use Districts (including TND and TOC districts); CM, Commercial and other non-residential property (including B-1, B-2, B-3, OP, M-1, PID, EC districts); and CA, Communal and Civic areas (including CR, CF, OS, U districts, and including common public areas of RS and RM). 
(a)  Signs may not be located in any easements unless a formal consent to encroach agreement has been approved by the city and all applicable easement holders. 
(b)  No portion of a blade sign, canopy or awning sign shall be lower than eight feet clearance from the pedestrian walkway or ground surface. 
(c)  All monument signs other than major roadway and residential monument signs must include an address number or address range. 
    1007.2. Table 1, Permanent Sign Table. 
Purpose: These sign regulations are intended to define, permit, and control the placement of signs within the city. The city commission has adopted these regulations in order to achieve the following community goals and objectives: 
(a)  Protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public; 
(b)  Safeguard the public use and nature of the streets and sidewalks; 
(c)  Protect and enhance the visual environment of the city; 
(d)  Minimize visual distractions to motorists using the public streets; 
(e)  Promote an aesthetically pleasing environment for Miramar residents; 
(f)  Promote the economic growth of Miramar by creating a community image that is conducive to attracting new business and industrial development; 
(g)  Allow legible and effective signs and prevent their over-concentration, improper placement, and excessive height, bulk, density, and area; 
(h)  Promote the safety of persons and property by requiring that signs not create a hazard due to collapse, fire, decay, or abandonment; 
(i)  Ensure that signs do not obstruct fire-fighting efforts, and do not create traffic hazards by confusing or distracting motorists or by impairing drivers' ability to see pedestrians, obstacles, or other vehicles or to read traffic signs; 
(j)  Allow the identification of commercial and noncommercial uses, ideas, products and services in the community; and 
(k)  Control visual clutter and encourage high professional standards in sign design and display. 
Zoning Districts: 
RS Residential Single-Family; RL, E, RS-1, R1-B, RS-3, RS-4, RS-5, RS-6, RS-7, PUD, and T districts. RM Residential Multi-Family; RM-10, RM-16, RM-25 and PUD districts. MU Mixed Use; TND, TOC districts. CM Commercial and other non-residential property; B-1, B-2, B-3, OP, M-1, PID, PUD, and EC districts. CA Communal and Civic areas; CR, CF, OS, CNS, and U districts, and includes common public areas of RS (single-family) and RM (multi-family) residential communities.  
Notes on Tables: 
If "Yes" indicator is present, then: 
Landscaping is required, consistent with the requirements of Section 1005.5. 
Illumination is permitted, consistent with the requirements of Section 1005.3(c). 
In Other category, refer to text in Sections 1007, 1008, or 1010 for more detailed information. 
The sign face area indicates the maximum area permitted for the sign face. 
Table 1. Permanent Signage RS RM MU CM CA Specifications Activity Identification Sign 
(within Freestanding Monument) ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 2 b. Sign Face Area 24/18 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area 72 s.f. d. Width 12 ft. e. Height 6 ft. f. Depth/Projection 8" max. g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height 16" max. i. Setback 10 ft. j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination Yes/Yes l. Other Yes; Sec. 1007.3(a) Activity Identification Wall Sign 
(Attached to Wall) ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1 b. Sign Face Area 12 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width 4 ft. e. Height 4 ft. f. Depth/Projection 8" max. g. Clearance 4 ft. h. Letter Height 2" min. i. Setback N/A j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other Yes; Sec. 1007.3(a) Address Sign--Non Residential ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1 per unit min. b. Sign Face Area N/A c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height N/A f. Depth/Projection 1/2" g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height 6" min. i. Setback N/A j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other Yes; Sec. 1010(a) Address Sign--Residential ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1/dwelling unit b. Sign Face Area N/A c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height N/A f. Depth/Projection 1/2" g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height 3" min. i. Setback N/A j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other Yes; Sec. 1010(a) ATM Sign 
Automatic Teller Machine ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1 per ATM b. Sign Face Area 5 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height N/A f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height 8" max. i. Setback N/A j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A/Yes l. Other Yes; Sec. 1007.3(b) Awning Address/Identification Sign ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1 per awning b. Sign Face Area N/A c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height N/A f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height 4" min./12" max. i. Setback N/A j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other Yes; Sec. 1007.3(c) Band Identification Sign ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1 max./façade b. Sign Face Area Sec. 1006.3 c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height N/A f. Depth/Projection 8" max. g. Clearance 8' min. h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback N/A j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination No/Yes l. Other Yes; Sec. 1007.3(d) Blade Identification Sign 
Blade Advertising moved to Temp. Sign Table ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1/façade b. Sign Face Area 6 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width 3 ft. e. Height 3 ft. f. Depth/Projection 3 ft. g. Clearance 8 ft. h. Letter Height 4" min. i. Setback N/A j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other Yes; Sec. 1007.3(e) Bulletin Board Sign 
(Outdoor Display Case) 
¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1 b. Sign Face Area 16 s.f. max. c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width 4 ft. e. Height 4 ft. f. Depth/Projection 4" g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback N/A j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination No/Yes l. Other Yes; Sec. 1007.3(w) Canopy Sign 
(Pedestrian-Oriented) ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1/double sided b. Sign Face Area 6 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height N/A f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance 8 ft. h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback N/A j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other No City Public Information Sign ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1 b. Sign Face Area 48 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area 144 s.f. d. Width 10 ft. e. Height 24 ft. f. Depth/Projection 4 ft. g. Clearance 8 ft. h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback 10 ft. j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination Yes/Yes l. Other Yes; Sec. 1007.3(f) Community Information Sign ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 3/parcel b. Sign Face Area 4 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height 8 ft. f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback 5 ft. j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other Yes; Sec. 1007.3(g) Digital Clock ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1 b. Sign Face Area Sec. 1007.3 c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height N/A f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback N/A j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination No/Yes l. Other Yes; Sec. 1007.3(h) Digital Menu Board 
(Drive-thru restaurants) ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1 per drive-thru land b. Sign Face Area 40 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area 80 s.f. d. Width 8 ft. e. Height 8 ft. f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback 10 ft. j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination Yes/Yes l. Other Yes; Sec. 1007.3(g) Digital Menu Board Preview Monument Sign 
(Drive-thru restaurants) ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1 per drive-thru land b. Sign Face Area 15 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area 30 s.f. d. Width 3 ft. e. Height 6 ft. f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback 10 ft. j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination Yes/Yes l. Other Yes; Sec. 1007.3(g) Directional Sign 
(Non-Residential) ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) Sec. 1007.3 b. Sign Face Area 8 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area 24 s.f. d. Width 6 ft. e. Height 4 ft. f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height 4" min. i. Setback 10 ft. j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination Yes/Yes l. Other Yes; Sec. 1007.3(i) Directional Sign 
(Non-Residential Wall) ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) Sec. 1007.3(i) b. Sign Face Area Sec. 1007.3(i) c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height N/A f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height Sec. 1007.3(i) i. Setback N/A j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination No/Yes l. Other Yes; Sec. 1007.3(i) Directional Sign 
(Residential) ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) Sec. 1007.3 b. Sign Face Area 8 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area 12 s.f. d. Width 3 ft. e. Height 4 ft. f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback 5 ft. j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination Yes/Yes l. Other Yes; Sec. 1007.3(i) Directory Monument Sign ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 3; per Sec. 1004.3 b. Sign Face Area 24 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area 36 s.f. d. Width 6 ft. e. Height 6 ft. f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height 4" min. i. Setback 5 ft. j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination Yes/Yes l. Other No Directory Wall Sign ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 2 b. Sign Face Area 12 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width 4 ft. e. Height 4 ft. f. Depth/Projection 8" max. g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height 4" min. i. Setback N/A j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination No/Yes l. Other No Drive-Thru Directional 
Freestanding Monument or 
Decorative Pole Sign ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 2 b. Sign Face Area 4 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area 12 s.f. d. Width 3 ft. e. Height 4 ft. f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback 5 ft. j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination Yes/No l. Other No Gasoline Monument Identification Sign 
(includes Price Sign within Monument) ¦ a. Quantity (max) 2; 1 set of prices per/face b. Sign Face Area 24 s.f./20 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area 72 s.f. d. Width 12 ft. e. Height 6 ft. f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback 10 ft. j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination Yes/Yes l. Other Yes; Sec. 1007.3(j) Gasoline Service Station 
Canopy Identification Sign ¦ a. Quantity (max) 3 b. Sign Face Area 24 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height 2 ft. max. f. Depth/Projection 8" max. g. Clearance 14 ft. min. h. Letter Height 24" max. i. Setback N/A j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination No/Yes l. Other Yes; Sec. 1007.3(k) Gasoline Service Station Identification Sign on Store 
(Convenience Store) ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1 b. Sign Face Area 30 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height N/A f. Depth/Projection 8" max. g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback N/A j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination No/Yes l. Other Yes; Sec. 1007.3(l) Individual Building Monument Identification Sign ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1 b. Sign Face Area 36 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area 72 s.f. d. Width 12 ft. e. Height 6 ft. f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback 10 ft. j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination Yes/Yes l. Other Yes; Sec. 1007.3(m) Leasing Freestanding Advertising Sign ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) Sec. 1007.3(n) b. Sign Face Area 64 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width 8 ft. e. Height 8 ft. f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback 10 ft. j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination Yes/No l. Other Yes; Sec. 1007.3(n) Major Roadway Sign ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 4 max. b. Sign Face Area 48 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area 144 s.f. d. Width 12 ft. e. Height 12 ft. f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height 30" max. i. Setback 10 ft. j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination Yes/Yes l. Other Yes; Sec. 1007.3(o) Marquee Sign ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1 b. Sign Face Area 84 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width Sec. 1007.3 e. Height Sec. 1007.3 f. Depth/Projection Sec. 1007.3 g. Clearance Sec. 1007.3 h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback Sec. 1007.3 j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination No/Yes l. Other Yes; Sec. 1007.3(p) Memorial Sign ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 2 b. Sign Face Area 4 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height 2 ft. f. Depth/Projection 2 ft. g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback N/A j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other Yes; Sec. 1010(e) Menu Board Monument Sign ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1 per drive-thru lane b. Sign Face Area 72 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area 108 s.f. d. Width 12 ft. e. Height 8 ft. f. Depth/Projection 24" g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback 10 ft. j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination Yes/Yes l. Other Yes; Sec. 1007.3(q) Menu Board Preview Monument Sign ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1 per drive-thru lane b. Sign Face Area 24 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area 36 s.f. d. Width 3 ft. e. Height 4 ft. f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback 10 ft. j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination Yes/Yes l. Other Yes; Sec. 1007.3(q) Menu Board Wall Sign ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1 per drive-thru lane b. Sign Face Area 24 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area 30 s.f. d. Width 6 ft. e. Height 4 ft. f. Depth/Projection 8" g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback N/A j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination No/Yes l. Other No Nameplate Sign ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1 b. Sign Face Area 2 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height N/A f. Depth/Projection 2" g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback N/A j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other Yes; Sec. 1010(f) Office Building Monument Identification Sign 
(Multiple Establishment Center) ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 2; Sec. 1007.3(r); 1/entrance b. Sign Face Area 48 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area Sec. 1006.4 d. Width 18 ft. e. Height 6 ft. f. Depth/Projection 24" g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback 10 ft. j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination Yes/Yes l. Other Yes; Sec. 1007.3(r) Office Building Identification Wall Sign 
(Multiple Establishment with Individual Tenant Entrances) ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1/tenant b. Sign Face Area Sec. 1006.3 c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height N/A f. Depth/Projection 8" Max. g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback N/A j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other Yes; Sec. 1007.3(s) Office Building Identification Wall Sign 
(Multiple Establishment Center with Shared Tenant Entrances) ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) Sec. 1007.3(t) b. Sign Face Area Sec. 1006.3 c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height N/A f. Depth/Projection 8" g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback N/A j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other Yes; Sec. 1007.3(t) Office Building Directory Wall Sign 
(Multiple Establishment Center) ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 2 b. Sign Face Area 24 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height N/A f. Depth/Projection 8" g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback N/A j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination No/Yes l. Other No Parapet Sign ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) Sec. 1007.3(x); 
1/façade b. Sign Face Area Sec. 1006.3 c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height N/A f. Depth/Projection 8" max. g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback N/A j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination No/No l. Other Sec. 1007.3(x) Residential Community Identification Monument Sign 
(Entrance Feature Sign) ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) Sec. 1007.3(y); 1/frontage b. Sign Face Area 48 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area Sec. 1006.4 d. Width N/A e. Height 10 ft. f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback 10 ft. j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination Yes/Yes l. Other Sec. 1007.3(y) Residential Community Identification Wall Sign ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 4 b. Sign Face Area Sec. 1006.3 c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height N/A f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback N/A j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination No/Yes l. Other Yes; Sec. 1007.3(z) Shopping Center Directional Sign 
(Multiple Establishment Center) ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 4 b. Sign Face Area 12 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area 24 s.f. d. Width 3 ft. e. Height 4 ft. f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback 5 ft. j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination Yes/Yes l. Other No Shopping Center Directory Wall Sign 
(Multiple Establishment Center) ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 4 b. Sign Face Area 16 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area 16 s.f. d. Width 4 ft. e. Height 4 ft. f. Depth/Projection 4" g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback N/A j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination No/Yes l. Other No Shopping Center Directory Freestanding Sign 
(Multiple Establishment Center) ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 4 b. Sign Face Area 24 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area 36 s.f. d. Width 4 ft. e. Height 6 ft. f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback 5 ft. j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination Yes/Yes l. Other No Shopping Center Identification Wall Sign 
(Multiple Establishment Center) ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) Sec. 1007.3(d) b. Sign Face Area Sec. 1006.3 c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height N/A f. Depth/Projection 8" g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback N/A j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination No/Yes l. Other No Shopping Center Monument Sign 
(Multiple Establishment Center) ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 3 b. Sign Face Area Sec. 1006.4 c. Sign Structure Area Sec. 1006.4 d. Width N/A e. Height 6 ft. f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback 10 ft. j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination Yes/Yes l. Other No Street and Traffic Pole Signs ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) As required b. Sign Face Area As required c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height As required f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance As required h. Letter Height As required i. Setback As required j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other Yes; Sec. 1007.3(aa) Street and Traffic Wall Signs ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) As required b. Sign Face Area As required c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height As required f. Depth/Projection As required g. Clearance As required h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback N/A j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other Yes; Sec. 1007.3(aa) Tower Entrance Feature Wall Sign 
Identification ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 2; Sec. 1007.3(bb) b. Sign Face Area Sec. 1007.3(bb) c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height N/A f. Depth/Projection 8" max. g. Clearance Sec. 1007.3(bb) h. Letter Height Sec. 1007.3(bb) i. Setback Sec. 1007.3(bb) j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination Yes; Sec. 1007.3(bb) l. Other Sec. 1007.3(bb) Warning Signs ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 2 b. Sign Face Area 2 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width As required e. Height As required f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance As required h. Letter Height As required i. Setback As required j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other No Window Sign 
Hours of Operation ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1 b. Sign Face Area Sec. 1007.3(ee) c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height N/A f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback N/A j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other Sec. 1007.3(ee) Window Sign 
Identification ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) Sec. 1007.3(cc), (dd) b. Sign Face Area Sec. 1007.3 c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height N/A f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height 8" max. i. Setback N/A j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other Sec. 1007.3(cc)-(ee)  
    1007.3. Specific sign standards (supplemental to Table 1). 
a.  Specific to activity identification sign (within freestanding monument or attached to a wall). 
A.  Monument sign must include address numerals. 
B.  Up to two monument signs are permitted if facing different street frontages. 
C.  May include a message board which may be electronic or manual changeable copy, subject to Section 1005.3(c). 
D.  Identification of non-profit organizations is limited to 24 square feet and message board area is limited to 18 square feet within a freestanding monument; the combined area of identification and message board within a wall sign is limited to 12 square feet. 
E.  A wall activity identification sign requires an architectural frame. 
b.  Automatic teller machine (ATM) sign. 
A.  Identification sign must be architecturally integrated into ATM. 
B.  Advertising and instruction signs may consist of an electronic message board, subject to Section 1005.3(c), or decals, but must be integrated into the design and cannot exceed one square foot in total sign area. 
c.  Awning address and identification sign. 
A.  At least one awning per frontage must include the address of the establishment. 
B.  Business identification, including logo, may be included on additional awning. 
C.  Permissible awning types include: 
1.  Fixed or retractable awnings. 
2.  Shed awnings. 
3.  Dome awnings. 
D.  Signage shall be limited to the valance of the awning or the vertical portion of a dome awning. 
E.  Awnings shall be a minimum of four feet in depth. 
F.  Awnings shall not extend beyond the width of the building or tenant space, nor encroach above the roof line or the story above. 
G.  The height of the valance shall not exceed 12 inches. 
H.  Letters, numbers, and graphics shall not exceed 75 percent of the valance area. 
I.  Awning signs shall not be internally illuminated or backlit. 
d.  Band identification signs (also known as wall signs). 
A.  All establishments within office and retail centers are permitted one band identification sign on each first story façade, provided that such façade faces a street frontage or contains a standard pedestrian entrance. An additional band identification sign may be permitted for a façade that does not face a street frontage or contain a standard pedestrian entrance, provided that such façade faces a parking area of a retail center, as in an outparcel condition, or faces an office or retail space. An additional band identification sign shall not be permitted on any façade which faces residential property, unless that residential property is a portion of a mixed-use community. An additional band identification sign allowed by this subsection is limited to no more than two feet in height and no more than 24 square feet in total area, regardless of the size permitted for other allowable band identification sign. 
B.  Band identification signs may not be provided in addition to another type of permitted permanent wall identification sign type located on the same façade, such as a parapet sign, office building identification wall sign, shopping center identification wall sign or other attached identification sign. However, the following types of signs are permitted as additional identification signs, as appropriate: activity identification, awning identification, ATM identification, blade identification, and canopy identification. 
C.  Band identification signs shall include only letters, background, lighting, and an optional logo. 
D.  The following band identification sign construction types are permitted: 
1.  Cut-out letters: Letters shall be individually attached to the wall or on a separate background panel, and may be illuminated by an approved decorative light source external and separate from the sign. 
2.  Flat panel letters: Letters shall be printed or etched on the same surface as the background, which is then affixed to the wall and may be illuminated by an approved decorative light source external and separate from the sign. 
3.  Channel letters: Each letter shall have its own internal lighting element, individually attached to the wall or onto a separate background panel. The letter shall be translucent, or solid to create a backlit halo effect. 
E.  Height and width shall be measured using smallest rectangle that fully encompasses the entire extent of letters, logo and background. 
F.  Band identification signs shall not be wider than 90 percent of the width of the building facade or individual tenant space. 
G.  Band identification signs shall not project vertically above the roof line. 
H.  Band identification signs may be illuminated from dusk to dawn. External light sources shall be shielded from direct view to reduce glare. 
I.  Electrical raceways, conduits and wiring shall not be exposed. Internal lighting elements shall be contained completely within the sign assembly or inside the wall. 
J.  Band identification signs should be placed consistent with the architectural features that suggest the best placement for signage. They should be vertically aligned with the center of an architectural feature such as a storefront window, entry portal, or width of a bay or overall retail space. They shall not interrupt or obscure these features or cause visual disharmony. 
K.  Where multiple band identification signs are present on a single building (i.e., for retail tenants in a shopping center), signage shall be coordinated in terms of scale, placement, colors and materials, through master sign plan approval. 
e.  Blade identification and blade advertising signs. 
A.  Blade identification signs may be double-sided. 
B.  Blade identification signs shall be permitted only for establishments that have a principal entrance on the first story. 
C.  Establishments shall be permitted one blade identification sign per façade, in addition to one non-projecting wall sign. Blade identification signs may encroach into the public frontage up to four feet and shall clear the sidewalk by at least eight feet. 
D.  Blade identification signs shall not encroach above the roof line nor above the bottom of the second story window. 
E.  Slogans, address labels, operating hours and contact information shall not be permitted on the blade identification sign; however, coinciding with an approved special event, a blade identification sign may be temporarily replaced by a blade advertising sign upon approval of a TSP issued by the city for a specified duration not to exceed 30 days. 
F.  Mounting hardware, such as supports and brackets, may be simple and unobtrusive or highly decorative, but shall complement the design of the sign and the building. 
G.  For buildings and multiple establishment centers with multiple blade identification signs, placement and location, mounting hardware and sign shapes, sizes and colors shall be coordinated. A master sign plan shall be required prior to placement of blade identification signs within any multiple establishment center, and the location of all blade identification signs shall be in accordance with the master sign plan approval. 
H.  Blade identification signs shall not be placed on the same horizontal or vertical plane as an attached sign, or otherwise placed in a manner that interferes with the visibility of an attached sign. 
f.  City public information sign. Message board may be electronic and must be integrated into an architectural monument, subject to Section 1005.3(c). 
g.  Community information sign. 
A.  Signs must be at least five feet from edge of pavement, and shall not be located in any easement or within a sight triangle that would obstruct visibility by pedestrian or vehicle traffic. 
B.  Permanent signs require landscaping treatment at base of sign. 
h.  Digital clock. 
A.  Clock must be included within allowable sign area of permitted monument or wall sign. 
B.  May include digital message format for time and temperature indicators. 
i.  Directional sign-Non-residential and residential. 
A.  Maximum quantity determined per master sign plan for the property. 
B.  Ground cover landscaping required; subject to landscaping requirements in this chapter if monument is at least 20 square feet in area. 
C.  Must include addresses and building numbers, if applicable. 
D.  All retail establishments may have directional wall signs not to exceed eight square feet in area. Furthermore, retail establishments exceeding 50,000 square feet in area and having at least two separate standard pedestrian entrances while offering general merchandise and/or specialty items, may install directional signs above the walls of these entrances with an identifying name not to exceed a letter height of 18 inches that directs customers to the proper entrance for the specified use. 
j.  Gasoline identification and price signs within monument identification sign. 
A.  Monument sign must include address numerals. 
B.  Pricing message board may include an electronic message board or manual changeable copy message board, subject to Section 1005.3(c). 
C.  Identification of business is limited to 24 square feet and message board is limited to 20 square feet. 
D.  Up to two tenant signs may be included within the total 24 square feet for identification. 
k.  Gasoline service station canopy identification sign. 
A.  May include both lettering and logos. 
B.  One per street frontage, not to exceed three per property. 
C.  May not include colored stripes even if part of logo branding. 
D.  Must be installed on the fascia of the canopy; may not be installed on the roof. 
E.  Address signs must be installed on at least two frontages of canopy. 
l.  Gasoline service station identification/directional signs on convenience store and automatic carwash. 
A.  Address sign required on store. 
B.  Identification of store is permitted 30 square feet. 
C.  Identification of up to two additional businesses located on the premises are permitted with each up to 12 square feet. 
D.  Convenience store shall not have any advertising on exterior walls. Advertising shall be permitted on window signs only. 
E.  Car wash structure must also include "Enter" and "Exit" directional signs on car wash entrance and exit, consisting of permanent mounted metallic or plastic letters, which may be illuminated. 
F.  Shall not have any advertising on or near the car wash structure other than an attached or freestanding menu board with price information and instructions approved by a master sign plan. 
m.  Individual building monument identification sign. 
A.  Address sign is required. 
B.  Main occupant (as determined by owner) may have up to 36 square feet of sign face area for identification, including logo. 
C.  May be double-sided if sign is perpendicular to the street. 
D.  Up to two tenant signs may be included in the 36 square feet of total sign face area. 
E.  Signs may be internally-illuminated as long as sign face illumination is integrated into the monument and electrical components are not visible. 
F.  Signs may be externally-illuminated by ground light fixtures hidden within the ground cover landscaping bed. These fixtures may not exceed 18 inches in height. 
G.  Banners may not be hung over a portion of the sign, except as a temporary replacement for a permanent sign and as approved with a temporary sign permit. 
n.  Leasing freestanding advertising/identification sign. 
A.  Requires a building permit from the building division. 
B.  One per street frontage-Not to exceed three per property. 
C.  General address indication is required. 
D.  May not visually obstruct other permanent or temporary signs or any line-of-sight required for vehicle or pedestrian traffic. 
E.  Landscaping treatment required per Section 1005.5. 
F.  Design and maintenance standards shall comply with Section 1005. 
o.  Major roadway monument identification sign, residential. 
A.  General address indication is required. 
B.  Name of subdivision is required; parcel or pod identification is optional, but no more than six pods or parcels may be identified on a single identification sign. 
C.  One per street frontage-Not to exceed four per parcel. 
p.  Marquee sign. 
A.  Marquee signs may only be permitted for theaters and performing arts centers. 
B.  Electronic message boards may be permitted within marquee signs subject to the standards provided in Section 1005.3(c). 
C.  Marquee signs shall be located only above a principal entrance of a building. 
D.  No marquee sign shall be wider than the entrance it serves, plus two feet on each side thereof. 
E.  No portion of a marquee sign shall be lower than ten foot clearance. 
F.  No marquee sign shall extend closer to the curb/ROW than three feet. 
G.  Columns or posts may be used as supports for marquee signs provided that a minimum eight foot clearance is provided. 
H.  All Marquees, including anchors, bolts, supporting rods and braces, shall be constructed of non-combustible materials and shall be designed by a structural engineer and approved by the building inspector. 
I.  Marquee components and materials may vary. Anchors, bolts, and supporting rods should be limited to the interior of the marquee. 
J.  A band identification sign shall be permitted above a marquee sign, in accordance with subsection (d). 
q.  Menu board monument sign and menu board preview monument sign. 
A.  Advertising only permitted within sign face area. 
B.  Signs may be internally-illuminated as long as sign face is integrated into the monument and electrical components are not visible. 
C.  Signs may be externally-illuminated by ground light fixtures hidden within the ground cover landscaping bed. These fixtures may not exceed 18 inches in height. 
D.  Full landscaping treatment is required per Section 1005.5, regardless of size. 
E.  Preview menu board monument sign must be on architectural pedestal or integrated within vertical monument. 
F.  The digital menu board and the preview menu board monument sign must have a full color spectrum and energy efficient LED-light emitting diode lighting, a powder-coat and UV-ultraviolet resistant finishes, and a full landscaping treatment as required by section 1005.5, regardless of size. 
r.  Office building (multiple establishment center) monument identification sign. 
A.  One per vehicular entrance from a street that allows left-turn access into the site for a maximum of two per parcel. 
B.  Must identify name of center and may identify up to six tenants on each sign face side; may include additional tenants depending on size of property and maximum size per Section 1006.4 allowance. 
C.  Must include property address number(s). 
s.  Office building (multiple establishment with individual tenant entrances) identification wall sign (see also band sign). 
A.  One per ground floor entrance for individual tenant spaces provided each tenant has a principal pedestrian entrance. 
B.  Building may have a maximum of up to two wall identification signs indicating the name of the center exclusive of number of individual tenants permitted a sign. 
t.  Office building (shared tenant entrance multiple establishment center) identification wall sign. 
A.  Subject to a master sign plan approval. 
B.  In buildings with up to ten stories with multiple tenants, tenants with at least one entire floor of space may have one wall sign, not to exceed more than four wall signs above the ground level for all tenants within the entire building. 
C.  Tenants with at least 50 percent occupancy of the building may have up to two signs on the building on two different facades, not to exceed a total of four wall signs above the ground level for all tenants within the entire building. 
D.  Building may have a maximum of two wall identification signs indicating the name of the center (if applicable), exclusive of number of tenants permitted a sign (maximum of one per street frontage). 
E.  Building must have property address number(s). 
u.  Office building (single establishment center) monument identification sign. 
A.  One per vehicular entrance from a street that allows left-turn access into the site for a maximum of two per parcel. 
B.  May have up to two additional tenants listed on each sign face. 
C.  Must include property address number. 
v.  Office building (single establishment center) identification wall sign. 
A.  Must have a sign on the façade with a standard pedestrian entrance, subject to Section 1006.3, but may have one additional sign on another façade, provided it is visible from the roadway. 
w.  Outdoor display cases (bulletin boards). 
A.  Each outdoor display case shall not exceed 16 square feet. 
B.  Outdoor display cases may be externally or internally illuminated. 
C.  Outdoor display cases shall not be attached to shop front windows. 
x.  Parapet sign. 
A.  Parapet signs are permitted where the architecture requires this type of construction, but are not permitted where another attached (wall) identification sign type is provided. 
B.  Parapet signs may not exceed 75 percent of the height of the parapet 
C.  One per street frontage; maximum of two total. 
y.  Residential community identification monument sign (entrance feature sign). May include the names of individual pods of the subdivision, provided that the subdivision name is provided in a larger font. Quantity shall be limited to one sign per street frontage; or a maximum of four for the entire community. 
z.  Residential community identification wall sign. 
A.  Letters may be pin-mounted (non-illuminated) or internally illuminated or up-lit. 
aa.  Street and traffic pole or wall signs. 
A.  Must meet established federal/state/local governmental standards and criteria. 
B.  Must be decorative. U-channel posts are not permitted, except for those stop signs located at the driveway entrances. 
bb.  Tower entrance feature wall sign. 
A.  The design standards shall be determined by a master sign plan for the property. 
B.  Each residential property may have a maximum of two entrance towers, each facing a different frontage, to which signage may be attached. 
C.  Each commercial and mixed-use property may have a maximum of two entrance towers, each facing a different frontage, to which signage may be attached. 
D.  Each residential entrance tower may have a maximum of one wall sign identifying the name of the community, which is limited to a total sign area of 30 square feet in area. 
E.  Each non-residential or mixed-use development entrance tower may have a maximum of one wall sign identifying the name of the center, which is limited to a total sign area of 24 square feet in area. 
F.  Each non-residential or mixed-use development entrance tower may have a maximum of two wall signs identifying the names of tenants, which is limited to a total sign area of 16 square feet in area. 
G.  Each non-residential or mixed-use development entrance tower must have an address range installed on at least one face of the tower, with letters at least six inches tall. 
H.  The name of the center may be placed above or below the clock, but can be no higher than 24 feet above the crown of the adjacent roadway. The maximum letter height shall be 18 inches. 
I.  The tenant signs must be placed below the clock, but can be no higher than 16 feet above the crown of the adjacent roadway. The maximum letter height shall be 12 inches. 
J.  Each tower must be located at least ten feet from the property line. 
K.  Landscaping shall consist of a minimum of eight trees and 48 shrubs. 
cc.  Window sign-Identification. 
A.  Window identification signs may include only parts of the business establishment name that are not included on the permitted wall identification sign, due to space or allowance. 
dd.  Window sign-Message. 
A.  Window message signs are considered permanent, and shall include messages of a permanent nature, such as phone numbers and primary goods and services offered by the business(es) located within. 
ee.  Specific to all window signs. 
A.  Only the following window sign types shall be permitted, and shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1.  One per establishment frontage. 
2.  Window signs shall consist of professionally-made vinyl appliqué letters applied to the window. Appliqués shall consist of individual letters or graphics with no visible background. 
3.  Hanging signs that hang from the ceiling behind the window shall be considered window signs and shall be included in the calculation of maximum allowable window sign area. 
4.  Neon signs or signs which approximate neon in appearance shall be limited to a maximum of one square foot for the entire tenant storefront, and must be placed inside the tenant space. 
5.  Door signs applied to or hanging inside the glass portion of an entrance doorway shall be considered window signs and shall be included in the calculation of maximum allowable window sign area. 
B.  Window signs shall not interfere with the primary function of windows, which is to enable passersby and public safety personnel to see through windows into premises and view product displays. 
C.  The maximum area for all window signs on any establishment shall be no larger than ten percent of the total area of all windows. Sign area shall be measured using smallest rectangle that fully encompasses the entire extent of letters, logo and background. 
D.  Message window signs may list services and/or products sold on the premises, or provide phone numbers, operating hours or other messages, provided that the total combined area of both message window signs, and identification window signs, do not exceed the limit provided in subsection (c) above. 
E.  Letters on window signs shall be no taller than eight inches. 
(Ord. No. 12-05, § 3(Exh. A), 11-30-11; Ord. No. 14-08, § 2(Exh. A), 11-18-13; Ord. No. 19-07 , § 7, 11-28-18) 
Sec. 1008. - Temporary signs. 
    Under no circumstances shall a temporary sign be erected for longer than the scheduled length of the event to which it relates. If it is possible to define a sign using more than one of the definitions contained in Section 1002, and one of the corresponding sign types is referenced in this section or in the Table 2, the Temporary Signs Table, then the sign type that provides the most restrictive standard shall apply. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, to the extent that this section permits a sign containing commercial copy, it shall permit a noncommercial sign to the same extent. Specific sign standards are provided in Table 2. All temporary signs are prohibited to be placed on utility poles and similar structures. 
    General provisions for all temporary signs: 
    1008.1. Time of display. Where not specified in this Code, all temporary signs shall not be posted more than 30 days prior to the time of the event or activity to which they related, and shall be removed no later than seven calendar days after the conclusion of that event or activity. 
    1008.2. Consent and assurance of removal for signs placed on property owned by others. Prior to the placement of any temporary sign on multi-family residential or nonresidential property, not owned by the person placing the sign(s), that person must: 
(1)  Obtain the prior written consent, on forms provided by the city, of the owner of the property allowing the placement of the sign on the property and submit same to the city clerk. The property owner shall acknowledge that they are responsible for the removal of any such sign(s), if they are not removed by the person placing the sign(s). 
(2)  Submit a letter acknowledging: 
(a)  Responsibility for the removal of his or her temporary sign(s) no later than seven days after the event or activity to which they relate. 
(b)  That no sign may be placed in a public right-of-way or within an easement. 
(c)  That the city has the authority to remove such sign(s) and may charge the person placing the sign(s) a fee to be set by resolution of the city commission for such removal should the person not remove the sign(s). 
    1008.2.3. Exemption from consent requirement for political signs. Political signs shall not be subject to the requirements of Section 1008.2. Such signs shall be subject to all requirements provided in Section 1010.h. 
    1008.3. Specific provisions for residential development and marketing signs (model signs). Signs erected for the purpose of marketing new housing developments shall be governed by a comprehensive signage program. This program shall be submitted with a temporary sign permit ("TSP") application before temporary signage may be erected. A model sign may be erected after the project to which it relates has received its first building permit and must be removed concurrently with the issuance of the last certificate of occupancy. The director shall approve updates or alterations to any model sign approved by a temporary sign permit, other than alterations to content. The following shall apply to such signs: 
(a)  Entrance model sign. Two model signs are permitted per development entrance and shall be located within 50 feet of such entrance. Two model signs are permitted per pod or parcel and shall be located within 50 feet of a pod or parcel entrance. Such signs shall have a maximum sign face area of 64 square feet, and a maximum height of eight feet if freestanding. For the purposes of this paragraph, the distance from an entrance shall be measured from the extended ROW or pavement of the perpendicular street or access way providing ingress or egress for the entrance. 
(b)  Sales center model sign. One model sign is permitted per residential sales center and shall be located at such sales center. Such signs shall have a maximum sign face area of 32 square feet, and a maximum height of six feet if freestanding. 
(c)  Directional model sign. One directional model sign is permitted per every three residential pods or parcels with a minimum of one permitted per development entrance. Such signs shall designate the location of the pods or parcels and shall be located along the collector roads for the development. Such signs shall have a maximum sign face area of eight square feet, and a maximum height of four feet if freestanding. Such signs shall designate the location of the sales area or model homes and shall be located within the parcel or pod. Such signs shall have a maximum sign face area of eight square feet, and a maximum height of four feet if freestanding. 
(d)  [Reserved.] 
(e)  Model home/model unit sign. One model sign is permitted per model home or unit type and shall be located at the model home or unit type it identifies. Such signs shall have a maximum sign area of six square feet, and a maximum height of four feet if freestanding. 
(f)  Warning sign for development. One warning sign is permitted per pod, outparcel or development entrance that provides instructions to contractors working therein. Such signs shall be located at such entrance. Such signs shall have a maximum sign area of 20 square feet, and a maximum height of six feet if freestanding. 
    1008.4. Table 2, Temporary Sign Table. 
Purpose: These sign regulations are intended to define, permit, and control the placement of signs within the city. The city commission has adopted these regulations in order to achieve the following community goals and objectives: 
(a)  Protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public; 
(b)  Safeguard the public use and nature of the streets and sidewalks; 
(c)  Protect and enhance the visual environment of the city; 
(d)  Minimize visual distractions to motorists using the public streets; 
(e)  Promote an aesthetically pleasing environment for Miramar residents; 
(f)  Promote the economic growth of Miramar by creating a community image that is conducive to attracting new business and industrial development; 
(g)  Allow legible and effective signs and prevent their over-concentration, improper placement, and excessive height, bulk, density, and area; 
(h)  Promote the safety of persons and property by requiring that signs not create a hazard due to collapse, fire, decay, or abandonment; 
(i)  Ensure that signs do not obstruct fire-fighting efforts, and do not create traffic hazards by confusing or distracting motorists or by impairing drivers' ability to see pedestrians, obstacles, or other vehicles or to read traffic signs; 
(j)  Allow the identification of commercial and noncommercial uses, ideas, products and services in the community; and 
(k)  Control visual clutter and encourage high professional standards in sign design and display. 
Zoning Districts: 
RS Residential Single-Family; RL, E, RS-1, R1-B, RS-3, RS-4, RS-5, RS-6, RS-7, PUD, and T districts. RM Residential Multi-Family; RM-10, RM-16, RM-25 and PUD districts. MU Mixed Use; TND, TOC districts. CM Commercial and other non-residential property; B-1, B-2, B-3, OP, M-1, PID, PUD, and EC. CA Communal and Civic areas; CR, CF, OS, CNS, and U districts, and includes common public areas of RS (single-family) and RM (multi-family) residential communities.  
Notes on Tables: If "Yes" indicator is present, then: 
Landscaping is required, consistent with the requirements of Section 1005.5. 
Illumination is permitted, consistent with the requirements of Section 1005.3(c). 
In other category, refer to text in Sections 1007, 1008, or 1010 for more detailed information. 
The sign face area indicates the maximum area permitted for the sign face. 
Table 2. Temporary Signage RS RM MU CM CA Specifications Blade Advertising Sign ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1/façade b. Sign Face Area 6 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width 3 ft. e. Height 3 ft. f. Depth/Projection 3 ft. g. Clearance 8 ft. h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback N/A j. Time of Display 30 days k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other Yes; Sec. 1007.3(e) Contractor Sign ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) Sec. 1008.5(a) b. Sign Face Area 48 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height 6 ft. f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback 10 ft. j. Time of Display Sec. 1008.5(a) k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other Yes; Sec. 1008.5(a) Courtesy Notice Sign ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 2 b. Sign Face Area As required c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height As required f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance 3 ft. h. Letter Height 3" min. i. Setback 5 ft. j. Time of Display Sec. 1008.5(b) k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other Yes; Sec. 1008.5(b) Development Sign ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) Sec. 1008.5(c) b. Sign Face Area 48 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height 6 ft. f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback 10 ft. j. Time of Display Sec. 1008.5(c) k. Landscaping/Illumination Yes/No l. Other Yes; Sec. 1008.5(c) Directional Sign 
(for Commercial Establishments) ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1 per accessway b. Sign Face Area 8 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height 4 ft. f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback 10 ft. j. Time of Display Sec. 1008.5(e) k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other Yes; Sec. 1008.5(e) Directional Sign 
(for Religious Institutions) ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1 per accessway b. Sign Face Area 8 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height N/A f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback 10 ft. j. Time of Display Sec. 1008.5(f) k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other Yes; Sec. 1008.5(f) Family Event Sign ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1 b. Sign Face Area 4 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height N/A f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback 10 ft. j. Time of Display Sec. 1010(b) k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other Yes; Sec. 1010(b) Grand Opening Sign 
(Banner) ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1 per street 
frontage b. Sign Face Area 32 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height N/A f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback N/A j. Time of Display Sec. 1008.5(g) k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other Yes; Sec. 1008.5(g) Grand Opening Sign 
(Freestanding) ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1 per street 
frontage b. Sign Face Area 32 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height N/A f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback 10 ft. j. Time of Display Sec. 1008.5(g) k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other Yes; Sec. 1008.5(g) Grand Opening Residential Sign 
(Banner) ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1 per street 
frontage b. Sign Face Area 32 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height N/A f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback N/A j. Time of Display Sec. 1008.5(g) k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other Yes; Sec. 1008.5(g) Political Sign 
(Residential/Non-Residential) ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 2; Sec. 1010(h) b. Sign Face Area Sec. 1010(h) c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height N/A f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback 10 ft. j. Time of Display Sec. 1010(h) k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other Yes; Sec. 1010(h) Real Estate Sign ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1 per frontage b. Sign Face Area Sec. 1008.5(i) c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height N/A f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback 15 ft. min. j. Time of Display Sec. 1008.5(i) k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other Yes; Sec. 1008.5(i) Residential Model Signs ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) Sec. 1008.3 b. Sign Face Area 6 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height 4 s.f. f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback Sec. 1008.3 j. Time of Display Sec. 1008.3 k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other Yes; Sec. 1008.3 Roadside Memorial Marker a. Quantity (max) Sec. 1013 b. Sign Face Area 15" diameter c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height 5 s.f. f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback Sec. 1013 j. Time of Display Sec. 1013 k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other N/A Sidewalk Sign ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 1 b. Sign Face Area N/A c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width 36" max. e. Height 42" max. f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback N/A j. Time of Display N/A k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other Yes; Sec. 1008.5(j) Special Event Sign ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 2 b. Sign Face Area Sec. 1008.5(k) c. Sign Structure Area Sec. 1008.5(k) d. Width N/A e. Height N/A f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback N/A j. Time of Display Sec. 1008.5(k) k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other Yes; Sec. 1008.5(k) Warning Sign ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 2 b. Sign Face Area 2 s.f. c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height N/A f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback N/A; -10 ft. 
freestanding j. Time of Display upon need k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other No Window Sign--Advertising ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) N/A; Sec. 1008.5(l) b. Sign Face Area Sec. 1008.5(l) c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height N/A f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height 7" max. i. Setback N/A j. Time of Display Sec. 1008.5(l) k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other Yes; Sec. 1008.5(l) Yard Sale Sign ¦ ¦ a. Quantity (max) 2 per dwelling b. Sign Face Area 4 s.f. max. c. Sign Structure Area N/A d. Width N/A e. Height 3 ft. f. Depth/Projection N/A g. Clearance N/A h. Letter Height N/A i. Setback 5 ft. j. Time of Display Sec. 1008.5(m) k. Landscaping/Illumination N/A l. Other Yes; Sec. 1008.5(m)  
    1008.5. Specific sign standards (supplemental to Table 2). 
a.  Contractor sign. 
A.  Quantity: One per dwelling unit for single-family lots; one per each street frontage for multi-family residential or non-residential project. 
B.  Time of display: Contractor sign may be posted after issuance of a building permit, and shall be removed upon the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy for the last building or upon lapse of site plan approval. 
C.  Permit requirement: Requires a TSP. 
b.  Courtesy notice sign. 
A.  Posting: Must be installed prior to or by the date required by statute or ordinance, when application(s) on subject property is/are officially scheduled for a public meeting/hearing. 
B.  Removal: Within seven days after the final public hearing or community meeting to which it pertains. 
C.  One sign may be posted on each perimeter roadway frontage. 
c.  Development sign. 
A.  Quantity: One per dwelling unit for a single-family lot; one per each street frontage for multi-family residential or non-residential project. 
B.  Time of display: May be posted upon site plan approval, and shall be removed no later than upon the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy for the last building or upon lapse of site plan approval. 
C.  Permit requirement: Requires a TSP and building permit. 
D.  Shall identify name of project and type of development. 
E.  May include a city-approved artistic perspective rendering of the project. 
d.  [Reserved.] 
e.  Directional sign, special event (for commercial establishments). 
A.  Must be located within the subject property; one per access way. 
B.  Permit requirement: Requires a TSP, issued in conjunction with a special event or meeting. 
C.  Time of display: same day as special event or meeting; must be removed immediately after special event, meeting or service. 
f.  Directional sign, special event (for religious institutions). 
A.  Must be located within the subject property; one per access way. 
B.  Time of display: Same day as special event, meeting or service, must be removed immediately after special event, meeting or service. 
g.  Grand opening sign (banner)/grand opening sign (freestanding)/grand opening residential sign (banner). 
A.  May not be erected unless a temporary use permit ("TUP") or TSP has been granted by the city. 
B.  Only one grand opening sign of either permissible type (banner or freestanding) is permitted per establishment per approval period. 
C.  Maximum area is 32 square feet. 
D.  Time of display: 30 days prior to the grand opening event; banner or sign shall be removed no later than seven days after the event. 
E.  Purpose is to advertise a grand opening for a new business or a change in ownership of a business, or a new residential development; no business may have more than one grand opening. 
F.  Banners may only be attached to a building surface or another sign and shall not be attached to trees, poles or fences. 
h.  Handheld sign (also referred to as a "human sign"). 
A.  Up to one handheld sign may be displayed per establishment or activity at any time. 
B.  Handheld signs shall be displayed only upon the premises of the establishment or activity, or upon the adjacent public sidewalk, provided that the placement of such sign shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicle traffic. 
C.  Maximum area of sign shall be 32 square feet. 
i.  Real estate sign. 
A.  One real estate sign is permitted per dwelling unit for residential property and one per business or nonresidential activity, unless the property has two frontages on a public ROW, in which case two signs shall be permitted. 
B.  Real estate signs may be up to four square feet on residential lots and up to 16 square feet on non-residential property. 
C.  Setback from public ROW: 15 feet. 
D.  Time of display: May be posted no sooner than the date of listing of the property for sale or lease; shall be removed no later than three days following the sale closing or signing of the lease. 
E.  Open house signs may only be posted on weekends and holidays, between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. during the times and dates when the property is available for inspection. 
j.  Sidewalk sign. 
A.  Sidewalk signs shall consist of freestanding, double-sided temporary signs placed at the entrance to a business located in a primarily pedestrian environment. 
B.  Sidewalk signs shall be removed at the close of business each day. 
C.  One sidewalk sign shall be permitted for each business. 
D.  Sidewalk signs shall not exceed 42 inches in height and 36 inches in width. 
E.  Sidewalk signs shall be moved inside during high winds or other weather conditions that might cause the signs to pose a hazard to public safety. 
k.  Special event sign/special event banner. 
A.  May not be erected unless a TUP or TSP has been granted by the city. 
B.  May be freestanding on a post or posts (up to 32 square feet in sign area) or a wall-mounted banner (not to exceed 32 square feet in sign area for a one-story or two-story building, or no more than 60 square feet for a three-story or higher building). 
C.  No more than two special event signs of either type (banner or freestanding) are permitted per establishment during any single approval duration. 
D.  No more than four special event signs may be erected during one calendar year for any individual property or establishment, or for any multi-tenant center, for no more than 15 days at a time. 
E.  Time of display: Banner or sign shall be removed immediately after the event. 
l.  Window sign-Advertising. 
A.  The total area of all window signs, including advertising window signs, shall not exceed ten percent of total window area of an establishment. 
B.  Advertising window signs must comply with the regulations specific to all window signs in Section 1007. 
m.  Yard sale sign. 
A.  Up to two per dwelling unit on residential property only, provided it shall be set back at least five feet from any public ROW, does not exceed six square feet in sign area excluding posts, and does not exceed three feet in height including posts, measured from the yard at the post location. 
B.  Time of display: Posting: One day prior to yard sale; Removal: Same day. 
C.  A yard sale sign may be posted no more than once every 180 days on any single parcel. 
(Ord. No. 12-05, § 3(Exh. A), 11-30-11; Ord. No. 13-03, § 2, 10-17-12; Ord. No. 14-08, § 2(Exh. A), 11-18-13; Ord. No. 17-17, § 4, 9-19-17) 
Sec. 1009. - Specifically prohibited signs. 
    The following signs are specifically prohibited in the city. If it is possible to define a sign using more than one of the definitions contained in Section 1002, and one of the corresponding sign types is referenced in this section as being prohibited, then that sign shall be prohibited. 
(a)  Advertising sign, except for the following types: Activity, blade advertising (temporary), contractor, family event, gasoline price, gasoline pump advertising, grand opening, identification (where the name of the establishment happens to indicate a product or service offered), leasing/real estate, marquee, menu board, window, and yard sale signs; 
(b)  Animated sign; 
(c)  Attention attracting device; 
(d)  Balloon attached to a structure, landscaping feature or the ground; 
(e)  Bench sign; 
(f)  Bus shelter sign; 
(g)  Flags, except as provided for in Section 1010; 
(h)  Hazardous sign; 
(i)  Mansard sign; 
(j)  Off-premises sign or billboard sign; 
(k)  Painted wall sign; 
(l)  Pole sign, if not specifically prescribed as a permitted sign by this chapter; 
(m)  Portable sign; 
(n)  Projecting sign, if not specifically prescribed as a permitted sign by this chapter; 
(o)  Roof sign; 
(p)  Snipe sign; 
(q)  Vehicle sign that acts as portable sign when the vehicle to which it is affixed or on which it is painted is not usually on the road during normal business hours; 
    In addition, the following conditions are prohibited: 
(r)  Signs in conjunction with a home occupation, assisted living facility in a residentially-zoned area; 
(s)  Sign installed on an external raceway; 
(t)  Sign and sign structure which is not properly maintained or is abandoned; 
(u)  Strip lighting used to outline roofs or any part of a building or window or sign frame; 
(v)  Any sign placed on public property or rights-of-way by someone other than the city. No sign shall be placed on any utility pole except for utility identification or similar purpose. 
(w)  Any sign not specifically prescribed as a permitted sign or exempted by this chapter, and permitted or exempted signs only to the extent allowed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12-05, § 3(Exh. A), 11-30-11) 
Sec. 1010. - Exempt signs. 
    The following signs are exempt from obtaining either a permanent sign or building permit or a TSP and may be located in the zoning districts provided herein. If it is possible to define a sign using more than one of the definitions contained in Section 1002, and one of the corresponding sign types is referenced in this section, then the sign type that provides the most restrictive standards shall apply. These signs must still adhere to LDC Sections 1007 and 1008 and to other applicable sections of the LDC, City Code, Florida Building Code and Florida Fire Prevention Code, as updated from time to time. 
(a)  Address sign; 
(b)  Bulletin board; 
(c)  Community information sign; 
(d)  Courtesy notice sign, upon approval of notice requirement from the city; 
(e)  Family event sign; 
(f)  Flag in accordance with the requirements of Sections 1002 and 1010; 
(g)  Handheld signs; 
(h)  Memorial sign; 
(i)  Nameplate sign; 
(j)  Political sign; 
(k)  Real estate sign; 
(l)  Sidewalk signs; 
(m)  Sign erected inside a building that is not legible from outside such building; 
(n)  Street sign pursuant to an approved site plan or erected by a governmental agency; 
(o)  Traffic sign that complies with FDOT and city design standards, subject to city approval; 
(p)  Warning sign; 
(q)  Window signs; 
(r)  Yard sale signs; 
    The following requirements shall apply to signs which are exempt from permitting pursuant to this section. 
a.  Address signs. 
A.  Address sign numerals applied to nonresidential buildings shall be at least six inches tall and at least one-half-inch wide. Address sign numerals applied to residential buildings shall be at least three inches tall. 
B.  Address signs shall be easily visible by using colors or materials that contrast with their background. 
C.  Address signs shall be constructed of durable materials. The address sign shall be attached to the front of the building in proximity to the principal entrance or at a mailbox. 
D.  Address numbers are required for all permanent monument signs, except for residential community identification monument and residential entrance feature signs. 
b.  Family event sign. 
A.  One per dwelling unit (residential property only). 
B.  Time of display: No earlier than 30 days prior to event; removal required within seven days after event. 
C.  Shall not exceed four square feet in sign face area. 
c.  Flag (residential and non-residential property). Flags shall be displayed on flagpoles and shall not be placed on top of buildings or light poles. Commercial/advertising flags are not permitted. No more than one governmental flag and two other noncommercial flags may be posted per flagpole, as follows: 
A.  Maximum height: Flagpoles in residential districts shall not exceed 20 feet. Flagpoles in nonresidential districts shall not exceed 40 feet, unless the pole is utilized as part of a stealth telecommunications tower, in which case such stealth tower pole may be up to 150 feet high. 
B.  Maximum number and size: Each residential property shall be allowed a maximum of one flagpole. Each nonresidential property shall be allowed a maximum of three flagpoles. The maximum dimensions of any flag shall be proportional to the flagpole height. The hoist side of the flag shall not exceed 20 percent of the vertical height of the pole. Flagpole height and maximum flag size shall be in accordance with the table provided in this section. References to flagpole height in this subsection refer to vertical flagpoles. References to the number of flags and flagpoles and flag dimensions refer to both vertical flagpoles and mast arm flagpoles [for example, staffs extending at an angle from a building]. On United States and Florida holidays, there shall be no maximum flag size or number or other limitations on manner of display. 
C.  Setback: A vertical flagpole must be set back from all property boundaries at least 15 feet within residential property, at least 25 feet within non-residential property, or five feet less than the structural setback of the district, whichever is less, in any district. 
D.  Condition of flag and pole or other permanent mounting: The flag and flagpole or other permanent mounting shall be maintained in good repair. Flagpoles with broken halyards shall not be used and flags which are torn or frayed shall not be displayed. 
Flag size for pole heights not listed shall be proportionally derived. 
Pole Height 
(feet) Maximum Flag Size 
(square feet) 20 15 (3' × 5') 25 24 (4' × 6') 30 60 (6' × 10') 40 96 (8' × 12')  
d.  Gasoline advertising signs. 
A.  Non-price advertising signage may only be attached to a gasoline pump, and shall not exceed two square feet of sign area per pump. No other advertising signage is permitted on the building, car wash, light poles or canopy. 
e.  Memorial sign. 
A.  One per standard pedestrian entrance located near the entrance. 
B.  Shall not exceed four square feet in sign area. 
C.  Memorial signs shall be constructed of durable materials. 
f.  Nameplate sign. 
A.  One per dwelling unit or per practicing professional in a business or professional office. 
B.  Must be adjacent to standard pedestrian entrance. 
C.  Nameplate signs shall consist of either a panel or individual letters applied to a building wall within ten feet of an entrance to the building. 
D.  Nameplate signs shall not exceed two square feet in sign area per sign. 
E.  Nameplate signs shall be constructed of durable materials. 
g.  Noncommercial residential sign. 
A.  Allowed only in window of a residential dwelling unit (as attached sign). 
B.  Up to two square feet of sign area permitted. 
h.  Political sign. 
A.  Political signs may not be placed on a utility pole. 
B.  Each residential property may have two political signs per candidate or issue per parcel, not to exceed four square feet of sign area per sign. 
C.  Each nonresidential property may have two political signs per candidate or issue per establishment or activity, not to exceed 16 square feet of sign area per sign. 
D.  Posting: Not earlier than 90 days prior to the election to which it relates or the date of candidate qualification, if applicable. 
Removal: By the person placing the sign, or his/her designee, within seven days after the election. 
E.  Supplemental pre-election posting: In addition to the political signs allowed by this subsection, no earlier than five days prior to the commencement of voting, including the commencement of any established early voting period: 
1.  Political signs may be placed upon parcels which include a polling place or early voting site provided that such signs shall be no closer than 100 feet from the public entrance to the polling place or early voting site in accordance with F.S. § 102.031(4)(a). 
2.  Each non-residential parcel that does not include a polling place or early voting site may have two additional political signs for a total of four political signs per candidate or issue per parcel, not to exceed 16 square feet of sign area per sign. 
3.  [Reserved.] 
F.  Vacant rural properties: For the purposes of this section, property which is currently zoned Rural (RL), and upon which no residential construction has occurred, shall be considered non-residential and shall be subject to the provisions in Section 1010.h.A., C., D., and E. above. 
(Ord. No. 12-05, § 3(Exh. A), 11-30-11; Ord. No. 13-03, § 2, 10-17-12) 
Sec. 1011. - Nonconforming signs. 
    1011.1. Removal required from public property. Any unauthorized sign placed on public property is subject to immediate confiscation and removal by the city. With the exception of snipe signs as defined in Section 1002, which shall be considered abandoned property and may be immediately disposed of, an owner may recover a removed sign by paying the removal costs within 20 days of the date of removal. If the owner does not recover the sign within 20 days, then it shall be considered abandoned property and shall be disposed. 
    1011.2. Amortization allowed for on-premises signs. All nonconforming, legal, on-premises signs or sign structures shall be removed or altered so as to conform to the provisions of this chapter as it existed on October 1, 1998, by October 1, 2015. Signs or sign structures not removed or altered so as to conform to the provisions of this chapter shall accrue penalties, which are applicable to the property where the sign is located, as provided for in LDC Section 1012. 
    1011.3. Structural alterations. Nonconforming signs shall not be structurally altered or enlarged, and the technology which they use shall not be modernized, unless they are made to conform to all the requirements of this chapter. Substitution or interchange of copy shall be permitted consistent with this chapter, until the expiration date for removal of said signs. 
    1011.4. Natural damage. Nonconforming signs and sign structures that, to the extent of 50 percent or more of their value, are destroyed by wind, deterioration or other damage shall be made to conform to all the requirements of this chapter, or be removed. 
    1011.5. Conforming and nonconforming signs prohibited on same premises. No conforming sign or sign structure on a single or multi-establishment property shall be erected on the same premises with an existing nonconforming sign until the nonconforming sign has been made to conform to all the requirements of this section or removed. 
    1011.6. Continuance of certain nonconforming signs. Nonconforming, legal on-premises signs of roof sign or mansard sign type, that would otherwise be subject to Section 1011.2, but which the director determines cannot be altered to conform to the requirements of this chapter due to architectural constraints of the property upon which such signs are mounted, may remain until such time that the building upon which the sign is mounted undergoes architectural renovation that would allow for signage to be displayed in conformance with current Code standards. The director shall review the condition of the premises and sign structures, and shall make a determination as to whether the nonconforming roof or mansard signs cannot feasibly be replaced due to the present architectural condition of the property. At such time as the property is subject to architectural renovation, the director shall review the building permit and related applications for the proposed renovation and shall determine whether the proposed renovation will allow for the replacement of the nonconforming roof or mansard signs with identification sign types that are in conformity with this chapter. Upon the director's determination that replacement of a nonconforming roof or mansard sign is feasible, the owner of the nonconforming sign shall remove such sign prior to completion of the building renovation. 
(Ord. No. 12-05, § 3(Exh. A), 11-30-11; Ord. No. 14-08, § 2(Exh. A), 11-18-13) 
Sec. 1012. - Administration and enforcement. 
    The requirements of this section shall be administered and enforced by the director. 
    1012.1. Inspections. All non-exempt, permanent and temporary signs must be inspected and approved by the planning division of the community development department prior to receiving their final inspection approval from the building division. All temporary signs installed prior to or after the approval of a valid temporary sign permit by the planning division are subject to inspection and removal or replacement if found to be inconsistent with the city's approval 
    1012.2. Erroneously issued permits. Issuance of a permit shall not be construed to be an approval of any violation, and upon discovery of a violation, the city manager or his/her designee shall order immediate correction thereof, and may stop, prevent the erection, or require the removal of any sign until the correction is completed. 
    1012.3. Penalties. Pursuant to the city's code enforcement procedures, sign code violations are subject to special magistrate hearings, fines, and penalties, as applied by the city's code compliance officers: 
(a)  First notice: $25.00. 
(b)  Second notice: $50.00. 
(c)  Third notice: $100.00. 
(d)  Fourth notice: $500.00. 
(e)  After the issuance of the fourth notice, the city shall have the right to either continue penalties at the same rate as the fourth notice or remove the penalized sign at the expense of the owner of the property where the sign is located. 
(f)  At least 15 days shall be provided between notices in order to give the penalized party sufficient time to respond to the notice. 
(Ord. No. 12-05, § 3(Exh. A), 11-30-11) 
Sec. 1013. - Roadside memorial markers. 
    1013.1. Locations . Roadside memorial markers within the City shall be permitted with the following limitations: 
(1)  Roadside memorial markers are permitted in locations only where vehicular fatalities have occurred and may not be placed in swales adjoining residential properties. 
(2)  It is understood, particularly for urban area curb and gutter sections, the memorial marker may not necessarily be placed at the exact location of the fatality due to restricted space within the right-of-way, property owner complaints, or other constraints. The exact location will be at the discretion of the city engineer. 
(3)  A roadside memorial marker may be located within the swale of a public right-of-way, but shall be located at least three (3) feet from the edge of pavement or two (2) feet from the edge of a sidewalk, if no swale is present or as determined by the city engineer. 
(4)  There shall be no more than one (1) roadside memorial marker per accident in a location where a death has occurred. 
    1013.2. Applications . 
(1)  Application for a roadside memorial marker shall be made in writing to the city engineer. Application for a roadside memorial marker may be made by immediate family members or friends, with requests from friends requiring the written approval of the deceased's immediate family. For purposes of this section, "immediate family members" are defined as the parents, siblings, children, legal guardians, and/or spouse of the deceased. 
(2)  Roadside memorial markers shall be permitted for an initial period of one (1) year, and may be renewed for one additional year upon reapplication, prior to the expiration of the initial permit. 
    1013.3 . Design, Installation, and Maintenance . 
(1)  Roadside memorial markers must adhere to Table 2 in Sec. 1008. The roadside memorial markers shall consist of a 15" diameter aluminum sign panel with a white background of engineering grade sign sheeting, and black letters. The post for installing the roadside memorial marker shall be a standard 5-foot metal delineator post. Placement of the deceased's name on the sign will be at the immediate family's option. 
(2)  Roadside memorial markers shall be procured, installed, and maintained by city personnel after coordination with the appropriate agency(ies). Roadside memorial markers shall be the property of the city. Roadside memorial markers will not be allowed within the limits of active construction work zones. 
(3)  There shall be no activities while the roadside memorial marker is in place that pose a safety hazard to the public or violate any provisions of chapter 316, Florida Statutes, concerning stopping, standing, sitting, parking, or obstruction of traffic on public roads. 
(4)  Flowers, wreaths, or other paraphernalia affixed to, or placed adjacent to or near, the roadside memorial marker shall be subject to removal by the city at any time, without notice, and will be discarded. 
(5)  Any roadside memorial marker found installed contrary to the provisions of this section may be removed by the City. 
(Ord. No. 17-17, § 2, 9-19-17) 
LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This is a numerical listing of the ordinances of the city used in this Land Development Code. Repealed or superseded laws and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 00-19  1-19-00 2 201 3 516 00-35  7- 5-00 3 1110.1 00-36  7- 5-00 3 813 01-03 11-15-00 3 705.3.1(r)-(t) 713.19 01-04 11-15-00 3 714-714.8 01-23  3- 7-01 3 712.2-712.8.12.2 01-29  4-18-01 3 704.5 01-30  5- 2-01 3 901.2(ee)8. 901.15.8 901.15.9 903.2(t) 903.4 903.9.7 01-36  6-20-01 2 201 3 517.1-517.9 02-06 12-12-01 3 804.4(a) 02-10  1- 9-02 3 508.14 02-12  4-17-02 2 503.8.2 506.9 509.9 511.7.5 03-01 10- 2-02 3 201, 814 03-02 11-20-02 2 812.2 03-05 12- 4-02 3 1001-1014 4       Rpld 505.2.1(g), 505.2.2(d) 03-15  5-21-03 3 201, 804.5, 804.7, 808.3.1(a), 1106(b), (c) 03-20  9-17-03 3 705.4-705.4.7 03-21  9-17-03 3 809.17, 809.18 03-22  9-17-03 3 803.3.2(a) 03-23  9-17-03 3(A) 501.5-501.11.5 04-03 11-19-03 3 705.3.1 04-04 11-19-03 3 1013.2 04-09  3-17-04 2 503 04-10  3-17-04 2 302.3, 302.5.4 04-16  4-21-04 3 901-901.15, 902-902.2, 903-903.8, 904-904.5, [905] 05-02 10-20-04 3 705.4.1(n) 05-03 11-17-04 2 809.13 05-22  9-21-05 2       Added 713.20 06-03 10-19-05 2 1003 06-04 10-19-05 3 505.2 06-05 11-16-05 3 809.19 06-16  9-27-06 2       Added 508.18.1 07-04 11-29-06 2 201 3 713 4 705.2.2 5 705.5.2 07-06 11-29-06 2 706.3.2(j) 3 706.3.4(n)-(s) 07-07 11-29-06 3 201 4 704.2.2(e) 704.3.2(a)(5), (b)(2) 704.4.2(b) 704.5.2(d) 5 704.5.14 6 705.2.1(j), (l) 7 706.2.2(r) 8 706.3.2(f) 9 709.1.1(d) 10 713.21 11 808.3.3(b) 07-08 11-29-06 2 508.10.5 07-15  7- 3-07 3 705.3.1 4 707.1.1(e) 5 708.1.1(k) 08-23  7- 2-08 2 508.18       Added 508.18.1       Rnbd 508.18.1       as 508.18.2 10-03  1-27-10 2       Added 1201-1206 10-06  2-17-10 2       Added 518 11-10  9-21-11 2 201 3 705 4 706 5 707 6       Added 713.22 7       Added 714.7(5) 8 808.3.2 12-05 11-30-11 2       Added 815 3(Exh. A)       Rpld 1001-1014       Added 1001-1012 12-07 11-30-11 2 704.2.2 704.3.2 704.4.2 704.5.2 3 705.3.1 705.5.1 4 706.2.2 706.3.2 5 707.1.1 709.1, 709.1.1 6       Added 713.23 7 808.3.3(f), (g) 12-10  3-21-12 2(Exh. A)       Added 715 13-02 10- 3-12 2       Added 809.20 13-03 10-17-12 2       Added 1008.2.3       Added 1010 h.E., F. 13-10  5-15-13 2 505.2 505.2.1 505.2.2 3 713.3 13-15  8-21-13 2 201 3       Rpld 802.7 4       Added 816 14-01 11- 6-13 2       Added 713.24 14-08 11-18-13 2(Exh. A) 1002 1005.3(a)6.       Added 1007.1(c) 1007.2 1007.3 d., s. 1008.4 1008.5 h.-m. 1011.2 14-11  2- 5-14 2(Exh. A) 201 814 14-15  7- 2-14 2 809.19.4(a), (b) 814.3 D(1) 15-04 11-24-14 2 715, table 9A. 3 715.5.0 15-05 11-24-14 2 201 3 705.4.1(n)-(p)       Added 705.4.2(c) 4       Added 713.25-713.25.13 5 808.3.2 15-10  2- 4-15 2 705.3.1(b) 705.4.1(c) 3 706.3.2 706.3.4(i)       Rpld 706.3.4(q)       Rnbd 706.3.4(r)-(t)       as 706.3.4(q)-(s) 4 715, Tbl 9A 16-04  1-27-16 2(Exh. A)       Added 101-109 2(Exh. B)       Rpld 101-104       Rpld 301-303 3       Rpld 401, 402 4       Rnbd 403       as 401 5       Rpld 813.2.3.3 16-05  1-27-16 2 505 3 508.14 4 705 5 706.1 706.3 6 713.6 713.10 713.14 713.16 713.19 713.21, 713.22 7 715.1.3.4 715.1.4.5, 715.1.4.6 715.1.5.4, 715.1.5.2 715.1.6.1 715.7.8.1 715.2.1.1 715.3.1 715.3.3       Added 715.3.3.A.-715.3.3.D. 715.3.7 715.4.0 8 809.9 809.13 809.17 809.18 17-07 11-14-16 2-4 106-108 5 201 6       Added 301-323 7       Rpld 401 8       Rpld 501-508 9       Rpld 601-607 10       Rpld 702 11       Rpld 1201-1206 12 813 17-17  9-19-17 2       Added 1013 3 1002 4 1008 18-01 11- 1-17 2       Rpld 201, 202       Added 201-203 3 301.5 310.13 310.13.1-310.13.4 310.11 310.11.1 315 320 322.2.1-322.2.3 4       Added 401-406 5 701-711 712.4.2.1 712.8.10.2 713, 714 714.3 715.1.3.1 715.1.4.1-715.1.4.5 715.1.5.1 715.1.5.2 715.3.5 715.3.6 715.5.0 6       Rpld 1101-1110 7 104 18-05 11-27-17 2 201 3 401 403, 403.5 405 4 808 18-07  3- 7-18 2 201 3 308.11 4 318.2 5 318.4 6 319.1 7 321.1.2 8 321.1.4 9 321.1.9 10 321.2 322.1 11 322.22 12 322.2.3 13 402.4 14 402.7 15 403.4 16 404.5 17 405.3.2.2 18 405.6.1 19 802.4.4 20 803.3.2 21 809.12 22 809.12.1 18-14  9-17-18 2(Exh. A) 405.8 19-07 11-28-18 4 1002 5 1005.3 6, 7 1007.2, 1007.3  
