CODE OF THE CITY OF MARIANNA, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Published in 1996 by Order of the City Commission 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
MARIANNA, FLORIDA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Howard Milton, Jr. 
Mayor 
____________ 
Roger Clay 
Jimmy Standland 
Paul Donofro, Jr. 
James B. Wise 
City Commission 
____________ 
Elly F. Johnson 
City Manager 
____________ 
Frank Bondurant 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Phil McCrary 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Marianna, Florida. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1986 Code, as supplemented through October 3, 1990, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city commission. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1986 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE LDC1:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Alyce A. Whitson, Supervising Editor, and Robert McNaughton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Elly Johnson, City Manager, Frank Bondurant, City Attorney, and Phil McCrary, City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Marianna, Florida. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Marianna, Florida. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Marianna, Florida. 1996. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. 977  7- 7-09 Omit 5 978  6- 3-09 Omit 5 979  6- 3-09 Omit 5 980  6- 3-09 Omit 5 981  7- 7-09 Omit 5 982  8- 4-09 Omit 5 983 10- 6-09 Include 5 984 12- 1-09 Omit 5 985 12- 1-09 Omit 5 986 12- 1-09 Omit 5 987  3- 2-10 Omit 5 988  6- 1-10 Include 5 989  6- 1-10 Omit 5 990  9- 7-10 Include 5 991 11- 2-10 Omit 5 992 11- 2-10 Omit 5 993 11- 2-10 Omit 5 994 11- 2-10 Include 5 995  2- 1-11 Include 6 996  2- 1-11 Omit 6 997  7-11-11 Omit 6 1000 11- 1-11 Omit 6 1001 11- 1-11 Omit 6 1002 11- 1-11 Omit 6 1003 11- 1-11 Omit 6 1004  1- 9-12 Omit 6 1005  2- 7-12 Omit 6 1006  6- 5-12 Omit 6 1007  6- 5-12 Omit 6 1008  8-13-12 Omit 6 1022 11- 5-13 Include 6 1030  2- 3-15 Include 6 1031  2- 3-15 Include 6 1032  2- 3-15 Include 6 1033  1- 5-16 Omit 7 1034  1- 5-16 Omit 7 1035  5- 3-16 Omit 7 1036  7- 5-16 Include 7 1037 10- 4-16 Omit 7 1038 10- 4-16 Omit 7 1039 10- 4-16 Omit 7 1040 10- 4-16 Omit 7 1041 10- 4-16 Omit 7 1042 10- 4-16 Omit 7 1043 10- 4-16 Omit 7 1044 10- 4-16 Omit 7 1049 12- 6-16 Include 7 1050 11- 1-16 Omit 7 1021 11- 5-13 Include 8  
PART I - CHARTER OF THE CITY OF MARIANNA, FLORIDA[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Marianna, Florida, as adopted by referendum on May 19, 1987, and by ordinance number 776 adopted on July 7, 1987. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. A uniform system of capitalization has been used. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Municipal home rule powers, F.S. ch. 166. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 1.01. - Present municipality abolished. 
    The present municipal government existing under the name of the City of Marianna, be, and the same is hereby abolished. 
Sec. 1.02. - Title of property reserved to new municipality. 
    The title, rights and ownership of property, uncollected taxes, dues, claims, contracts, judgments, decrees and choses in action, held or owned by the City of Marianna shall pass to and be vested in the municipal corporation organized under this Charter to succeed the municipality abolished. 
Sec. 1.03. - Existing contracts binding. 
    No obligation or contract of the said City of Marianna, including bonds heretofore issued, shall be impaired or avoided by this Charter, but such debts and obligations shall pass to and be binding upon the new municipality which is hereby organized and created. 
Sec. 1.04. - Present officers hold until successors qualify. 
    All officers heretofore elected or appointed and holding office under the said municipality shall continue to hold their respective offices and to discharge the duties thereof during the term for which they were elected, unless removed in the manner hereinafter provided and until their successors are elected, chosen, appointed or selected and confirmed under the provisions of this Charter. 
Sec. 1.05. - Present ordinances continued in effect. 
    All ordinances heretofore passed by the Town Council of the Town of Marianna, and by the City Council of the City of Marianna, and the City Commission of the City of Marianna, not heretofore repealed, and not inconsistent with this Charter and the general laws of the State of Florida, shall continue in effect and unimpaired until repealed, amended or modified by the municipality which is hereby organized and created. 
Sec. 1.06. - Creation and powers. 
    The City of Marianna, Florida, is hereby created which shall have all governmental, corporate and proprietary powers to enable it to conduct municipal government, perform municipal functions and render municipal services, and may exercise any power for municipal purposes except as otherwise provided by law. 
State Law reference- Municipal home rule powers, F.S. ch. 166. 
Sec. 1.07. - Construction. 
    The powers of the city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city, limited only by the constitution, general law and specific limitations contained herein. 
ARTICLE II. - CORPORATE LIMITS 

Sec. 2.01. - Description of corporate limits. 
    The following area shall constitute the corporate limits of the City of Marianna, Florida: 
    Commence at the southwest corner of the southeast 1/4 of the northeast 1/4 of Section 33, Township 5 North, Range 10 West, Jackson County, Florida and call this the point of beginning, thence east along the south line of the northeast 1/4 a distance of 233.70 feet, thence north parallel to the west line of the southeast 1/4 of the northeast 1/4 of said section a distance of 716.10 feet, thence west parallel to the south line of the northeast 1/4 of said section a distance of 208.70 feet to the easterly right-of-way of College Street, thence north along the easterly right-of-way of College Street a distance of 1,007.00 feet more or less so as to reach the south right-of-way line of River Forest Road, thence easterly along the southerly right-of-way of River Forest Road a distance of 648.46 feet, thence continue easterly along the southerly right-of-way of said road a distance of 1,470.40 feet to the intersection of the Old Fish Hatchery Road, thence continue along the southerly right-of-way of the Old Fish Hatchery Road southeasterly a distance of 910.00 feet, thence south 89 degrees 20 minutes 00 seconds west a distance of 169.50 feet, thence south 74 degrees 45 minutes 00 seconds west a distance of 142.20 feet, thence west a distance of 796.00 feet to the west boundary of Section 34, Township 5 North, Range 10 West, thence south along the west line of said section a distance of 595.20 feet to the south line of the northwest 1/4 of said section, thence east along the south line of the northwest 1/4 of said section a distance of 2,500.00 feet more or less to the west bank of the Chipola River, thence meander southerly along the west bank of the Chipola River to the south line of the north 1/2 of Section 10, Township 4 North, Range 10 West, thence west along the south line of the north 1/2 of said section to the southeast corner of the northeast 1/4 of Section 9, Township 4 North, Range 10 West, thence west along the south line of the north 1/2 of said section to the southeast corner of the northeast 1/4 of Section 8, Township 4 North, Range 10 West, thence south along the east line of Section 8 to the southeast corner of said section, thence west along the south line of said section to the southwest corner of said section, thence north along the west line of said section to the southwest corner of Section 5, Township 4 North, Range 10 West, thence north along the west line of said section to the southwest corner of Section 32, Township 5 North, Range 10 West, thence north along the west line of said section to the northwest corner of the southwest 1/4 of said section, thence east along the north line of the south 1/2 of said section to the northwest corner of the southwest 1/4 of Section 33, Township 5 North, Range 10 West, thence east along the north line of the south 1/2 of said section to the point of beginning. 
ARTICLE III. - LEGISLATIVE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Code of ethics, F.S. § 112.311 et seq. 

Sec. 3.01. - City commission-Powers and composition. 
    There shall be a city commission with all legislative powers of the city vested therein consisting of five (5) members who shall be electors of the city, elected from five separate districts by the electors in each district as established by ordinance. 
Sec. 3.02. - Same-Election and terms. 
    The regular election of city commission members shall be held on the last Tuesday in November each year, in the manner provided in article VI of this Charter and shall be for two-year terms. 
Sec. 3.03. - Mayor. 
    The commission shall elect from among its members a mayor and a vice-mayor. Election of the mayor and vice-mayor shall be done annually at the first (1st) regular commission meeting in January. The mayor shall preside at meetings of the commission, shall be recognized as head of city government for all ceremonial purposes, by the governor for purposes of military law, for service of process, execution of contracts, deeds and other documents, and as the city official designated to represent the city in all agreements with other governmental entities or certifications to other governmental entities, but shall have no administrative duties except as required to carry out the responsibilities herein. The vice-mayor shall act as mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor. 
Sec. 3.04. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Appointment and removals. Neither the commission nor any of its members shall in any manner dictate the appointment or removal of any city administrative officers or employees whom the manager or any of his subordinates are empowered to appoint, but the commission may express its views and fully and freely discuss with the manager anything pertaining to appointment and removal of such officers and employees. 
(b)  Interference with administration. Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations, the commission or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the manager solely through the manager, and neither the commission nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. Nothing in the foregoing is to be construed to prohibit individual members of the commission from closely scrutinizing by questions and personal observation, all aspects of city government operations so as to obtain independent information to assist the members in the formulation of sound policies to be considered by the commission. It is the express intent of this Charter, however, that recommendations for improvement in city government operations by individual commission members be made to and through the city manager, so that the manager may coordinate efforts of all city departments to achieve the greatest possible savings through the most efficient and sound means available. 
Sec. 3.05. - Vacancies; forfeiture of office; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of a commission member or police chief shall become vacant upon his death, resignation, removal from office in any manner authorized by law or forfeiture of his office, such forfeiture to be declared by the remaining members of the commission. 
(b)  Forfeiture of office. A commission member or police chief shall forfeit his office if he lacks at any time during his term of office any qualification for the office prescribed by this Charter or by law. 
(c)  Filling of vacancies. A vacancy of the commission or police chief shall be filled in one of the following ways: 
(1)  If there are less than six (6) months remaining in the unexpired term or if there are less than six (6) months before the next regular city election, the commission by a majority vote of the remaining members shall choose a successor to serve until the newly elected commission member or police chief is qualified. 
(2)  If there are more than six (6) months remaining in the unexpired term and no regular city election is scheduled within six (6) months, the commission shall fill the vacancy on an interim basis as provided in [subsection (c)](1) [of this section], and shall schedule a special election to be held not sooner than sixty (60) days, nor more than ninety (90) days following the occurrence of the vacancy. Notwithstanding any quorum requirements established herein, if at any time the membership of the commission is reduced to less than a quorum, the remaining members may by majority vote, appoint additional members under either [subsection (c)](1) or [(c)](2) above. In the event of a tie vote of the commission for filling of a vacancy on the commission and said appointment cannot be resolved by the commission, the commission shall request the governor of the State of Florida to appoint a qualified elector to fill the vacancy. 
(d)  Extraordinary vacancies. In the event that all members of the commission are removed by death, disability, law or forfeiture of office, the governor shall appoint an interim commission that shall call a special election as provided in [subsection] (c) above. 
State Law reference- Filling of vacancies, F.S. § 166.031(6). 
Sec. 3.06. - Procedure. 
(a)  Meetings. The commission shall meet regularly at least once in every month at such times and places as the commission may prescribe by rule. Special meetings may be held on the call of the mayor or of a majority of the members and, whenever practicable, upon no less than twelve (12) hours' notice to each member and the public. 
(b)  Rules and journal. The commission shall determine its own rules and order of business. 
(c)  Voting. Voting, on ordinances and resolutions, shall be by roll call on final action and shall be recorded in the journal. A majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum; but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time and may compel the attendance of absent members in the manner and subject to the penalties prescribed by the rules of the commission. No action of the commission except as otherwise provided in the preceding sentence and in section 3.05, shall be valid or binding unless adopted by the affirmative vote of the majority of a quorum present. 
State Law reference- Open meetings, F.S. § 286.011. 
Sec. 3.07. - Referendum. 
(1)  Referendum. The qualified voters of the city shall have power to require reconsideration by the commission of any adopted ordinance and appointment of department heads, and if the commission fails to repeal an ordinance or appointment so reconsidered, to approve or reject it at a city election, provided that such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or any emergency ordinance or ordinance relating to appropriation of money, levy of taxes or salaries of city officers or employees. 
(2)  Commencement of proceedings. Any five (5) qualified voters may commence referendum proceedings by filing with the city clerk or other official designated by the commission an affidavit stating they will constitute the petitioners' committee and be responsible for circulating the petition and filing it in proper form, stating their names and addresses and specifying the address to which all notices to the committee are to be sent, and citing the ordinance or appointment sought to be reconsidered. 
    Promptly after the affidavit of the petitioners' committee is filed, the clerk or other official designated by the commission may, at the committee's request, issue the appropriate petition blanks to the petitioners' committee at the committee's expense. 
(3)  Petitions. 
(a)  Number of signatures. Referendum petitions must be signed by qualified voters of the city equal in number to at least ten (10) percent of the total number of qualified voters registered to vote at the last regular city election. 
(b)  Form and consent. All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be assembled as one instrument for filing. Each signature shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil and shall be followed by the address of the person signing. Petitions shall contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of the ordinance or appointment sought to be reconsidered. 
(c)  Affidavit of circulator. Each paper of a petition shall have attached to it when filed an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof stating that he personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that all the signatures were affixed in his presence, that he believes them to be the genuine signature of the persons whose names they purport to be and that each signer had an opportunity before signing to read the full text of the ordinance or appointment sought to be reconsidered. 
(d)  Time of filing referendum petitions. Referendum petitions must be filed within thirty (30) days after adoption by the commission of the ordinance or after appointment sought to be reconsidered. 
(4)  Procedure for filing. 
(a)  Certificate of clerk; amendment. Within twenty (20) days after the referendum petition is filed, the city clerk or other official designated by the commission shall complete a certificate as to its sufficiency, specifying, if it is insufficient, the particulars wherein it is defective and shall promptly send a copy of the certificate to the petitioners' committee by registered mail. Grounds for insufficiency are only those specified in subsection (3) [of this section]. A petition certified insufficient for lack of the required number of valid signatures may be amended once if the petitioners' committee files a notice of intention to amend it with the clerk or other official designated by the commission within two (2) days after receiving the copy of the certificate and files a supplementary petition upon additional papers within ten (10) days after receiving the copy of such certificate. Such supplementary petition shall comply with the requirements of subsections [(3)](b) and [(3)](c), and within five (5) days after it is filed the clerk or other official designated by the commission shall complete a certificate as to the sufficiency of the petition as amended and promptly send a copy of such certificate to the petitioners' committee by registered mail as in the case of an original petition. If a petition or amended petition is certified sufficient, or if a petition or amended petition is certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not elect to amend or request commission review under subsection [(4)](b) of this section within the time required, the clerk or other official designated by the commission shall promptly present his certificate to the commission and the certificate shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. 
(b)  Commission review. If a petition has been certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not file notice of intention to amend it or if an amended petition has been certified insufficient, the committee may, within two (2) days after receiving the copy of such certificate, file a request that it be reviewed by the commission. The commission shall review the certificate at its next meeting following the filing of such request and approve or disapprove it, and the commission's determination shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. 
(5)  Referendum petitions; suspension of effect of ordinance. When a referendum petition is filed with the city clerk or other official designated by the commission, the ordinance sought to be reconsidered shall be suspended from taking effect. Such suspension shall terminate when: 
(1)  There is a final determination of insufficiency of the petition, or; 
(2)  The petitioners' committee withdraws the petition; or 
(3)  The commission repeals the ordinance, or; 
(4)  After a vote of the city on the ordinance has been certified. 
(6)  Action on petition: 
(a)  Action by commission. When a referendum petition has been finally determined sufficient, the commission shall promptly reconsider the appointment or the referred ordinance by voting its repeal. If the commission fails to reconsider the appointment or fails to repeal the referred ordinance within thirty (30) days, it shall submit the appointment or referred ordinance to the voters of the city. 
(b)  Submission to voters. The vote of the city on an appointment or referred ordinance shall be held not less than thirty (30) days and not later than sixty (60) days from the date that the petition was determined sufficient. If no regular city election is to be held within the period described in this subsection the commission shall provide for a special election, except that the commission may, in its discretion, provide for a special election at an earlier date within the described period. Copies of the referred ordinance shall be made available at the polls. 
(c)  Withdrawal of petitions. A referendum petition may be withdrawn at any time prior to the fifteenth (15th) day preceding the day scheduled for a vote of the city by filing with the city clerk or other official designated by the commission a request for withdrawal signed by at least four (4) members of the petitioners' committee. Upon the filing of such request the petition shall have no further force or effect and all proceedings thereon shall be terminated. 
(7)  Results of election. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on an appointment or a referred ordinance vote against it, it shall be considered repealed upon certification of the election results. 
(8)  Requirements for purchase, construction or condemnation of electric service in City of Marianna. The City Commission of the City of Marianna, Florida, shall not be authorized to acquire through purchase, construction or condemnation, or any and all of such methods, any facility to be used by said city in supplying electricity or electric service in the City of Marianna, until the proposition to purchase, construct or condemn such facility has first been submitted to the qualified voters of the City of Marianna and approved by a majority of said qualified voters participating in said election. 
ARTICLE IV. - POLICE 

Sec. 4.01. - Police chief; term of office. 
    The police chief shall hold office for a term of four (4) years and shall reside within the City of Marianna. The first election for police chief shall be at the next ensuing general city election to be held on the last Tuesday in November of 1987 and then on the last Tuesday in November of each fourth year thereafter, and he shall take over and assume the duties of office on the first Tuesday in January following the date of election. The police chief heretofore elected and now holding office shall continue to hold office and to discharge the duties thereof until his successor is qualified, elected, and takes oath of office. 
Sec. 4.02. - Qualifications. 
    A candidate for police chief shall have been a resident of the city at least one year prior to taking office and have five years experience in law enforcement or related fields and meet such other qualification requirements as set by ordinance of the city commission. 
Sec. 4.03. - Duties; responsibilities and authority. 
    It shall be the duty of the police chief, with the advice, instructions and authority of the city commission, to preserve order and to do all in his power to prevent violations of the city Charter and city ordinances of the City of Marianna, and state and federal laws and to perform such other duties and responsibilities as may be prescribed by ordinance of the city commission or exercise such authority as outlined by the city commission and required by state law. The duties and authority delegated to the police chief may be performed by any other police officer of the City of Marianna other than the police chief when more convenient and designated by the police chief. The salary of the police chief shall be fixed by ordinance, resolution or other affirmative action of the city commission. 
ARTICLE V. - ADMINISTRATIVE 

Sec. 5.01. - City manager. 
    There shall be a city manager who shall be the chief administrative officer of the city. The manager shall be responsible to the commission for the administration of all city affairs placed in his charge by or under this Charter. 
Sec. 5.02. - Appointment; removal; compensation. 
(a)  Minimum qualifications; advertising vacancy. The city commission shall establish minimum qualifications and job descriptions for city manager job applicants and shall advertise the vacancy at least fifteen (15) days prior to filling the city manager's position. 
(b)  Appointment. The commission shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term by a majority vote of all the commission members. 
(c)  Removal. The commission may remove the manager by a majority vote of all the commission members. Upon second of [a] motion to terminate, the city manager will be offered the option for a public hearing to be held prior to a vote to remove the manager. 
(d)  Compensation. The compensation of the manager shall be fixed by the commission and shall not be reduced during his tenure. 
Sec. 5.03. - Acting city manager. 
    By letter filed with the commission, the manager shall designate, subject to approval of the commission, a qualified city administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of the manager during his temporary absence or disability. During such absence or disability, the commission may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the city to serve until the manager shall return or his disability shall cease. 
Sec. 5.04. - Powers and duties of the city manager. 
    The city manager shall: 
(a)  Recommend a candidate for appointment as city clerk, fire chief, and all other department heads, and when he deems it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove said appointments. Such appointments, suspension or removal shall be ratified, approved and confirmed by a [four-fifths] ( 4/5 ) majority vote of the city commission; 
(b)  Appoint, and when he deems it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all city employees and appointive administrative officers provided for by or under this Charter, except as otherwise provided by law, this Charter or personnel rules adopted pursuant to this Charter. He may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to his direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office or agency; 
(c)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law; 
(d)  Attend all commission meetings and shall have the right to take part in discussion but may not vote; 
(e)  See that all laws, provisions of this Charter and acts of the commission, subject to enforcement by him or by officers subject to his direction and supervision, are faithfully executed; 
(f)  Prepare and submit the annual budget, budget message, and capital program to the commission in a form provided by ordinance; 
(g)  Submit to the commission and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(h)  Make such other reports as the commission may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices and agencies, subject to his discretion and supervision; 
(i)  Keep the commission fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations to the commission concerning the affairs of the city as he deems desirable; 
(j)  Sign contracts on behalf of the city pursuant to the provisions of appropriations ordinances; 
(k)  Perform such other duties as are specified in this Charter or may be required by the commission. 
ARTICLE VI. - QUALIFICATIONS AND ELECTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Election code, F.S. chs. 97-106. 

Sec. 6.01. - Nonpartisan elections. 
    All qualifications and elections for the office of city commission or police chief shall be conducted on a nonpartisan basis without regard for or designation of political party affiliation of any nominee on any nomination petition or ballot. 
Sec. 6.02. - Qualifications. 
    Candidates for the office of city commissioner or police chief shall qualify for such office by the filing of a written notice of candidacy with the designated official at such time and in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance. The candidates for commissioner shall reside in the district in which he seeks office, and the candidates for police chief shall reside in the city. Elections shall be conducted pursuant to the Florida Election Code or other ordinances passed by the city commission. 
Sec. 6.03. - Form of ballots. 
    The commission by ordinance shall prescribe the form of the ballot including the method for listing candidates for city commission elections and any other city election and shall follow the procedures outlined in F.S. ch. 101. 
Sec. 6.04. - Elections. 
(a)  Multiple candidates. When two (2) or more persons qualify as candidates for the office of city commissioner or police chief, the person's name who so qualified shall appear on the ballot and be voted upon at first (1st) nonpartisan primary election to be held on the last Tuesday in November and the two (2) persons receiving the highest number of votes cast for each designated office shall be declared candidates for each of the designated offices and shall be voted upon at the regular city election to be held on the first Tuesday in December, and the person receiving the highest number of votes cast at such regular city election shall be declared elected; provided that if any candidate in the first (1st) nonpartisan primary election receives a majority of the votes cast for a designated office, such candidate shall be declared elected without the necessity of being voted upon in the regular city election and shall assume office at the same time and in the same manner as those elected in the regular city election. 
(b)  Single candidates. In the event not more than one (1) person qualifies as a candidate, either for ballot listing or write-in, for a designated office on the city commission or police chief to be filled at an election, that seat shall not be listed on the first (1st) nonpartisan primary or regular city election ballot. Each unopposed candidate shall be deemed to have voted for himself. 
Sec. 6.05. - Commission districts; adjustment of districts. 
(a)  Number of districts. There shall be five (5) city commission districts. 
(b)  Districting commission. By the first (1st) day of the month following official certification of the decennial census to the state, or when the boundary of the city changes, the city commission shall appoint ten (10) city electors, determined from the registration for the last statewide general election, who shall comprise the districting commission. Electors chosen shall not be employed by the city in any other capacity. 
(c)  Report; specifications. Within one hundred twenty (120) days of appointment, the districting commission shall file with the official designated by the commission, a report containing a recommended plan for adjustment of the commission district boundaries to comply with these specifications: 
(1)  Each district shall be formed of compact, contiguous territory, and its boundary lines shall follow the centerlines of streets; 
(2)  The districts shall be based upon the principal of equal and effective representation as required by the United States Constitution and as represented in the mathematical preciseness reached in the legislative apportionment of the state; 
(3)  The report shall include a map and description of the districts recommended and shall be drafted as a proposed ordinance. Once filed with the designated official the report shall be treated as an ordinance introduced by a commission member. 
(d)  Support. It shall be the responsibility of the city manager to provide staff assistance and technical data to the districting commission. 
(e)  Procedure. The procedure for the commission's consideration of the report shall be the same as for other ordinances, provided that if a summary of the ordinance is published pursuant to this Charter and general law, it must include both the map and a description of the recommended districts. 
(f)  Failure to enact ordinance. The commission shall adopt a redistricting ordinance at least ninety (90) days before the regular city election. If the commission fails to do so by such date, the report of the districting commission shall go into effect and have the effect of an ordinance. 
(g)  Effect of enactment. The new commission districts and boundaries, as of the date of enactment, shall supersede previous commission districts and boundaries for all the purposes of the next regular city election, including qualifications. The new districts and boundaries shall supersede previous districts and boundaries for all other purposes as of the date of which all commission members elected subsequent to the date the new districts went into effect take office. 
ARTICLE VII. - TRANSITION SCHEDULE 

Sec. 7.01. - Continuation of former Charter provisions. 
    All provisions of Laws of Fla. 1941, ch. 21368, Laws of Fla. 1953, ch. 29268, and Laws of Fla. 1955, ch. 30964, (the former Charter) as amended by special law or otherwise which are not embraced herein and which are not inconsistent with this Charter shall become ordinances of the city subject to modification or repeal in the same manner as other ordinances of the city. 
Sec. 7.02. - Ordinances preserved. 
    All ordinances in effect upon the adoption of this Charter, to the extent not inconsistent with it, shall remain in force until repealed or changed as provided herein. 
Sec. 7.03. - Rights of officers and employees. 
    Nothing in this Charter except as otherwise specifically provided shall affect or impair the rights or privileges of persons who are city officers or employees at the time of adoption. Elected officers shall continue to hold their offices and discharge the duties thereof until their successors are elected, or their term expires. 
Sec. 7.04. - Pending matters. 
    All rights, claims, action, orders, contracts and legal or administrative proceedings involving the city shall continue except as modified pursuant to the provisions of this Charter. 
Sec. 7.05. - Schedule. 
(a)  First election. At the first election under this Charter, two (2) commission members shall be elected. They shall be the commissioners from districts 1 and 2 and shall be elected each odd year. Election for districts 3, 4, and 5 shall be held each even year. 
(b)  Time of taking full effect. This Charter shall be in full effect for all purposes on and after the date and time of the filing with the Secretary of State of [the State of] Florida following the approval of said Charter by the electorate. 
(c)  Transition ordinances. The commission shall adopt ordinances and resolutions required to effect the transition. Ordinances adopted within sixty (60) days of the first (1st) commission meeting under this Charter for the purpose of facilitating the transition may be passed as emergency ordinances in accordance with F.S. § 166.041. Thereafter, such ordinances may be readopted, renewed or otherwise continued in the manner prescribed in F.S. § 166.041. 
(d)  Initial salary of commission members. A city commissioner shall receive an annual salary in the amount of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) and the mayor shall receive an annual salary in the amount of three thousand six hundred dollars ($3,600.00)[.] 
ARTICLE VIII. - CHARTER AMENDMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Amendments to Charter, F.S. § 166.031. 

Sec. 8.01. - Who may propose. 
    The commission and/or the electors of the city may propose amendments to this Charter in accordance with general law and any ordinance adopted by the city in pursuance of this article. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
 Date Election 
 Date Section  Section 
this Charter 776  5-19-87  7- 7-87 1.01-8.01 1.01-8.01  
PART II - CODE 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of the City of Marianna, Florida" and may be so cited. 
(Code 1986, § 1-1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Charter. The word "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Marianna, Florida, printed as Part I, of this volume. 
    City. The word "city" shall be construed as if the words "of Marianna" followed the word city, and shall extend to and include its several officers, agents and employees. 
    City commission. Whenever the words "city commission" are used, they shall be construed to mean the city commission of the City of Marianna, Florida. 
    Code. The word "Code" shall mean the Code of the City of Marianna, Florida, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Code, the day of the act, event or default from which the designated period of time begins to run is not to be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed shall be less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
State Law reference- Computation of time, Fla. Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 1.090(a). 
    County. The word "county" shall mean the County of Jackson, Florida. 
State Law reference- Boundary of Jackson County, F.S. § 7.32. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or some other city officer or employee to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the head of the department or other officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
    F.S. The abbreviation "F.S." shall mean the latest edition or supplement of the Florida Statutes. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
    Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provisions imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    Mayor. Whenever the word "mayor" is used, it shall be construed to mean the mayor of the City of Marianna, Florida. 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The word "owner" applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Officers, departments, boards, commissions and other agencies. References to the city manager, city clerk, chief of police or other officers, any department, board, commission or any other agency, unless otherwise indicated, shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Marianna." 
    Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any place to or upon which the public resorts or travels, whether such place is owned or controlled by the city or any agency of the state or is a place to or upon which the public resorts or travels by custom or by invitation, express or implied. The term "public place" shall include any street, alley, park, public building, any place of business or assembly open to or frequented by the public, and any other place which is open to the public view, or to which the public has access. 
    Shall; may. The word "shall" is mandatory. The word "may" is permissive. 
    Signature or subscription. The term "signature or subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The word "state" shall be construed to mean the State of Florida. 
    Tense. Words used in the present or past tense include the future as well as the present or past. 
    Writing. The word "writing" includes handwriting, printing, typewriting and all other methods and means of forming letters and characters upon paper, stone, wood or other materials. 
(Code 1986, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Construction of statutes, F.S. § 1.01 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1986, § 1-3(a)) 
Sec. 1-4. - History and source notes. 
    The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. 
(Code 1986, § 1-3(b)) 
Sec. 1-5. - Editor's notes, cross references and state law references. 
    Editor's notes, cross references and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code, or which otherwise appear in footnote form, are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(Code 1986, § 1-3(b)) 
Sec. 1-6. - References to chapters, articles and sections. 
    All references to chapters, articles, or sections are to the chapters, articles, and sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1986, § 1-3(c)) 
Sec. 1-7. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinances repealed. 
(Code 1986, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-8. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract, right, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the city. 
(3)  Any administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code. 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance. 
(5)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(6)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(7)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes. 
(8)  Any ordinances prescribing through streets, parking and traffic regulations, speed limits, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles or loading zones. 
(9)  Any land use, subdivision, zoning or rezoning ordinance or amendment to the zoning map. 
(10)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city. 
(11)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(12)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city. 
(13)  Any ordinance annexing territory or excluding territory or any ordinance extending the boundaries of the city. 
(14)  Any ordinance establishing or regarding a retirement or pension system, establishing positions, classifying positions, setting salaries of city officers and employees or any personnel regulations. 
(15)  Any temporary or special ordinances. 
(16)  Any ordinance calling elections or prescribing the manner of conducting the election in accordance with state law. 
(17)  Any ordinance relating to fees, rates, deposits and charges for city utilities, permits, licenses, or services. 
(18)  Any ordinance adopting or authorizing any specification to be used in the city. 
(19)  Any provision of Laws of Fla. 1941, ch. 21368, Laws of Fla. 1953, ch. 29268, Laws of Fla. 1955, ch. 30964, as amended, or any special act provision which has been converted to ordinances by F.S. § 166.021 which has not been superseded or repealed or is not inconsistent with this Code. 
All such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code and are on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1986, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-9. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of the Code of the City of Marianna, Florida, 1986, and of ordinances existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not new enactments. 
Sec. 1-10. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections, or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the city commission. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of the City of Marianna, Florida, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of the City of Marianna, Florida is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ____________ , which said section reads as follows:...." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1986, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-11. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city commission during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission of the portions from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ through ____________ ." The inserted section numbers will indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code; and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-12. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever, except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the city commission, which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1986, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-13. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1986, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-14. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of the city's Code of Ordinances. Upon conviction for a violation of any of the provisions of such ordinances, the defendant shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day's violation of any provision of the city's ordinances shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 1-8) 
State Law reference- State law as to penalty for violation of ordinances, F.S. § 162.22. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration of the airport zoning regulations, § 14-91 et seq.; administration of the flood damage prevention regulations, § 30-61 et seq.; administrative procedures for the land development regulation code, pt. III, art. II. 
State Law reference- Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, F.S. ch. 166; procedures for adoption of ordinances and resolutions, F.S. § 166.041. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1-2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- City commission, art. III; administrative, art. V. 
State Law reference- Public officers, holding other offices, Fla. Const. art. 2, § 5; election code, F.S. § 97.011 et seq.; code of ethics for public officers and employees, F.S. § 112.311 et seq.; public records, F.S. ch. 119; public meetings and records, F.S. § 286.011; age discrimination, F.S. § 112.044; worker's compensation law, F.S. ch. 440; unemployment compensation, F.S. ch. 443; social security for public employees, F.S. ch. 650. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-26. - Personnel policy, rules and regulations. 
    The personnel policy, rules and regulations are not printed in this article but are on file in the city clerk's office. 
Secs. 2-27-2-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY MANAGER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- City manager, §§ 5.01-5.04. 
State Law reference- Code of ethics, F.S. § 112.311 et seq. 

Sec. 2-36. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The city manager shall exercise and perform the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Maintain an office in the city hall, attend all meetings of the city commission and recommend the calling of special meetings of the city commission when necessary; 
(2)  Act as purchasing agent for the city, provided he shall make no purchase of any item in excess of the amount established in the purchasing policy approved by the city commission without the prior approval of the city commission and until bids have been requested either by mail or advertisement, as may be determined by the city commission; 
(3)  Recommend action to be taken for the enforcement of all claims in favor of the city, including the collection of taxes and licenses; 
(4)  Recommend sale or rental of any property belonging to the city which is no longer useful or necessary for municipal purposes; 
(5)  Recommend to the city commission adequate insurance coverage for the city, observe and report to the city commission all hazards for which the city may be liable and investigate and report to the city commission all claims against the city; 
(6)  Investigate and report to the chief of police and city clerk all violations of the laws and ordinances of the city relating to licenses and excise taxes; 
(7)  Supervise and direct the enforcement of all inspection laws and ordinances of the city; 
(8)  Represent the city in all negotiations with contractors and others having business with the city and in all negotiations with other governmental agencies, but he shall take no action on behalf of the city without the approval of the city commission; 
(9)  Report to the city commission all matters that come to his attention relating to the welfare of the city and its government, and recommend needed changes and improvements in the government of the city and each department of the city government; 
(10)  Recommend to the city commission additional duties or deletion of duties of the city clerk, the chief of police and department heads; and 
(11)  Have such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed by the city commission, and perform such acts as may be directed by the mayor in the performance of his duties as mayor. 
(b)  In exercising the powers and duties enumerated in subsection (a) of this section, the city manager shall at all times act with the advice and counsel of the mayor or the commissioner in charge of the department of the city government involved. 
(Code 1986, § 2-16) 
Charter reference- Powers and duties of the city manager, § 5.04. 
State Law reference- Bids required for insurance, F.S. § 112.08; financial reporting, F.S. § 218.32. 
Sec. 2-37. - Department heads. 
    All department heads shall perform and carry out their duties as assigned by the city manager and as set forth in the personnel policy and approved by the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 2-17) 
Secs. 2-38-2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- State election code, F.S. chs. 97-106. 

Sec. 2-61. - Election code adopted. 
    There is hereby incorporated and adopted by reference, as a part of the city's Code, all of the provisions of F.S. chs. 97-106 known and cited as, "The Florida Election Code," as it pertains to municipal elections, and the provisions of the election code as it pertains to municipal elections shall hereafter be in full force and effect within the city limits. 
(Code 1986, § 2-1) 
Sec. 2-62. - City commissioner or police chief. 
(a)  Qualifying dates. The qualifying dates for the offices of city commission or police chief shall begin at noon on the 50 th ) day prior to the April election date and end at noon on the 46 th day prior to the April election date. 
(b)  Multiple candidates. When two or more persons qualify as candidates for the office of city commissioner or police chief, the person's name who so qualifies shall appear on the ballot and be voted upon at the election to be held on the second Tuesday in April, and the two persons receiving the highest number of votes cast for each designated office shall be declared candidates of each of the designated offices and shall be voted upon at the election to be held on the second Tuesday in May, and the person receiving the highest number of votes cast at such regular city election shall be declared elected; provided, that if any candidate in the first election receive a majority of the votes cast for a designated office, said candidate shall be declared elected without the necessity of being voted upon in the regular city election and shall assume office at the same time and in the same manner as those elected in the regular city election. 
(c)  Single candidates. In the event not more than one person qualifies as a candidate either for ballot listing or write-in for a designated office of the city commission or police chief to be filled at an election, that seat shall not be listed on the first election or subsequent city election ballot. Each unopposed candidate shall be deemed to have voted for himself. 
(Ord. No. 902, § 1, 2, 9-3-02; Ord. No. 941, §§ 1, 2, 9-5-06) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of sale preempted by the state, Fla. Const. art. VIII, § 5; offenses concerning public intoxication prohibited, F.S. § 397.701; liquors and beverages, F.S. ch. 561 et seq. 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverages means distilled spirits and all beverages containing one-half of one percent or more alcohol by volume. 
(Code 1986, § 4-1; Ord. No. 975, § 2, 4-7-09; Ord. No. 988, § 2, 6-1-10) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 561.01(4)(a), (5). 
Sec. 6-2. - Hours of sale or consumption; generally. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverage may be sold, consumed or served or permitted to be served or consumed, in any place in the city holding a license under the state department of business and professional regulation, division of alcoholic beverages and tobacco, between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day. 
(Code 1986, § 4-2; Ord. No. 988, § 2, 6-1-10) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate hours of sale, F.S. §§ 562.14(1), 562.45(2). 
Sec. 6-3. - Distance of licensed premises from churches or schools. 
    No retail alcoholic beverage vendors shall be permitted to conduct a place of business in a location that is less than 300 feet from an established church or school, which distance shall be measured by following the shortest route of ordinary pedestrian travel along the public thoroughfare from the main entrance of the place of business to the main entrance of the church and, in the case of a school, to the nearest point of the school grounds in use as part of the school facilities, within the city. 
(Code 1986, § 4-3; Ord. No. 988, § 2, 6-1-10) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate location, F.S. § 562.45(2); limitation on regulation of location for sale of malt beverages for off-premises consumption, F.S. § 563.02(1)(a). 
Sec. 6-4. - Consumption; possession in public places. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic beverages upon any street, sidewalk or any other public place or public property within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any alcoholic beverages in open containers on or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or property within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or to possess in open containers any alcoholic beverages on or upon any private premises within the corporate limits of the city not holding an appropriate license from the state department of business and professional regulation, division of alcoholic beverages and tobacco without the consent of the owner or occupant of such private premises. 
(d)  It shall not be a defense to a charge made under this section that the defendant was not, at the time of the alleged commission of the offense, intoxicated or under the influence of alcoholic beverages to the extent that his normal faculties were then impaired. 
(Code 1986, § 4-4; Ord. No. 988, § 2, 6-1-10) 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 854, adopted February 4, 1997, repealed former Chapter 10 in its entirety. Former Chapter 10, §§ 10-1-10-9, 10-31-10-35, 10-56, and 10-57, pertained to animals, and derived from the Code of 1986, §§ 5-1-5-14, 5-43, and 5-51-5-53. Ord. No. 854, §§ 1-17, added new provisions to the Code which have been included herein as Article II, §§ 10-31-10-47, at the editor's discretion. 
Cross reference- Persons riding animals to obey traffic regulations, § 66-3. 
State Law reference- Game and freshwater fish, F.S. ch. 372; damage by dogs, F.S. ch. 767; penalty for bringing diseased animals into the state, F.S. § 823.04; cruelty to animals, F.S. ch. 828. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL 

Sec. 10-31. - Title. 
    This article may be cited as the city animal control ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 854, § 1, 2-4-97) 
Sec. 10-32. - Authority and purpose. 
    This article is enacted to regulate the possession, ownership, care, and custody of animals in the interest of the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. No. 854, § 2, 2-4-97) 
Sec. 10-33. - Jurisdiction. 
    This article shall be in effect throughout the incorporated boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. No. 854, § 3, 2-4-97) 
Sec. 10-34. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the term: 
    Animal means any living, dumb creature. 
    Animal control officer means any person employed or appointed by the city who is authorized to investigate, on public or private property, civil infractions relating to animal control or cruelty and to issue citations as provided in this article. An animal control officer is not authorized to bear arms or make arrests. 
    Animal industry shall mean any veterinarian hospital, pet shop or such place where animals and/or fowl are kept for breeding purposes and/or sale, including horses used in support of a cattle operation not otherwise in violation hereof, or where such are slaughtered and dressed for food purposes and licensed as such by the city. It shall not be construed as applying to those establishments where slaughtered and dressed animals and fowl are cut and sold by the pound to individual household or restaurant purchasers. 
    At large means any animal, other than a cat, not under the control, custody, charge, or possession of the owner, keeper, or other responsible person by leash, cord, chain, secure fence, or other means of confinement or restraint. An animal participating in an organized exhibition, field trial, competition, or legal sport, or training for such events, shall not be deemed at large. 
    Commission means the city commissioners. 
    Certificate means a rabies vaccination certificate issued by a veterinarian or other person or institution deemed qualified to certify a current vaccination to the animal in writing. 
    Citation means a written notice, issued to a person by an officer, that the officer has probable cause to believe that the person committed a civil infraction in violation of this article, and that the county court will hear the charge. The citation shall contain: 
(1)  The date and time of issuance. 
(2)  The name and address of the owner. 
(3)  Date and time of the infraction. 
(4)  Facts constituting probable cause. 
(5)  The ordinance violated. 
(6)  Name and authority of the officer. 
(7)  The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay the civil penalty or contest the citation. 
(8)  The applicable civil penalty if a person elects to contest the citation. 
(9)  The applicable civil penalty if a person elects to abide by the citation. 
(10)  A conspicuous statement that if a person fails to pay the civil penalty within the allotted time, or fails to appear in court to contest this citation, he shall be deemed to have waived his right to contest the citation and that, in such case, judgment may be entered against the person for an amount up to the maximum civil penalty. 
    Commercial kennel means a kennel which offers or provides services for remuneration, including but not limited to, boarding, care and grooming, breeding, stud services, or sale of offspring of adult dogs and/or cats. 
    Control means the regulation of the possession, care, ownership, and custody of animals. 
    Cruelty means any act of neglect, torture, or torment that causes unjustifiable pain and suffering of an animal. 
    Dangerous animal means any animal which without provocation has attacked, bitten or injured a human being or another animal, or which has a known propensity to attack or bite human beings or other animals. 
    Hobby kennel means a kennel where dogs and/or cats are kept solely for the owner's companionship, or for recreation, sport, or hobby purposes, where no services are offered for remuneration, and where no more than one litter of puppies or kittens are offered for sale in a 12-month period. 
    Insecurely fenced property means property that an animal can enter upon or leave by going over, under, or through an existing fence. 
    Keeper means any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association having possession, custody, or control of an animal. 
    Kennel means any building, lot, structure, or premise where three or more dogs and/or cats at least four months of age are kept for any purpose, excluding pet beauty parlors, pet shops, pet hospitals, and veterinary hospitals or facilities. 
    Veterinarian means any person who is licensed to engage in the practice of veterinary medicine in Florida, under the authority of F.S. ch. 474. 
    Nuisance means: 
(1)  Disturbing the peace and quiet of any person by habitually barking, howling, crying, screaming, or making other bothersome noises between, but not limited to, the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(2)  Disturbing the peace or causing injury or threat of injury to any person or property by habitual or repeated destruction, desecration or soiling of public or private property, chasing of persons cars, or other vehicles, running at large, or other similar conduct or behavior. 
(3)  The keeping of any animal, which causes or emits unreasonable or offensive odor which can be detected off the premises of the owner or keeper, or the place where any animal is kept in such a manner as to cause a breeding place for flies, lice, fleas, or other vermin, or a breeding place for any diseases. 
    Ordinance means any ordinance enacted by the city commission, for the control of or cruelty to animals within the contiguous boundaries of the city the violation of which is a civil infraction. 
    Owner means any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association owning or harboring an animal, or any person who feeds or shelters an animal or who permits an animal to remain on his property. 
    Pet kennel means a kennel where dogs and/or cats are kept solely for the owners' companionship, where no services are offered for remuneration, and where no puppies or kittens are offered for sale. 
    Tag means a rabies vaccination tag issued pursuant to this chapter. 
    Vicious animal means any animal which without provocation has attacked, bitten, or injured a human being or another animal on two or more occasions, or which has inflicted serious bodily harm on a human being or another animal. 
(Ord. No. 854, § 4, 2-4-97; Ord. No. 956, § 2, 7-9-08) 
Sec. 10-35. - Rules and regulations. 
    The commission may enact rules and regulations to implement and carry out the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 854, § 5, 2-4-97) 
Sec. 10-36. - Animal control officer. 
(a)  The city shall employ an animal control officer to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Pursuant to the law, the animal control officer may enter upon public property and unfenced or insecurely fenced private property, except residential buildings, to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(c)  The animal control officer shall investigate complaints of alleged violations of this chapter and shall issue citations of written notice requiring that violations cease or be corrected. 
(d)  The animal control officer may seize, catch, or pick up: 
(1)  Any stray animal. 
(2)  Any animal at large. 
(3)  Any animal constituting a nuisance. 
(4)  Any dangerous or vicious animal not properly secured, confined, or restrained by the owner or keeper of the animal. 
(5)  Any female dog or cat in heat not properly confined by the owner or keeper of the dog or cat. 
(6)  Any dog or cat not wearing a vaccination tag. 
(7)  Any carrying or believed to be carrying rabies. 
(8)  Any sick or injured animal for which the owner or keeper cannot be identified. 
(9)  Any animal otherwise in violation of this article. 
(e)  The animal control officer shall impound any animal caught, seized or picked up pursuant to this article. 
(f)  The animal control officer may declare an animal to be a dangerous animal or a vicious animal and shall order the owner or keeper of such animal to secure, confine or restrain the animal as required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 854, § 6, 2-4-97) 
Sec. 10-37. - Confinement and quarantine of animals. 
(a)  Upon complaint, the animal control officer shall investigate whether an animal is dangerous or vicious. If the officer declares the animal to be dangerous or vicious, he shall provide written notice to the owner or keeper of the animal. The written notice shall state all the known facts and shall order the owner or keeper to chain the animal securely to the owner's or keeper's property [or] to confine the animal in a reasonable manner specified by the officer. The owner or keeper shall immediately comply with the officer's written order. 
(b)  The owner or keeper of a female dog or cat in heat (estrus) shall confine such a dog or cat so as to make it inaccessible to any male dog or cat, except for controlled and intentional breeding purposes. Confinement by a leash, chain, or other similar restraint, or within a fence, open kennel, open cage, or run, may be, but shall not be presumed to be, in compliance with this section. 
(c)  When an animal has bitten or is believed to have bitten a human being or another animal, or is suspected of carrying rabies, the animal shall be quarantined for a reasonable period of time, as determined by the animal control officer, but in no case, no less than ten days. At the discretion of the officer the animal may be quarantined in a city approved pound or subpound, at any approved facility, or at the owner or keeper's property under the supervision of the animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 854, § 7, 2-4-97) 
Sec. 10-38. - Seizure of animals. 
(a)  A property owner or tenant may seize in a humane manner any animal at large on his property in violation of this article. Where such seizure is made the property owner or tenant shall immediately deliver the animal to the animal control officer. 
(b)  Any person who seizes an animal pursuant to this section shall exercise utmost care to treat the animal humanely and to avoid cruelty, injury, sickness, hunger, or other ailment or affliction in both seizure and delivery of the animal. Any person unable to comply with this section shall not seize any animal. 
(Ord. No. 854, § 8, 2-4-97) 
Sec. 10-39. - Impound of animals. 
(a)  Animals will be impounded at the city pound, and will remain under the control and supervision of the animal control officer until such fines and forfeitures as determined by the city commission have been fully satisfied. 
(b)  The animal control officer may retain the services of a licensed veterinarian to treat any sick or injured animals, or any animal believed to be carrying rabies, retained in the city pound. When the owner or keeper of such animal is identified, such owner or keeper shall be liable for payment of the veterinarian expenses or reimbursement of the city's expenses in treating the animal. 
(c)  By resolution, the commission shall establish fees to be charged for impounding animals pursuant to this article. Impound fees shall be deposited in the city's general operating fund. 
(d)  No animal impounded by this article shall be released until: 
(1)  The owner of an impounded dog or cat which is not vaccinated or does not have a current tag, makes arrangements for vaccination and obtaining a tag. 
(2)  The owner or keeper of the animal pays all fees and expenses and obtains vaccinations and tags for the animal impounded. 
(3)  The owner or keeper executes a sworn statement of ownership, and releases the city from any forthcoming liability or responsibility with regard to the animal impounded. 
(4)  If a dangerous or vicious animal is impounded, the county court enters a final judgment or issues an order releasing the animal pending final judgment on the civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 854, § 9, 2-4-97) 
Sec. 10-40. - Disposition of animals. 
(a)  When a court of competent jurisdiction adjudges an animal to constitute a nuisance under this article, or any other law, the animal control officer may seize the animal, and the city may sell, destroy, or otherwise dispose of the animal. 
(b)  The city may transfer ownership or custody to a humane agency, sell, destroy, or dispose of any animal impounded pursuant to this article where: 
(1)  No owner exists. 
(2)  An owner cannot be identified. 
(3)  An identified owner cannot be notified. 
(4)  An owner is notified, but by his statements, actions, or failure to act, indicates an intent to abandon the animal. 
(5)  An owner does not claim the animal within five working days. 
(6)  The animal control officer shall make every reasonable effort to identify and notify the owner or keeper of an animal impounded pursuant to this chapter. Such effort must be made for a reasonable period of time. However, where the city complies fully with this section and where such efforts fail, resulting in the transfer of ownership or custody, sale, destruction, or other disposal of the animal, the city shall be deemed to have complied fully with due process of the law, and the owner or keeper shall not be entitled to compensation for loss of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 854, § 10, 2-4-97; Ord. No. 901, § 1, 9-3-02) 
Sec. 10-41. - Disposal of dead animals. 
(a)  When an animal dies, the owner or keeper of the animal shall dispose of the remains immediately. 
(b)  When the animal control officer discovers a dead animal on private property, he shall, after identification of the owner or keeper of the dead animal, provide written notice to the owner or keeper of the dead animal to immediately dispose of the animal. If the owner or keeper of the dead animal does not comply within 24 hours after receipt of the written notice, the city shall cause the remains to be disposed of and shall bill the owner or keeper, as applicable for the cost of such disposal. If the owner or keeper of the dead animal cannot be identified, it shall be the responsibility of the animal control officer or his designee, to dispose of the remains of the dead animal. 
(c)  When a dead animal is found on public property, the animal control officer shall dispose of the remains immediately, and shall make a reasonable effort to identify and notify the owner or keeper of such animal. 
(Ord. No. 854, § 11, 2-4-97) 
Sec. 10-42. - Rabies vaccinations of dogs and cats. 
(a)  The owner or keeper of a dog or cat in the city, shall cause such dog or cat to be vaccinated against rabies each year by a licensed veterinarian. Evidence of rabies vaccination shall consist of a certificate signed by the licensed veterinarian administering the vaccination and identifying the dog or cat. 
(b)  Rabies vaccination is excused only if a dog or cat is under the age of four months, or if a licensed veterinarian certifies in writing that rabies vaccination would be injurious to the health of the dog or cat. In the latter case the dog or cat shall be confined in an enclosed building or a kennel at all times until a licensed veterinarian can safely vaccinate the dog or cat. 
(c)  The owner or keeper of a dog or cat which is vaccinated against rabies shall obtain a tag for such dog or cat each year. The tag shall be attached to the collar of the dog or cat and shall be worn at all times except: 
(1)  When the dog or cat is participating in an organized exhibition, field trial, competition, or legal sport under the supervision of its owner or keeper, or is being groomed. 
(2)  When the dog or cat is confined in a licensed kennel, grooming facility or veterinary hospital, in which case the tag number shall be recorded and readily identifiable with the dog or cat to which it belongs. In the absence of a tag, it shall clearly be indicated on records of the controlling establishment. 
(3)  When a licensed veterinarian orders in writing the collar and tag be removed from a dog or cat for health reasons, in which case the dog or cat shall be confined in an enclosed building or a kennel at all times until a licensed veterinarian permits the collar and tag to be placed on the dog or cat. 
(4)  Any person bringing a dog or cat into the city, with the intent to reside permanently or temporarily for a period of six months, shall comply with this section within 30 days after arrival to the city. 
(Ord. No. 854, § 12, 2-4-97) 
Sec. 10-43. - Certificates and tags. 
(a)  Tags must be purchased for animals over the age of four months from the city, and issued only upon presentation of proof of a valid certificate of vaccination issued by a licensed veterinarian. No other tags shall be valid in the city. 
(b)  Each certificate and tag shall be valid for a period of one year from the anniversary date of the rabies vaccination. A certificate or tag is valid only for the dog or cat to whom it is issued. 
(c)  If a tag is lost or destroyed, the city or a licensed veterinarian shall issue a replacement tag upon presentation of the appropriate certificate, and payment of the applicable fees. 
(Ord. No. 854, § 13, 2-4-97) 
Sec. 10-44. - Tag and kennel fees. 
(a)  By resolution, the commission shall establish fees to be charged for issuing tags pursuant to this chapter, provided that said fees shall not exceed the following limits: 
(1)  Dog tag ..... $ 20.00 
(2)  Cat tag ..... 20.00 
(3)  Replacement tag ..... 5.00 
(4)  Transfer of ownership ..... 10.00 
(5)  Hobby kennel ..... 100.00 
(6)  Commercial kennel ..... 200.00 
(b)  Any city resident who owns either a seeing eye dog or a hearing dog, properly trained, and actually being used to assist a blind person, respectively, may obtain from the city, one tag each year at no charge upon presentation of proof of such utilization and a certificate for the dog. 
(c)  Tag fees collected shall be deposited in the city's general revenue fund. All expenses of administrating and enforcing this article shall be paid from the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 854, § 14, 2-4-97) 
Sec. 10-45. - Violations. 
(a)  It is a violation of this article for any person to interfere with the animal control officer in the administration or enforcement of this article. 
(b)  It is a violation of this article for any person to refuse to surrender an animal upon lawful demand by the animal control officer. 
(c)  It is a violation of any person to attempt to take an animal from the custody of the animal control officer or the city control pound or subpound or other city property without permission from the city or animal control officer. 
(d)  It is a violation of this article for the owner or keeper of a dog or cat to refuse to show the certificate, tag, or other document required by or issued pursuant to this chapter, upon lawful demand by the animal control officer, provided that the animal control officer may allow the owner or keeper 72 hours to produce the requested certificate. 
(e)  It is a violation of this article for any person to possess or use a stolen, counterfeit or forged certificate, tag, or other document required by or issued pursuant to this article. 
(f)  It is a violation of this article for the owner or keeper of an animal declared to be dangerous or vicious, to fail to secure, confine, or restrain the animal as ordered by the animal control officer pursuant to this article. 
(g)  It is a violation of this article for an owner or keeper of a female dog or cat in heat (estrus) to fail to confine the dog or cat as required by this article. 
(h)  It is a violation of this article for the owner or keeper of an animal which has bitten or is believed to have bitten a human being or other animal, or is suspected of carrying rabies, or fail to quarantine the animal as required by the animal control officer pursuant to this article. 
(i)  It is a violation of this article for any property owner or tenant to subject an animal to cruelty, injury, sickness, hunger, or other ailment or affliction, either intentionally or negligently, in seizure or delivery of the animal pursuant to this article. 
(j)  It is a violation of this article for the owner or keeper of an animal which has died, or the owner of private property upon which an animal has died, to fail to dispose of the remains of the animal as ordered by the animal control officer pursuant to this article. 
(k)  It is a violation of this article for the owner or keeper of a dog or cat to refuse or fail to have the dog or cat vaccinated against rabies each year as required by this article. 
(l)  It is a violation of this article for an owner or keeper of a dog or cat which is vaccinated against rabies to refuse or fail to obtain a tag for the dog or cat each year. 
(m)  It is a violation of this article for any person to remove the collar and tag from a dog or cat which is vaccinated against rabies, except as otherwise provided for in this article. 
(n)  It is a violation of this article for any person to entice or lure an animal out of an enclosure or off the property of its owner or keeper, or to seize, molest or tease an animal which is held or controlled by its owner or keeper or which is on the property of its owner or keeper. 
(o)  It is a violation of this article for the owner or keeper of an animal to permit, either willfully or negligently, the animal to be at large. 
(p)  It is a violation of this article for the owner or keeper of an animal to permit, either willfully or negligently, the animal to constitute a nuisance. 
(q)  It is a violation of this article for the owner or keeper of a dog or cat to permit, either willfully or negligently, the dog or cat to defecate upon: 
(1)  Any public property, other than in areas designated for such purpose; or 
(2)  Any private property without permission of the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 854, § 15, 2-4-97) 
Sec. 10-46. - Proceedings for violations. 
(a)  An officer who has probable cause to believe that a person has committed an act in violation of this article may issue a citation to the person. 
(b)  If the person elects not to contest the citation, he shall pay the civil penalty to the clerk of the county court within 14 days after the issuance of the citation. 
(c)  If a person elects to contest the citation, he shall appear at the office of the clerk of the county court within 14 days after the issuance of the citation. The clerk shall schedule a hearing in county court and shall provide written notice of the hearing to the person and the animal control officer. 
(d)  If a person fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed, or fails to appear in court to contest the citation, he shall be deemed to have waived his right to contest the citation, and in such case, judgment may be entered against that person for an amount up to the maximum civil penalty. 
(Ord. No. 854, § 16, 2-4-97) 
Sec. 10-47. - Penalties. 
(a)  A violation of this article is a civil infraction. 
(b)  The maximum civil penalty for a civil infraction may not exceed $500.00. 
(c)  If a person who has committed a civil infraction does not contest the citation, the civil penalty shall be less than the maximum civil penalty. 
(1)  First infraction: ..... $ 25.00 
(2)  Second infraction: ..... 50.00 
(3)  Third infraction: ..... 100.00 
(4)  Fourth infraction: ..... Up to $500.00 
(d)  Any person who willfully refuses to sign and accept a citation issued by the animal control officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided by F.S. §§ 775.082-775.084. 
(Ord. No. 854, § 17, 2-4-97) 
Sec. 10-48. - Barnyard animals. 
    No person shall keep or permit to run at large in the city any animals of the equine, bovine or swine class and includes goats, sheep, mules, horses, hogs or cattle and domesticated poultry except for the purposes of the animal industry. Under no circumstances shall an animal industry as defined herein be allowed if the same creates a nuisance as defined in section 10-34 City of Marianna Code or elsewhere in the City of Marianna Code. 
(Ord. No. 956, § 2, 7-9-08) 
Chapter 14 - AVIATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1-14-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL AIRPORT AND INDUSTRIAL PARK 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 14-26-14-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MARIANNA MUNICIPAL AIRPORT DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY BOARD[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Airport zoning, F.S. ch. 333; municipal licensing operators of airports, F.S. § 330.36. 

Sec. 14-36. - Board created; property described. 
    There is created a board to be known as the Marianna Municipal Airport Development Authority, hereafter called the "authority," which shall have jurisdiction, control, supervision and management over that certain real and personal property, together with the municipal airport located thereon, owned by the city: 
(1)  All that property included in a certain quit claim deed and surrender of lease entered into between United States of America, acting by and through the war assets administrator, and the city dated August 2, 1947, recorded in Deed Book 397, page 245, public records of Jackson County, Florida, 
(2)  All that property included in a certain supplemental quit claim deed entered into between the United States of America, acting by and through the war assets administrator, and the city dated June 16, 1949 and recorded in Deed Book 426, page 29, public records of Jackson County, Florida, 
subject to the conditions and restrictions contained in the instruments described in subsections (1) and (2) of this section. 
(Code 1986, § 3-26) 
Sec. 14-37. - General powers. 
    The municipal airport development authority shall have the power to: 
(1)  Rent or lease the airport, or portions of the airport, including the buildings and hangars thereon. 
(2)  Grant concessions therein upon such terms and conditions as it shall deem proper. 
(3)  Employ necessary operating personnel, including an executive director. 
(4)  Acquire, construct, improve, extend, enlarge, repair, maintain and operate any facility located at the airport. 
(5)  Maintain, operate, construct and install replacements in electrical, water, or sewerage disposal facilities and to collect the revenues therefrom. 
(6)  Exercise such other functions as may be authorized by ordinance adopted by the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 3-27) 
Sec. 14-38. - Membership generally; vacancies. 
    The members of municipal airport development authority board shall be the members of the city commission, during their terms of office. Vacancies occurring in the membership of the authority shall be filled in accordance with the method of filling vacancies on the city commission, and any successor filling a vacancy on the city commission shall automatically fill such vacancies as they occur on the authority board. 
(Code 1986, § 3-28) 
Sec. 14-39. - Organizational meetings; compensation of members. 
    The authority shall meet annually and organize, select its own officers, and adopt its own rules governing the affairs of the authority as provided by law. The members of the authority shall receive no compensation except for verified travel expenses in connection with their duties as members of the authority. 
(Code 1986, § 3-29) 
Sec. 14-40. - Power to lease and collect rents; appointment of fixed base operators; employ personnel. 
    The authority shall have the authority to lease and collect rents therefrom, appoint such persons as may be required from time to time as fixed base operators, to do all things and to exercise all necessary powers including but not limited to the employment of an executive director and such employees as may be required from time to time to effectuate the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 3-30) 
Sec. 14-41. - Budget. 
    The authority shall establish a budget for the operation of the authority in keeping with, but not limited to, the general practices of municipalities. 
(Code 1986, § 3-31) 
Sec. 14-42. - Procedure for changing membership. 
(a)  Should the city commission, at any time subsequent to the adoption of this article, elect to amend the provisions of section 14-38 by providing for the municipal airport development authority board to be composed of any individuals other than the then duly elected and acting members of the city commission, such amending ordinance shall not be effective unless and until the following provisions are complied with: 
(1)  Such amending ordinance shall first be read in full at a regular or special meeting of the city commission. 
(2)  After first reading, the city commission shall cause the proposed amending ordinance to be published in its entirety in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, and shall also cause a notice to be published specifying a date and time at which the proposed amending ordinance will be considered for final passage. Such proposed ordinance and notice shall be published once each week for two weeks, with the second such publication not less than one week prior to the date and time of the scheduled meeting of the city commission. 
(b)  At such scheduled meeting of the city commission, the proposed amending ordinance shall be read by title and, after discussion, voted upon. If a majority of the city commission shall vote in favor of the adoption of such ordinance, the ordinance shall be submitted to a referendum of all registered and qualified voters of the city, and, if approved by a majority of those participating in such referendum, shall become effective 30 days after the results of such referendum have been certified by the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 3-32) 
Sec. 14-43. - Marianna Industrial Commission. 
    The Marianna Industrial Commission appointed by the city commission shall be put into an advisory board responsible to and deriving its authority from the municipal airport development authority, and shall have such powers and duties as may be delegated by the authority. 
(Code 1986, § 3-33) 
Secs. 14-44-14-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION 

Sec. 14-56. - Police protection; qualification of officers. 
    The city manager is hereby authorized and directed to provide for police protection within the territorial boundaries of the Marianna Municipal Airport and Industrial Park through the employment of law enforcement officers who shall be authorized to exercise all of the rights and privileges vested in such officers by state law and this Code, provided that such officers shall be qualified as required by the criminal justice standards and training commission. The city manager shall report to the commission annually, or more frequently as may be required, concerning his actions taken pursuant to the powers and authorities hereby granted. 
(Code 1986, § 3-46) 
Sec. 14-57. - Law enforcement personnel to comply with applicable legislation. 
    When acting under the provisions of this division by exercising police powers at the Marianna Municipal Airport and Industrial Park, all law enforcement personnel shall comply with, and be governed by the laws of the state, as well as the ordinances, resolutions and the manual of procedure heretofore enacted or adopted as applicable to officers of the police department of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 3-47) 
Sec. 14-58. - Rules and regulations. 
    It shall be unlawful to commit within the territorial boundaries of the Marianna Municipal Airport and Industrial Park any act which is or shall be recognized by the laws of the state as a misdemeanor or which is or shall be recognized by this Code as a violation of municipal ordinance. The commission of such acts is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1986, § 3-48) 
State Law reference- Authority to create rules and regulations, Airport Law of 1945, F.S. § 332.01 et seq. 
Secs. 14-59-14-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AIRPORT ZONING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-81. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accident potential hazard area means an area within 5,000 feet of the approach or departure end of a runway, 5,000 feet wide, measured 2,500 feet either side of an imaginary line extended 5,000 feet from the centerline of the runway which aircraft may maneuver after takeoff or before landing and are subject to the greatest potential to crash into a structure or the ground. 
    Airport means the Marianna Municipal Airport. 
    Airport elevation means the highest point of an airport's usable landing area measured in feet above mean sea level. 
    Airport obstruction means any structure or object of natural growth or use of land which would exceed the federal obstruction standards as contained in 14 CFR 77.21, 77.23, 77.25 and 77.28 or which obstructs the airspace required for flight of aircraft in landing and takeoff at an airport or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or takeoff of aircraft. 
    Airspace height means to determine the height limits in all zones set forth in this article. The datum shall be mean sea level elevation (AMSL), unless otherwise specified. 
    Minimum descent altitude means the lowest altitude, expressed in feet above mean sea level, to which descent is authorized on final approach or during circling to land maneuvering in execution of a standard instrument approach procedure, where no electronic glide slope is provided. 
    Minimum enroute altitude means the altitude in effect between radio fixes which ensures acceptable navigational signal coverage and meets obstruction clearance requirements between those fixes. 
    Minimum obstruction clearance altitude means the specified altitude in effect between radio fixes on VOR airways, off-airway routes or route segments which meets obstruction clearance requirements for the entire route segment and which ensures acceptable navigational signal coverage only within 22 miles of a VOR. 
    Nonconforming use means any preexisting structure, object of natural growth or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this article. 
    Nonprecision instrument runway means a runway having a nonprecision instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned, and for which no precision approach facilities are planned or indicated on a Federal Aviation Authority planning document or military service's military airport planning document. 
    Runway means a defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length. 
    Structure means any object, constructed or installed by man, including but not limited to: buildings, towers, smokestacks, utility poles and overhead transmission lines. 
    Utility runway means a runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and less. 
    Visual runway means a runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures with no straight-in instrument approach procedure and no instrument designation indicated on a Federal Aviation Authority approved airport layout plan, a military service's approved military airport layout plan or by any planning document submitted to the Federal Aviation Authority by competent authority. 
    Zoning administrator means the administrative office or agency responsible for administering zoning within each of the political subdivisions that adopt the city airport land use ordinance set out in this division. 
(Code 1986, § 3-61) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 14-82-14-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 14-91. - Zoning administrator. 
    It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed in this article within the territorial limits over which the political subdivision has zoning authority. 
(Code 1986, § 3-106) 
Sec. 14-92. - Violations of article; notice; remedies. 
(a)  In the event of any violation of this article, the person responsible for such violation shall be given notice in writing by the zoning administrator. Such notice shall indicate the nature of the violation and the necessary action to correct or abate the violation. A copy of the notice shall be sent to the appropriate board of adjustment. 
(b)  An administrative official shall order discontinuance of use of land or building; removal of trees to conform with height limitations set forth in this article; removal of buildings, additions, alterations, or structures; discontinuance of any work being done; or shall take any or all other action necessary to correct violations and obtain compliance with all the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 3-107) 
Sec. 14-93. - Board of adjustment-Powers and duties. 
(a)  The city zoning board of adjustment shall have and will exercise the following powers on matters relating to areas within the territorial limit of authority: 
(1)  Hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning administrator in the enforcement of this article; 
(2)  Hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this article upon which such board of adjustment may be required to pass; and 
(3)  Hear and decide specific variances. 
(b)  The board of adjustment shall make written findings of facts and conclusions of law giving the facts upon which it acted and its legal conclusions from such facts in reversing, affirming, or modifying any order, requirement, decision or determination which comes before it under the provisions of this article. 
(c)  The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the board of adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement, decisions or determination of the zoning administrator or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this article, or to effect variation of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 3-108) 
Sec. 14-94. - Same-Rules; meetings. 
(a)  The board of adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance in harmony with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Meetings of the board of adjustment shall be held at the call of the chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, who may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
(c)  All hearings of the board of adjustment shall be public. 
(d)  The board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations, and other official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1986, § 3-109) 
Sec. 14-95. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the zoning administrator made in the administration of this article, may appeal to the board of adjustment. 
(b)  All appeals under this article must be made within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board of adjustment, by filing with the zoning administrator a notice of appeal specifying the grounds of such appeal. The zoning administrator shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken. 
(c)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed unless the zoning administrator certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceeding shall not be stayed except by order of the board of adjustment on notice to the zoning administrator and after due cause is shown. 
(d)  The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give public notice and due notice to the interested parties and render a decision within a reasonable time. During the hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent or by attorney. 
(e)  The board of adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination, as may be appropriate under the circumstances. 
(Code 1986, § 3-110) 
Sec. 14-96. - Judicial review. 
    Any person aggrieved or any taxpayer affected by any decision of the board of adjustment, may appeal to the circuit court as provided in F.S. § 333.11. 
(Code 1986, § 3-111) 
Sec. 14-97. - Conflicting regulations. 
    Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this article and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or trees, the use of land or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. 
(Code 1986, § 3-112) 
Secs. 14-98-14-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - AIRPORT ZONES AND AIRSPACE HEIGHT LIMITATIONS 

Sec. 14-111. - Generally. 
(a)  In order to carry out the provisions of this article, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying beneath the approach, transitional, horizontal and conical surfaces as they apply to a particular airport. Such zones are shown on the Marianna Municipal Airport Zoning Map which is on file at city hall and made a part of this article as if included in this section. 
(b)  An area located in more than one of the described zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. 
(Code 1986, § 3-76) 
Sec. 14-112. - Public civil airport height zones and limitations. 
    The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows: 
(1)  Primary zone. The primary zone is an area longitudinally centered on a runway, extending 200 feet beyond each end of that runway with the width as specified in this subsection. 
a.  The width of the primary zone is as follows: 
1.  Runways 8, 26, and 18; 500 feet for visual runways having only visual approaches. 
2.  Runway 26; 500 feet for nonprecision instrument runways having visibility minimums greater than three-fourths statute miles. 
b.  The width of the primary zone of a runway will be that width prescribed in this section for the most precise approach existing or planned for either end of that runway. 
c.  No structure or obstruction will be permitted within the primary zone, that is not part of the landing and takeoff facilities and is of a greater height than the nearest point on the runway centerline. 
(2)  Horizontal zone. The horizontal zone is the area around each civil airport with an outer boundary the perimeter of which is constructed by swinging arcs of specified radii from the center of each end of the primary zone of each airport's runway and connecting and adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs. 
a.  The radius of each arc is: 
1.  Runways 8, 26, and 18; 5,000 feet for all runways designated as utility or visual. 
2.  Runway 26; 10,000 feet for all runways not designated as utility or visual. 
b.  The radius of the arc specified for each end of a runway will have the same arithmetical value. That value will be the highest composite value determined for either end of the runway. 
c.  When a 5,000-foot arc is encompassed by tangents connecting two adjacent 10,000-foot arcs, the 5,000-foot arc shall be disregarded on the construction of the perimeter of the horizontal zone. 
d.  No structure or obstruction will be permitted in the horizontal zone that has a height greater than 150 feet above the airport height. 
(3)  Conical zone. The conical zone is the area extending outward from the periphery of the horizontal zone for a distance of 4,000 feet. Height limitations for structures in the conical zone are 150 feet above the airport height at the inner boundary with the permitted height increasing one foot vertically for every 20 feet of horizontal distance, measured outward from the inner boundary to a height of 350 feet above the airport height at the outer boundary. 
(4)  Approach zone. The approach zone is an area longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline and extending outward from each end of the primary surface. An approach zone is designated for each runway based upon the type of approach available or planned for that runway end. 
a.  The inner edge of the approach zone is the same width as the primary zone and it expands uniformly to a width of: 
1.  Runways 8, 26, and 18; 1,500 feet for that end of a runway other than a utility runway with only visual approaches. 
2.  Runway 26; 3,500 feet for that end of a nonprecision instrument runway other than utility, having invisibility minimums greater than three-fourths of a statute mile. 
b.  The approach surface extends for a horizontal distance of: 
1.  Runways 8, 26, and 18; 5,000 feet for all utility and visual runways. 
2.  Runway 26; 10,000 feet for all nonprecision instrument runways other than utility. 
c.  The outer width of an approach zone to an end of a runway will be that width prescribed in this subsection for the most precise approach existing or planned for that runway end. 
d.  Permitted height limitation within the approach zones is the same as the runway end height at the inner edge and increases with horizontal distance outward from the inner edge as follows: 
1.  Runways 8, 26, and 18; permitted height increases one foot vertically for every 20 feet horizontal distance for all utility and visual runways. 
2.  Runway 26; permitted height increases one foot vertically for every 34 feet horizontal distance for all nonprecision instrument runways. 
(5)  Transitional zone. The transitional zone is the area extending outward from the sides of the primary zone and approach zones connecting them to the horizontal zone. Height limits within the transitional zone are the same as the primary zone or approach zone at the boundary line where it adjoins and increases at a rate of one foot vertically for every seven feet horizontally, with the horizontal distance measured at right angles to the runway centerline and extended centerline, until the height matches the height of the horizontal zone or conical zone or for a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the side of the part of the precisions approach zone that extends beyond the conical zone. 
(6)  Other areas. In addition to the height limitations imposed in subsections (1)-(5) of this section, no structure or obstruction will be permitted within the city that would cause a minimum obstruction clearance altitude, a minimum descent altitude, a radar vectoring altitude or a decision height to be raised. 
(Code 1986, § 3-77) 
Secs. 14-113-14-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - LAND USE RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 14-126. - Use not to interfere with airborne aircraft. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no use may be made of land or water within any zones established by this article in such a manner as to interfere with the operation of an airborne aircraft. The following special requirements shall apply to each permitted use: 
(1)  All lights or illumination used in conjunction with street, parking, signs or use of land and structures shall be arranged and operated in such a manner that it is not misleading or dangerous to aircraft operating from a public airport or in the vicinity thereof. 
(2)  No operations from any type shall produce smoke, glare or other visual hazards within three statute miles of any usable runway of a public airport. 
(3)  No operations from any type shall produce electronic interference with navigation signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft. 
(4)  Use of land within the accident potential hazard area shall prohibit high density residential use, schools, hospitals, storage of explosive material, assemblage of large groups of people or any other use that could produce a major catastrophe as a result of an aircraft crash. 
(Code 1986, § 3-91) 
Sec. 14-127. - Lighting. 
    Notwithstanding section 14-126, the owner of any structure over 200 feet above ground level shall install lighting in accordance with Federal Aviation Administration Advisory Circular 70-7460-1 and amendments thereto on such structure. Additionally, high intensity white obstruction lights must be in accordance with Federal Aviation Administration Advisory Circular 70-7460-1 and amendments. 
(Code 1986, § 3-92) 
Sec. 14-128. - Variances. 
(a)  Procedure. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structures, or use his property not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this article, may apply to the board of adjustment for a variance from this article. No application for variance to the requirements of this article may be considered by the board of adjustment, unless a copy of the application has been furnished to the appropriate zoning administrator. 
(b)  Hazard marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted shall require the owner to mark and light the structure in accordance with Federal Aviation Administration Advisory Circular 70-7460-1 or subsequent revisions. The permit may be conditioned to permit the county or the city at its own expense to install, operate and maintain such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to pilots the presence of an airspace hazard if special conditions so warrant. 
(Code 1986, § 3-93) 
Sec. 14-129. - Airport noise zones. 
    No person shall sell, lease or offer to sell or lease any land within the airport noise zone 65 Ldn noise contour unless the prospective buyer or lessee has been given the following notice in writing: 
"Noise Warning. This land lies beneath the aircraft approach and departure routes for Marianna Municipal Airport and is subject to noise that may be objectionable." 
(Code 1986, § 3-94) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 26; flood damage prevention, ch. 30; utilities, ch. 70. 
State Law reference- Referral of land development regulation to local planning agency or separate zoning commission, F.S. § 163.3194; contracting, F.S. ch. 489; building construction standards, F.S. ch. 553; uniform statewide thermal efficiency standards, F.S. § 553.900; inspection warrants, F.S. § 933.20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Fire districts: descriptions and definitions; permitted frame construction. 
(a)  There is hereby established an inner fire district and an outer fire district in the city. 
(1)  Inner fire district. The inner fire district shall include all of the territory included in the following areas of the city: Beginning at the intersection of Jackson and St. Clair Streets; thence running east along Jackson Street and Old Greenwood Road to the intersection of Old Greenwood Road with Fayette Street or State Road No. 10; thence running north parallel with Nolan Street to a line representing a continuation of Clinton Street; thence west along such line and along Clinton Street to Wynn Street; thence south along Wynn Street to the south boundary of the railroad right-of-way; thence easterly along the south boundary of the railroad right-of-way to St. Clair Street; thence north along St. Clair Street to the point of beginning. 
(2)  Outer fire district. The outer fire district shall include all of that territory within the corporate limits of the city not included in the inner fire district as set forth in subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(b)  Whenever the term "fire district" is used in this chapter, it shall be understood to refer to all territory in either inner or outer fire districts, provided nothing therein shall be construed to prohibit the erection or repairs of frame buildings outside the inner but within the outer fire district, when such building is used exclusively and continuously for dwelling purposes. All such dwellings shall be covered with incombustible roofing. 
(Code 1986, § 6-21) 
Sec. 18-2. - References in adopted technical codes to officers and employees. 
    Whenever reference in the technical codes adopted in this chapter is made to the building official, or other officer or employee, it shall mean that person designated by the city commission. 
Secs. 18-3-18-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 

Sec. 18-26. - Adoption of building code; modifications. 
    Except as provided in this article, the latest building code adopted by the State of Florida of which copies are on file in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the county as well as the Jackson County Building Official, is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein as the building code for the City of Marianna, and every person shall comply therewith. 
(Code 1986, § 6-1; Ord. No. 841, § 1, 1-9-96; Ord. No. 974, § 2, 3-3-09) 
Secs. 18-27-18-50. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 974, § 2, adopted Mar. 3, 2009, deleted § 18-27, which pertained to compliance with certain safety provisions; persons responsible and derived from Code 1986, § 6-9. 
ARTICLE III. - HOUSE MOVING 

Sec. 18-51. - Permission required. 
    No person shall move or cause to be moved any building, house or other structure into or upon any street or thoroughfare within the city, or cause the same to be upon, or otherwise to obstruct the free passage of the streets or thoroughfares, without a written permit from the city clerk. 
(Code 1986, § 6-36) 
Sec. 18-52. - Designation of route in application; interference with traffic. 
    Any application for permission made or any permission granted under section 18-51 shall specify the route to be taken and shall be limited as to time. No permission shall be granted hereunder if in the judgment of the city commission the moving would unreasonably interfere with traffic or result in possible damage to trees or property. 
(Code 1986, § 6-37) 
Sec. 18-53. - Bond; amount; conditions; filing; approval. 
    Any application for permission required under this article shall be accompanied by a bond in the sum of $10,000.00 to be approved by the mayor, payable to the city and conditioned to indemnify the city and any person from any and all damages caused by such moving. No permission shall be granted under this article until such bond is filed and approved. Such bond shall have at least two good sureties or be executed by an authorized surety company. 
(Code 1986, § 6-38) 
Secs. 18-54-18-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRICAL CODE 

Sec. 18-76. - Adoption; modifications. 
    Except as provided in this article, the latest building code adopted by the State of Florida of which copies are on file in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the county as well as the Jackson County Building Official, is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein as the building code for the City of Marianna, and every person shall comply therewith. 
    Application of article to municipalities. 
    The City of Marianna, and the county. May contract by interlocal agreement for this article to be effective within jurisdictional area and for the county to enforce this article within such area. Such interlocal agreement shall be signed by the representatives of each entity and filed with the clerk of the circuit court of the county. 
(Code 1986, § 6-51; Ord. No. 841, § 2, 1-9-96; Ord. No. 974, § 2, 3-3-09) 
Secs. 18-77-18-100. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 974, § 2, adopted Mar. 3, 2009, deleted § 18-77, which pertained to amendments and derived from Code 1986, § 6-52. 
ARTICLE V. - PLUMBING CODE 

Sec. 18-101. - Adoption; modifications. 
    Except as provided in this article, the latest plumbing code adopted by the State of Florida of which copies are on file in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the county, is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth in this section as the plumbing code for the city, and each person shall comply therewith. 
(Code 1986, § 6-71; Ord. No. 841, § 3, 1-9-96; Ord. No. 974, § 2, 3-3-09) 
Secs. 18-102-18-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MECHANICAL CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- State minimum building codes, F.S. § 553.70 et seq. 

Sec. 18-121. - Adoption; modifications. 
    Except as provided in this article, the latest mechanical code adopted by the State of Florida of which copies are on file in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the county, is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth in this section as the mechanical code for the county, and each person shall comply therewith. 
    Application of article to municipalities. 
    The City of Marianna, and the county may contract by interlocal agreement for this article to be effective within jurisdictional area and for the county to enforce this article within such area. Such interlocal agreement shall be signed by the representatives of each entity and filed with the clerk of the circuit court of the county. 
(Code 1986, § 6-86; Ord. No. 841, § 4, 1-9-96; Ord. No. 974, § 2, 3-3-09) 
Secs. 18-122-18-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - GAS CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-141. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Certified gasfitter is a gasfitter who is the holder of an unsuspended and unrevoked State of Florida qualifier card for the current license year. 
    Coated and wrapped pipe means an iron or steel pipe which has been thoroughly cleaned, painted with asphalt or pitch and wrapped with burlap, asbestos felt or other suitable protective covering. 
    Gas appliance means a fixture or apparatus manufactured and designed to use natural, manufactured, or any gas as a fuel medium for developing light, heat, or power, and shall include ranges, gas refrigerators, hot plates, space heaters, water heaters, steam and hot water boilers, ovens, furnaces, together with any accessory designed to be attached to any gas appliance, such as solid tops, pilot lights, governors, regulators, and safety devices; provided, however, that nothing contained in this definition shall be construed to apply to tubing, appliances, appurtenances, or devices used for strictly experimental or scientific purposes. 
    Gas inspector means the director of the department of public works; or his/her designated agent. The inspector shall inspect the gas piping in every building or premises as frequently as may be deemed necessary. 
    Gas fitter means a person who represents himself as competent and qualified, and undertakes to construct, alter or make additions, or who for himself or for any person or firm or corporation undertakes to and does construct, alter or make any addition to a system of gas piping, venting and installation of all gas equipment, appurtenances and appliances together with safety and other controls of same. 
    Meter tampering means a natural gas meter is tampered with when any person shall willfully alter, injure, or knowingly suffer to be injured any natural gas meter or meter seal or other apparatus or device belonging to the city in such a manner as to cause loss or damage or to prevent any such meter installed for registering the quantity which otherwise would pass through same; or to alter the index or break the seal of any such meter; or in any way to hinder or interfere with the proper action or just registration of any such meter or device in such a manner as to use, without the consent of the city, any natural gas without such service being reported for payment or such natural gas passing through a meter provided by the city and registering the quantity of natural gas passing through the same. 
    House piping means the gas pipe from the gas meter outlet to the gas burning appliance or appliances. 
    Service line means all gas pipes from the gas system's main to the meter location. 
(Code 1986, § 6-103; Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- State minimum building codes, F. S. § 553.70 et seq. 
Sec. 18-142. - Adopted; revisions. 
(a)  Any matters, requirements or specifications concerning installation, construction, reconstruction, adjustment and repair of gas piping, gas appliances, fixtures and apparatus, in buildings and structures not covered by this article, when not in conflict with same shall be governed and in accordance with the current Florida Gas Code, as promulgated by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., with revisions as set forth in subsection (b) of this section and made a part of this article as now in effect. 
(b)  The following section is changed to read as stated in this section: 
    Piping plan. Work shall not proceed until such sketch or plan has been approved and signed by gas inspector. 
(Code 1986, §§ 6-101, 6-102; Ord. No. 841, § 5, 1-9-96; Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 18-143. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person failing to comply with the provisions of this article or failing to comply with any order of the gas inspector made pursuant to the powers herein granted to him, shall be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1986, § 6-110; Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Secs. 18-144-18-155. - Reserved. 
Sec. 18-156. - Appointment. 
    The city commission shall appoint a competent person as gas inspector. 
(Code 1986, § 6-126; Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 18-157. - Duty as to applications and plans; monthly reports. 
    It shall be the duty of the gas inspector to receive all applications for connection, to pass on and approve or reject plans submitted, to sign and issue all notices and to keep a daily record of all applications received, plans approved and all other matters which may pertain thereto and to make a monthly report of his operations. 
    It shall be the duty of the gas inspector to investigate all alleged violations of the provisions of this article and to file complaints when necessary. 
(Code 1986, § 6-129; Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 18-158. - Notice of defects; turning off gas until defect corrected. 
    The gas inspector shall give the owner or agent in charge of any building written notice of any defects in his installation or fixtures or changes or repairs necessary, and such owner or agent shall immediately, after such notice, make necessary changes and repairs. If the owner or agent fails to comply with this notice, the gas inspector may order the gas division to turn off the gas, and it shall not thereafter turn the gas on again until the gas inspector has certified that such defects have been repaired or removed. 
(Code 1986, § 6-128; Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 18-159. - Investigations and filing of complaints. 
    It shall be the duty of the public works director, or his/her designee, to investigate all alleged violations of the provisions of this article and to file complaints when necessary. 
(Code 1986, § 6-128; Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
DIVISION 2. - GAS INSPECTOR 

Sec. 18-160. - Resolution of controversies. 
    The gas inspector shall decide all controversies which may arise under this article, and, in so doing, shall be subject to the control and direction of the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 6-130; Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 18-161. - Inspections-Authorized; supervision; right of entry. 
    The gas inspector and his assistants are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to inspect and supervise the installation, construction, reconstruction and repair of all gas piping, gas appliances, fixtures and apparatus now or hereafter to be placed in or in any manner directly attached to any building or structure within the city and its gas service territory. The gas inspector and his assistants shall be subject to the orders and directions of the city commission, and they are hereby vested with full authority to enter any building or premises at any reasonable time in the discharge of their duties imposed in this section. 
(Code 1986, § 6-131; Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 18-162. - Same-Houses under construction, alteration or repair. 
    The gas inspector shall inspect as often as necessary all houses in the course of construction, alteration or repair and to inspect any installation of any character already in use which he may have reason to believe is out of repair or is imperfect. 
(Code 1986, § 6-132; Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 18-163. - Prohibited testing. 
    No fire test or water test shall be permitted on any gas piping. Water tested piping will be condemned as faulty. 
(Code 1986, § 6-133; Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 18-164. - Tests; certificate issued and tag attached; conformation. 
    When gas piping has been installed in a building or structure, whether the piping is new construction, repairs or extensions, the piping must be inspected and tested in the presence of the gas inspector or one of his assistants. A certificate of inspection shall be issued as provided in this section, and an inspection tag attached to such piping by the gas inspector. Such tests shall conform to the gas code adopted in section 18-142. 
(Code 1986, § 6-134; Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 18-165. - Certificate of inspection-Required to turn on gas. 
    The gas inspector shall furnish the gas division with a copy of each certificate of inspection. The division shall not turn gas into any new or altered repair system of gas until such certificate has been received. 
(Code 1986, § 6-135; Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 18-166. - Same-Issuance; form. 
    When the system of piping and all extensions thereto have been completed and all openings firmly closed, the person installing such piping shall make the test provided in section 18-164, and if the piping is found tight, shall make application for test to the gas inspector. Upon such application, the gas inspector or one of his assistants will inspect the piping and shall witness the test, and if the piping is found tight and the work done is in accordance with the provisions of this article, then such gas inspector or assistant shall issue and deliver a certificate of substantially the following form: 
No. ____________ 
    This is to certify that I have inspected and witnessed the test of the gas piping in ____________ Building No. ____________ Street and certify that the same is installed in compliance with the City of Marianna rules and regulations. 
Gas Inspector 
By _____  
(Code 1986, § 6-136; Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 18-167. - Same-Additional installations after issuance. 
    Any additional gas piping or outlets installed after the certificate required by section 18-165 has been issued must be reported for inspection and tested in the same manner as the pipe originally installed. 
(Code 1986, § 6-137; Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 18-168. - Inspection fees. 
(a)  Inspection fees may be charged for each trip to installation site by the gas inspector for re-inspection purposes, as set by the city commission. 
(b)  If all gas installation violations have not been corrected upon the third re-inspection, the gas inspector may deny or discontinue service of gas to said premises or customer(s). 
(Code 1986, § 6-138; Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Secs. 18-169-18-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1032, § 1, adopted Feb. 3, 2015, repealed Div. 3, which pertained to certificate of competency. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

Secs. 18-181-18-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - LICENSES AND PERMITS 

Sec. 18-201. - License-Required; requisites; suspension. 
(a)  Every person, before entering upon the installation, construction, reconstruction or repair of any piping in the city system and its gas service territory, shall be required to have the current qualifier license (as defined in F.S. ch. 527). 
(b)  Any person to engage in the business of gas installation and construction, unless such person holds a valid unrevoked and unsuspended qualifier card, or has in his regular employ a person who holds such license; any partnership to engage in such business unless such partnership shall have in its regular employ or as a member, a person who holds such license; or 
(c)  Every such license shall stand suspended during any period in which the conditions requisite to issuance of a license do not obtain. 
(Code 1986, § 6-176; Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 18-202. - Same-Insurance required. 
(a)  Certificate filed with office of public works; coverage. Before the permit is issued, the party applying for the permit shall file with the office of public works a certificate of insurance which certifies that such applicant is carrying an insurance policy of public liability and products liability insurance with respect to the business for which such permit is to be issued. The insurance coverage must be issued in a company authorized to do business in the state. Such insurance shall be written in limits of not less than $25,000.00 each person, $25,000.00 each accident, $25,000.00 aggregate bodily injury, $25,000.00 each accident, and $25,000.00 aggregate for property damage, and shall include coverage for the hazard of explosion. 
(b)  Effect of policy becoming ineffective; renewal. If, during the period of time for which such license is granted, the insurance company issuing such insurance policy shall cease to be licensed to do business in the state or become insolvent or should the insurance policy be cancelled or expire or become ineffective for any reason, then the license issued to the applicant shall immediately, without anything further, be cancelled. Such insurance shall be renewed or another policy submitted therefore as a prerequisite to the issuance of another license or for the annual renewal of the old license. 
(c)  Applicability of insurance requirement. The requirement for insurance set forth in this section shall apply to all persons, resident or nonresident, of the city when doing work in the city or when doing work on any property supplied by gas or to be supplied by gas by the city gas distributing system. 
(Code 1986, § 6-177; Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 18-203. - Work permit-Required. 
    No property owner shall cause or permit any installation, construction, reconstruction or repair of any gas piping in the city and its gas service territory before the person so doing the work shall have first obtained a permit from the city clerk to do such work. The mere fact that the work has been done will be considered sufficient to hold and render the property owner amenable to this section. 
(Code 1986, § 6-178; Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 18-204. - Same-Application. 
(a)  In writing; separate for each piece of work. No person shall connect or cause to be connected any gas piping or appliance with any gas main or private connection without having first filed a written application as set forth in this section and having obtained written permit for such work as required in this section. A separate permit must be obtained for such work on each house and for each separate piece of work of any description, including alterations and general repairs. 
(b)  Fees. The fees for each outlet charged for each permit issued to install, construct, reconstruct, or repair any gas piping shall be as set by the commission and on file in the office of the city clerk and the gas inspector. 
(c)  License a requisite for issuance. No permit shall be issued for such purpose except to a licensed gasfitter or a person licensed to do such work in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Plans and specifications required. Before issuing a permit, suitable plans and specifications of the work proposed to be done showing clearly the size of pipe, locations and measurements, type of pipe and total B.T.U. value of all appliances will be submitted to the office of public works and reviewed by the gas inspector. All connections and fixtures shall be neatly drawn. 
(Code 1986, § 6-179; Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 18-205. - Same-Issuance; change of plans or specifications; effect of infraction of rules. 
    If the plans are approved by the gas inspector, the city clerk will issue a written permit within two days after the application is filed. No change or modification of approved plans will be permitted unless such change or modification is authorized by the owner or agent, submitted to and approved by the gas inspector and placed on file as in the case of original work. No infraction of rules not specially authorized in writing by the gas inspector, although it may be shown on plan and has passed inspection, will be permitted. The gas inspector always reserves the right to compel the fitter to rectify any infraction of the rule even though the work has passed inspection and a final inspection certificate has been issued. 
(Code 1986, § 6-180; Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 18-206. - Same-Duration. 
    All permits are good for a continuous performance of work named therein. A permit shall automatically expire when work ceases for a period of 90 days, without good and reasonable cause for the cessation, but will naturally expire upon completion of work for which it was issued. 
(Code 1986, § 6-181; Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Secs. 18-207-18-225. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PROPERTY NUMBERING SYSTEM 

Sec. 18-226. - Purpose of article. 
    This article is promulgated for the purpose of providing a uniform numbering system for the assignment of address numbers to residences, buildings and properties with access from officially named public and private ways in the incorporated areas of the city, in the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens and inhabitants of the city. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 1, 2-5-91) 
Sec. 18-227. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory building means a building which is clearly incidental or subordinate to and customarily utilized in connection with a principal building located on the same lot. 
    Building front means that area of a building which faces the public or private way pursuant to which the building is numbered. 
    Grid system means a series of designated north/south parallel lines intersecting a second set of east/west parallel lines within one square mile area, i.e., section, as indicated on the official property numbering maps. 
    Numbering system means a uniform method of assigning and coordinating the addresses of buildings and properties, based on a designated grid system contained in the official property numbering maps. 
    Occupant means any person, firm, entity, partnership, trust, corporation, association, or other organization who is occupying or leasing a building or other property for a period exceeding 30 days. 
    Owner means any and all persons, firms, entities, partnerships, trust, corporations, associations, or other organizations who own the fee title to, or have an undivided interest in, any building or property which is subject to the provisions of this article. 
    Principal building means any structure which is designed, built or used for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind for any residential, commercial, or industrial purpose. 
    Private way means any officially named thoroughfare used for vehicular traffic which is not included in the definition of public way and which is not designated to or maintained by the city. This term shall include, but is not limited to, roadways or driveways in apartment, condominium, commercial, or industrial complexes, which have been named and signed in accordance with this ordinance or F.S. § 316.077, the state uniform traffic law. 
    Public way means that area of an officially named, dedicated or publicly maintained road or right-of-way, either paved or unpaved, which is intended for vehicular traffic, excluding service entrances or driveways. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 2, 2-5-91) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-228. - Building and property numbering established; street naming; incorporation of maps. 
(a)  A uniform system of numbering buildings and properties, as shown on the maps identified by the title, "Property Numbering Maps," and filed in the county planning department office, and city clerk's office, is hereby adopted. These maps and all explanatory matter thereon and related thereto are hereby adopted, and incorporated in this section by reference, and made a part of this article. 
(b)  A uniform system of names for all streets, rights-of-way and roadways in the city, as shown on the maps identified by the title, "Street Names and Property Numbering Maps" and filed in the county planning department and the city clerk's office are hereby adopted. These maps and all explanatory matter thereon and related hereto are hereby adopted and incorporated in this section by reference, and made a part of this article. Future street names shall be assigned by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 3, 2-5-91) 
Sec. 18-229. - Administration and assignment of numbers. 
(a)  The city zoning official shall be responsible for coordinating and maintaining the numbering system established by this article. Such official shall issue building numbers in conformity with the uniform numbering system established in section 18-228. Should an existing building have, exhibit, or be addressed by a number in conflict with the uniform numbering system, such official shall give notice to those owners or occupants whose building number is in conflict with the uniform numbering system. Such notice shall be delivered to the owner and occupant by: 
(1)  Certified mail, return receipt requested; 
(2)  Posting the notice in a conspicuous place on the building; or 
(3)  Hand delivery. 
Such notice shall include a notification of a change of address which shall contain the new building numbers assigned to the building in accordance with the provisions of this article and shall direct the owner or the occupant to post the newly assigned building number on the building or property in accordance with section 18-230. 
(b)  The zoning official shall, upon request and without charge, assign a number to each unnumbered building located in the various areas of the city, if a building has not been assigned a number pursuant to the uniform numbering system. 
(c)  The assignment by the zoning official and posting by the owner or occupant of the assigned number shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of a building permit for any such building by the county building department. 
(d)  The zoning official shall duly record and keep records of all numbers assigned under this section. 
(e)  Each subdivision (whether private, major, minor, or exempt) for which any plat or application is hereafter filed with the city, county or with the clerk of court shall have a name assigned to each public or private way therein. Each unpaved road hereafter dedicated to, or accepted for maintenance by, the city shall likewise be named. The names assigned hereafter shall not be duplicative of names, either by spelling, phonetically, or by similar sound, already in use. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 4, 2-5-91) 
Sec. 18-230. - Posting of numbers. 
    All buildings in the city shall have their assigned building numbers properly displayed, whether or not mail is delivered to such building or property. It shall be the duty of the owners and occupants of each building in such areas to post the assigned building number on the property in the following manner: 
(1)  The building (address) number shall be affixed to the front of the building, or to a separate structure in front of the building, such as a mailbox, post, wall, fence, etc., in such a manner so as to be clearly visible and legible from the public or private way on which the building fronts. 
(2)  Numerals shall be Arabic and shall not be less than three inches in height and one-half inch in width. 
(3)  The numerals shall be of a contrasting color with the immediate background of the building or structure on which such numerals are affixed. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 5, 2-5-91) 
Sec. 18-231. - Annexation. 
    Whenever any land is annexed into the city after passage of this article, the prior assigned street names and numbers, as established by the county, shall be used. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 6, 2-5-91) 
Chapter 22 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Environmental protection standards, pt. III, § 4-4. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Nuisances regarding animals, § 10-31 et seq; supplemental performance standards for property, pt. III, § 4-1.8. 
State Law reference- Abatement of nuisances by injunction, F.S. § 60.05; public health, F.S. ch. 381 et seq.; authority for municipalities to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with those adopted by the state department of health and rehabilitative services, F.S. § 381.101; nuisances injurious to health, F.S. ch. 386; public nuisances, F.S. ch. 823. 

Sec. 22-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Inspector means any code enforcement officer, municipal development director and/or his/her designee for the city. 
    Nuisance means any of the conditions described in section 22-28. 
    Refuse means leavings, dregs, rubbish, trash or waste material. 
    Underbrush means any undergrowth or brush conducive to the collection of insects and rodents. 
    Unfit or unsafe dwelling or structure means any dwellings or structures or portions thereof and accessory buildings which are structurally unsafe, unstable, or unsanitary; inadequately provided with exit facilities; constitute a fire hazard; unsuitable or improper for the use or occupancy to which they are put; constitute a hazard to health or safety because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment; dangerous to life or property of the occupant thereof or of the surrounding areas; unfit for human habitation, if so intended or used; or otherwise in violation of the housing, building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, sanitation and fire codes of the city. 
    Weeds means underbrush or plants that are injurious to crops, grasses or flowers. 
(Code 1986, § 11-1; Ord. No. 830, § 2(11-1), 9-6-94; Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-27. - Article supplemental to other city ordinances. 
    The provisions of this article shall be supplemental to all other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 830, § 2(11-15), 9-6-94; Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 22-28. - Enumeration. 
(a)  A nuisance is: 
(1)  Any accumulation of rubbish, trash, junk and other abandoned materials, metals, lumber or other things. 
(2)  Any excessive accumulation of grass, weeds, undergrowth or other dead or living plant life upon a lot, tract or parcel of land, improved or unimproved, within 100 feet of any improved property within the city to the extent and in the manner that such lot, tract or parcel of land shall or may become infested or inhabited with rodents, vermin or snakes; may become a breeding place for mosquitoes; threaten or endanger the public health and welfare; may reasonably cause disease; or adversely affect and impair the economic welfare of the adjacent property. 
(3)  Any refuse of a height of more than one foot. 
(4)  Any underbrush which exceeds one foot in height. 
(5)  Any unfit or unsafe dwelling or structure. 
(6)  Any weeds which exceed one foot in height. 
(7)  All unnecessary or unauthorized noises and annoying vibrations, including animal noises. 
(8)  All disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as the conditions, substances or other causes which give rise to the emission or generation of such odors and stenches. 
(9)  The carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within 24 hours after death. 
(10)  The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage, dead animals, creamery, industrial wastes or other substances. 
(11)  Any building, structure or other place or location where any activity which is in violation of local, state or federal law is conducted, performed or maintained. 
(12)  Any accumulation of stagnant water permitted or maintained on any lot or piece of ground. 
(13)  Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot or cinders, in unreasonable quantities. 
(14)  Unsheltered storage for a period of 30 days or more within the corporate limits of this city, except in licensed junkyards, of old and unused stripped junk and other automobiles not in good and safe operating condition, and of any other vehicles, machinery, implements, or equipment or personal property of any kind which is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured is hereby declared to be a nuisance and a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
(15)  Such other acts or conditions which are declared by other ordinances to be or to constitute nuisances. 
(b)  For the purpose of this article, the term nuisance shall also include any condition or use of premises or of building exteriors which is detrimental to the property of others or which causes or tends to cause substantial diminution in the value of other property in the neighborhood in which the premises are located. This includes, but is not limited to, the keeping or depositing on or the scattering over the premises of any of the following: 
(1)  Lumber, junk, trash, or debris; and 
(2)  Abandoned, discarded, unused objects or equipment such as automobiles, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans or containers. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any owner or occupant of premises within the city to maintain a nuisance as described in this section. Any owner or occupant of premises knowingly maintaining a nuisance within the city shall be guilty of an offense. Where the nuisance is maintained by a fictious [fictitious] person owning or occupying the premises, a natural person serving as an officer, manager or other agent of the owner or occupant who knowingly permits the nuisance to be maintained shall be guilty of the same offense as the fictious [fictitious] person. 
(Code 1986, §§ 11-2, 11-3; Ord. No. 830, § 2(11-1(b), 11-2), 9-6-94; Ord. No. 955, § 2, 8-5-08; Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 22-29. - Powers and duties of the inspector; determination of interested parties. 
(a)  The inspector shall be charged with the duty of administering the applicable standards and securing compliance therewith, and, in furtherance of this responsibility, the inspector shall: 
(1)  Make such inspections as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes and intent of this article. 
(2)  Investigate any complaints of alleged violation of this article and maintain a log reflecting the resolution of such complaints. However, only matters or conditions pertinent to the existence of a nuisance shall be considered or reported by the inspector pursuant to this article. 
(b)  When the inspector verifies the existence of a nuisance involving an unfit or unsafe structure, it shall be his duty to promptly prepare and submit to the city manager the notice and order required by this article. The city manager or his or her designee, with the assistance of the city attorney, shall determine the owner of record of the real estate upon which the nuisance is located, and send the owners a notice and order of abatement. In addition, the notice and order shall be given to the lessees or occupants, if any, and persons of interest, including a mortgagee, a contract purchaser, an agent with the power of attorney, and persons claiming an interest under lis pendens and the like. All such persons are referred to as the "interested parties" in this article. 
(c)  The inspector shall serve the notice and order upon the record owner of the premises at the address reflected by the latest tax rolls. 
(Ord. No. 830, § 2(11-3), 9-6-94; Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 22-30. - Duties of other departments. 
(a)  Members of the fire department, police department, public works and sanitation departments shall make written reports to the inspector of all dwellings or structures or the properties which appear to be a nuisance within the terms of this article. Such reports shall be submitted to the inspector as soon as practicable. 
(b)  In carrying out his responsibilities under this article, the inspector may request assistance from the city, to determine violations of municipal ordinances, state law, and other applicable departments within rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 830, § 2(11-13), 9-6-94; Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 22-31. - Entry powers. 
    The inspector and his designees are hereby authorized to enter upon private property in order to enforce the provisions of this article. When necessary to obtain such entry, the inspector and his designees may institute appropriate proceedings to obtain a search warrant or inspection warrant whichever is necessary. 
(Ord. No. 830, § 2(11-14), 9-6-94; Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 22-32. - Notice and order of abatement. 
(a)  The notice and order may require the cutting of grass, weeds or underbrush or the removal of rubbish or such other measures as are reasonably necessary to abate the nuisance. 
(b)  The notice and order may require the vacation, demolition or removal of any unfit or unsafe dwelling or structure, or may order the repair, restoration or replacement of any part of the same; provided, however, that no building or structure shall be subject to repair, restoration or replacement where the cost of repairing, restoring or replacing any part or parts thereof would exceed 50 percent of the value (as determined by reference to the most recent, certified advalorem tax roll of the Jackson County Property Appraiser of such structure after repair, restoration or replacement. 
(c)  The notice shall include: 
(1)  The description of the location of the buildings and/or land involved either by street address or by legal description. 
(2)  A statement providing an accurate description of the nuisance for which the notice is issued. 
(3)  Specification of the sections of this article upon which the notice of violation is based. 
(4)  If the nuisance does not involve an unfit or unsafe structure, a statement ordering what shall be done to abate the nuisance. 
(5)  If the nuisance does involve an unfit or unsafe structure, a statement of the nature and extent of such repairs or alterations necessary to comply with this article. 
(6)  If the nuisance involves an unfit or unsafe structure and is of such a character that repairs or alterations cannot bring the building into compliance, a statement to that effect and an order of demolition of the building indicating fully the reason therefore. 
(7)  If abatement of the nuisance or demolition of a structure is necessary for compliance, a specification of time for performing such abatement or demolition shall be stated in the notice which shall not be less than ten days, nor more than 120 days. 
(8)  The name of the person upon whom the notice is served, as stated in section 22-29(b). 
(9)  A statement advising that upon the owner's failure to comply with the notice, the city may vacate, demolish, or remove or otherwise abate the nuisance in accordance with the order stated in the notice, and the expense of such performance by the city shall be charged against the real property. The assessment, when made, shall constitute a lien upon the property by the city. 
(10)  A statement advising of the procedures for review of the action of the inspector, as set out in section 22-38. 
(d)  In the case of an unfit or unsafe dwelling or structure, the notice and order shall require the owner and other interested parties within 30 days after service to obtain a permit and begin specified repairs or improvements, or begin to demolish and remove the dwelling or structure or portion of such dwelling or structure. This work shall be completed within 60 days from the date of the permit for repair or demolition. Any demolition permit necessary as a result of any condemnation in this section shall not require a fee. 
(e)  Except as otherwise provided in this article for unsafe or unfit dwellings or structures, the inspector may order such work to be completed within such time as he determines to be reasonable considering the nature of the nuisance, the danger to the public and the amount of work involved to abate the nuisance. 
(f)  When the city inspector verifies the existence of a rodent infestation in any dwelling or structure that is to be demolished and removed, in order to preclude the migration of rodents, the notice and order of the inspector shall require that effective rodent extermination methods be employed by a licensed structural pest control operator prior to demolition. Extermination techniques shall include ectoparasite control measure. 
(g)  In the case of an unfit and unsafe dwelling or structure, which after inspection is determined to be uninhabited, the inspector shall cause to be posted a no trespassing sign to prevent entry into the premises by third parties who might be exposed to the risk of danger created by the unsafe structure. 
(Code 1986, § 11-4; Ord. No. 830, § 2(11-4), 9-6-94; Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 22-33. - Publication of notice. 
    The city commission shall cause to be published in a newspaper regularly published and in general circulation within the city during the month of May in each year hereafter, and once a week for two consecutive weeks, a notice reading substantially as follows: 
    "Attention owners, agents, custodians, lessees and the occupants of real property within the city limits and all other interested parties: 
    You are hereby notified that you are required by law to cut and keep cut to a height of not exceeding 12 inches all weeds, grass or underbrush; to remove any trash, debris, refuse or noxious matter located on any property owned, controlled or occupied by you in the city; and also to repair, restore or demolish any unfit or unsafe structure located upon such property, and that upon your failure to do so, the city will cause the nuisance to be abated, and the cost of the nuisance will be assessed against the property upon which the nuisance is located." 
(Ord. No. 830, § 2(11-5), 9-6-94; Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 22-34. - Services of notice and order. 
    It shall be the duty of the city manager or his or her designee to see to it that the required notice and order is delivered to the interested parties by personal delivery of a copy to the party to be notified, or by leaving such copy at his usual place of abode with some person of the family above 15 years of age and informing such person of the contents of the notice and order, or by either registered or certified United States mail, with return receipt requested, or, if the name of any such party or his place of residence or his post office address cannot be ascertained after diligent search, or if a notice and order sent by either registered or certified mail shall be returned undelivered and the person to be notified is not residing within the city, by publishing a copy thereof once a week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. A copy of such notice and order shall be posted in a conspicuous place at city hall and the county courthouse and upon such dwelling or structure. The subsequent removal or illegibility of the notice and order posted upon the dwelling or structure shall not render the posting invalid. 
(Ord. No. 830, § 2(11-6), 9-6-94; Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 22-35. - Extension of time to comply. 
(a)  In the case of an unfit or unsafe building or structure, if the interested parties shall have obtained a building or demolition permit within the 30-day period and, in good faith and in due time, begun work to comply with the notice and order, but it appears that they will not be able to complete the work by the date ordered, they may file a written request stating the reasons they have been unable to complete compliance, and, if reasonable grounds are shown therefore, the inspector is authorized to issue an amended notice and order authorizing an extension of time, not to exceed 60 days, in which to complete compliance with the original order. 
(b)  In the case of a nuisance which is not an unfit or unsafe dwelling or structure, the building official may grant extensions of up to 60 days to abate the nuisance as are reasonably necessary under the circumstances, upon a written request from the interested parties, stating the reasons they have been unable to complete compliance and showing reasonable grounds for such failure to complete compliance. 
(c)  The code enforcement board, in exceptional cases, upon written request, may extend the completion date required by the notice and order and extensions, as merited by special hardship, unusual difficulty, or uniqueness of the situation. However, in no event shall the completion date extend beyond a maximum period of 180 days. 
(Ord. No. 830, § 2(11-7), 9-6-94; Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 22-36. - City action on failure to comply. 
(a)  If the owner or other parties in interest fail to repair, restore or replace such parts of the dwelling or structure within the time permitted by the notice and in the absence of extenuating circumstances as would justify an extension of the time period therefore, the city manager may order a vacation of the premises until compliance or a demolition of the structure. 
(b)  If the owner or other parties in interest shall fail to comply with a notice and order made pursuant to the provisions of this article within the time therein fixed, the city, acting through the city manager, is authorized to vacate, demolish or remove or otherwise abate the nuisance in accordance with such notice and order, either with city forces or by independent contractor selected through the city's procurement process. 
(Ord. No. 830, § 2(11-8), 9-6-94; Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 22-37. - Assessment of cost and abatement; lien. 
(a)  Upon expiration of the 30-day appeal period with no appeal having been taken, the city manager, after proceeding under this article, shall, as often as may be convenient, report the action taken toward abatement of the nuisance by the city, and the city commission shall assess the entire cost of such action against the real property, which assessment, when made, shall constitute a lien upon the property in favor of by the city. The lien of the city shall encompass, in addition to the cost of determining the nuisance, effecting the vacation, securing of the property removal or abatement of the nuisance, and demolition and removal of the dwelling or structure and accessories when applicable, all administrative, legal, postal and publication expenses, as well as rodent extermination when employed, the fees of independent experts offering opinions, reports or testimony concerning the nuisance or abatement, as well as all other direct or indirect costs associated therewith. All such costs and expenses are collectively referred to herein as the abatement cost. The lien upon the property for the abatement cost shall be superior to the interest of all others receiving notice and an opportunity to administratively appeal the notice and order, except taxes. 
(b)  The city clerk shall record a notice of the lien in the county's official record book showing the nature of such lien, the amount of the lien, an accurate legal description of the property, including the street address, and the names of all interested parties known to the city. Such municipal lien shall bear interest from the date at the rate of 18 percent per annum and enforceable by foreclosure against the property if unsatisfied after the expiration of three months from the date of recording the notice of lien, or enforceable as other liens may be enforced by the city. Additionally, the city may enforce the lien upon the real property of the owner, as provided for in F.S. ch. 173, as amended from time to time. 
(Code 1986, § 11-6; Ord. No. 830, § 2(11-9), 9-6-94; Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 2-3-15) 
State Law reference- Manner of making special assessments and foreclosure of liens by cities, F.S. § 173.15. 
Sec. 22-38. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any interested party may appeal the decision of the inspector or city manager to the code enforcement board upon the filing, within 30 days after service of the inspector or city manager's notice and order, of an application to the inspector, setting forth the grounds for the appeal. Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the inspector shall forthwith transmit a copy of the notice of appeal, together with all related documents of his department, to the code enforcement board. Within ten days after the filing of notice of appeal, the code enforcement board shall schedule a date for the hearing of the appeal and give notice of the date for the hearing to the interested parties, in a manner as would afford them not less than ten days' notice. Under no circumstances shall the code enforcement board establish a hearing date beyond 60 days from the filing of the notice of appeal. 
(b)  All appeals proceedings shall be public, and notice of such appeals shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. The findings of the code enforcement board shall be encompassed in a resolution stating with particularity the grounds for the code enforcement board's decision. 
(c)  The resolution of the code enforcement board shall be subject to the approval of the legislative body, and, upon approval of the legislative body, all interested parties shall have 30 days within which to comply. The legislative body shall have the right and power to modify, change or amend the resolution of the code enforcement board as in their discretion is deemed best. 
(Code 1986, § 11-5; Ord. No. 830, § 2(11-10), 9-6-94; Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 22-39. - Final appeal to circuit court. 
    An interested party, having exhausted his administrative remedies before the code enforcement board, may appeal to the circuit court the decision of the board, or alternatively, that of the legislative body, in like manner of appeals from county courts. 
(Ord. No. 830, § 2(11-11), 9-6-94; Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 22-40. - Appearance by counsel, in person or by agent; witnesses sworn. 
    Any interested party appearing before the code enforcement board may appear in person, by counsel, or by an agent possessing the power of attorney, provided the agency's instrument appears in the county's official records book, but may not appear through any person otherwise a stranger to the record. All witnesses appearing before the board in proceedings under this article shall be sworn by the chairman or, in his absence, by the person acting in his stead, except a counsel representing a client. 
(Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Secs. 22-41-22-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ABANDONED, WRECKED, JUNKED PROPERTY[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Abandoned property on public property, mandatory procedure for certain property, F.S. § 705.101 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 22-61-22-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MOTOR VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 66. 

Sec. 22-71. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Inoperative means any condition of disfunction, partial mechanical disrepair or incompletion, or a condition which renders a motor vehicle unfit or unsafe to use and operate upon public highways. Any vehicle not repaired or moved or rendered operable within 14 days after notice given pursuant to this article shall be presumed to be inoperative, regardless of the nature or extent of any repairs or maintenance which, if made upon the vehicle, would render it operative or usable. The terms "unsafe" or "unfit" shall include all motor vehicle standards set forth in F.S. ch. 316. 
    Junked motor vehicle means any motor vehicle which does not have lawfully affixed thereto both an unexpired license plate, and the condition of the motor vehicle is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative, abandoned or discarded. 
    Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel along the ground and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motorscooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts, campers and trailers. 
    Private property means any real property within the city which is privately owned and which is not public property. 
    Public property means any street or highway which shall include the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the purposes of vehicular travel, and shall also mean any other publicly owned property or facility. 
(Code 1986, § 11-36; Ord. No. 830, § 2(11-32), 9-6-94) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-72. - Prohibited acts; nuisance declared; exceptions. 
    No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any motor vehicle of any kind which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked or partially dismantled condition, whether attended or not, upon any public or private property within the city for a period of time in excess of 14 days. The presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked or partially dismantled vehicle, or parts of same, on private or public property is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this article. This section shall not apply to any vehicle enclosed within a building on private property; stored or totally hidden from view by an authorized fence enclosure to any vehicle held in connection with a business enterprise, lawfully licensed by the city and properly operated in the appropriate business zone, pursuant to the zoning laws of the city; to any motor vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted or designed for operation on drag strips or raceways; or to any motor vehicle retained by the owner for antique or classic car collection purposes, provided such vehicle is either operable or in the process of being restored to operable condition. For the purposes of this section, the process of being restored to operable condition shall mean material, mechanical or cosmetic repair performed continuously or without interruption by any period in excess of 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 830, § 2(11-33), 9-6-94) 
Sec. 22-73. - Notice to remove. 
(a)  Whenever it comes to the attention of the chief of police that any nuisance exists in the city on private property, a notice in writing shall be served upon the occupant of the land where the nuisance exists, or in case there is no such occupant, then upon the owner of the property or his agent, notifying them of the existence of the nuisance and requesting its removal in the time specified in this article. 
(b)  The notice may be served as follows: 
(1)  By personal delivery by a police officer to the person who is to be served; 
(2)  By placement on the nuisance vehicle; or 
(3)  By registered mail. 
(Code 1986, §§ 11-36, 11-37; Ord. No. 830, § 2(11-34), 9-6-94) 
Sec. 22-74. - Responsibility for removal and liability for expenses. 
    Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard, the owner of the abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative or junked motor vehicle and the owner or occupant of the private property on which the same is located, either or all of them, shall be responsible for its removal. In the event of removal and disposition by the city, the owner and occupant of the private property where same is located shall be jointly and severally liable for the expenses incurred by the city, including a reasonable attorney's fee incurred in collecting the expenses before or after suit. 
(Code 1986, § 11-39; Ord. No. 830, § 2(11-35), 9-6-94) 
Sec. 22-75. - Notice-Service. 
    The chief of police shall give notice of removal to the owner or occupant of the private property where a nuisance is located, at least 14 days before the time of compliance. It shall constitute sufficient notice when a copy of the notice is posted in a conspicuous place upon the private property on which the vehicle is located, and duplicate copies are sent by registered mail to the owner or occupant of the private property at his last known address. 
(Ord. No. 830, § 2(11-36), 9-6-94) 
Sec. 22-76. - Same-Contents. 
    The notice required in this article shall contain the request for removal within the time specified in this article and shall advise that upon failure to comply with the notice to remove the city or its designee shall undertake such removal with the cost of removal to be levied against the owner or occupant of the property. The notice shall further advise the procedure to request a hearing before the code enforcement board. Several vehicles may be included in a single notice. 
(Ord. No. 830, § 2(11-37), 9-6-94) 
Sec. 22-77. - Hearing-Request. 
    Within the 14-day compliance period, the persons to whom the notices are directed, or their duly authorized agents, may file a written request with the chief of police for a hearing before the code enforcement board to defend the charges brought by the city. 
(Ord. No. 830, § 2(11-38), 9-6-94) 
Sec. 22-78. - Same-Procedure. 
    The hearing provided for in this article shall be held as soon as practicable after the filing of the request, and the person to whom the notices are directed shall be advised in writing of the time and place of such hearing at least seven days in advance of the hearing. At any such hearing the city and the persons to whom the notices have been directed may introduce such witnesses and evidence as either party deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 830, § 2(11-39), 9-6-94) 
Sec. 22-79. - Removal of motor vehicle from property. 
    If the violation described in the notice has not been remedied within the 14-day period of compliance, or if a notice requesting a hearing is timely filed, a hearing is had, and the existence of the violation is affirmed by the code enforcement board, the chief of police shall have the right to take possession of the junked motor vehicle and remove it from the premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or refuse to allow such person to enter upon private property for the purpose of removing a vehicle under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 830, § 2(11-40), 9-6-94) 
Sec. 22-80. - Notice of removal. 
    Within five days of the removal of such vehicle, the chief of police shall give notice to the registered owner of the vehicle, if known, and also to the owner or occupant of the private property from which the vehicle was removed, that such vehicle has been impounded and stored for violation of this article. If the vehicle is not registered in this state, the notice shall be given within a reasonable time from the date of removal. The notice shall give the location of the stored vehicle and the costs incurred by the city for removal and storage. 
(Ord. No. 830, § 2(11-41), 9-6-94) 
Sec. 22-81. - Disposition of vehicles; proceeds of sale. 
(a)  Upon removing a vehicle under the provisions of section 22-79, the chief of police may summarily dispose of the vehicle and execute a sworn certificate of sale. The chief of police shall publish notice of public sale once, not less than seven days before the date of the proposed sale. 
(b)  The proceeds resulting from the sale or disposition of vehicles shall be placed in the police department forfeiture account. 
(Ord. No. 830, § 2(11-42), 9-6-94) 
Sec. 22-82. - Public sale-Notice. 
    The notice of public sale shall state: 
(1)  The sale is of abandoned property in the possession of the city. 
(2)  A description of the vehicle, including make, model, license number, if available, and any other information which will accurately identify the vehicle. 
(3)  The terms of the sale. 
(4)  The date, time and place of the sale. 
(Ord. No. 830, § 2(11-43), 9-6-94) 
Sec. 22-83. - Same-Procedure. 
    The vehicle shall be sold to the highest and best bidder at public sale, with the proceeds to be applied against the expenses incurred by the city. Any excess may be claimed within 30 days of the sale by the last rightful owner of the vehicle immediately preceding the sale. At the time of payment of the purchase price, the chief of police shall execute a sworn certificate of sale in duplicate, the original of which to be given to the purchaser, and the copy of such certificate to be retained by the chief. Title to the vehicle shall pass to the purchaser at a public or private sale and be evidenced by the certificate which shall be sufficient to cause a new title to be issued by the appropriate state agencies. Should the sale for any reason be invalid, the city's liability shall be limited to the return of the purchase price. 
(Ord. No. 830, § 2(11-44), 9-6-94) 
Sec. 22-84. - Redemption of impounded vehicles. 
    The owner of any vehicle seized under the provisions of this article may redeem such vehicle at any time after its removal but prior to the sale or destruction thereof upon proof of ownership and payment to the city of the expenses incurred by the city, which for all purposes in this section shall include, but not be limited to, the actual and reasonable expenses of removal, advertising, attorney's fee, abstract of title, appraisal and storage for each vehicle redeemed. 
(Ord. No. 830, § 2(11-45), 9-6-94) 
Sec. 22-85. - Liens. 
    Upon the failure of the owner or occupant of property on which abandoned vehicles have been removed by the city to pay on demand the unrecovered expenses incurred by the city, and upon recording a notice of lien sufficient to identify the property, the owner or occupant, and the amount remaining due, the city shall have a lien upon the property for the amount due, together with a reasonable attorney's fee incurred in collecting same before or after suit. Such liens, when delinquent for more than 30 days, may be foreclosed by the city in the manner provided by law for the foreclosure of mortgages on real property. 
(Ord. No. 830, § 2(11-46), 9-6-94) 
Secs. 22-86-22-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUNKYARDS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Buffer and landscaping requirements, pt. III, § 4-3. 
State Law reference- Junkyard control law, F.S. § 339.241. 

Sec. 22-106. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Automobile graveyard means an establishment or place of business which is maintained or operated for the use of storing, keeping, buying or selling wrecked, scrapped, ruined or dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts. 
    Fence means an enclosure at least six feet in height, so constructed or planted and maintained as to obscure the junk inside the enclosure from ordinary view to those persons passing upon the streets in this city. 
    Junk means old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, lumber, trash, rubber, debris, oddments, wastements, litter, leavings, ruins, castoffs, rummage, waste, or junked, dismantled or wrecked automobiles or parts thereof, iron, steel and other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous material. 
    Junkyard means an establishment or place of business which is maintained or operated for the use of storing, keeping, buying or selling such junk or for the maintenance or operation of an automobile graveyard and shall be construed to include garbage dumps and sanitary fills. 
    Streets means any street, road or alley within the city limits. 
(Code 1986, § 11-56; Ord. No. 830, § 2(11-66), 9-6-94) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-107. - Penalty for violation of section; injunctions. 
(a)  Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense against the city and, upon conviction, shall be penalized by a fine as set out in section 1-14. 
(b)  The fine shall be applicable only after receipt by the person of written notification that the person is violating any provisions of this article, and his failure to comply with the requirements contained in this article within 30 days from the date of the receipt of notice. 
(c)  In addition to other remedies provided in this article, any public official may apply to the circuit court, or other court of competent jurisdiction of the county, for an injunction to abate such nuisance. 
(Code 1986, § 11-59; Ord. No. 830, § 2(11-69), 9-6-94) 
Sec. 22-108. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  No junkyard shall be operated or maintained within 100 feet of any street, provided that a person who was operating or maintaining a junkyard less than 100 feet from any street prior to the passing of this article may be permitted to operate and maintain his junkyard if the view from such street is obscured by natural objects, plantings or fences on his property line. 
(b)  The provisions in this section shall not be construed to prohibit any person who operates or maintains a junkyard less than 100 feet from any street prior to the passing of this article to enlarge, expand or increase the size of the junkyard. 
(Code 1986, § 11-57; Ord. No. 830, § 2(11-67), 9-6-94) 
Sec. 22-109. - Fencing requirements. 
    A fence constructed under the provisions of this article shall be kept in good order and repair. The city commission shall have the power to promulgate rules and regulations governing the location, construction, planning and materials of fence, living or otherwise. 
(Code 1986, § 11-58; Ord. No. 830, § 2(11-68), 9-6-94) 
ARTICLE V. - CITATIONS 

Sec. 22-110. - Title of article. 
    This article shall be known as the City of Marianna Ordinance Enforcement Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 955, § 2, 8-5-08) 
Sec. 22-111. - Ordinance enforcement officers. 
    The following positions will serve as municipal ordinance enforcement officers: code enforcement officer, fire inspector, and animal control officer. The city manager may also delegate the authority of municipal ordinance enforcement officer as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 955, § 2, 8-5-08) 
Sec. 22-112. - Penalties for ordinance violations. 
Violation Code Reference Fine Unlawful accumulation of rubbish, trash, junk and other abandoned materials, metals, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans, containers, lumber or other things Sec. 22-28(a)(1) $260.00 Excessive accumulation of untended growth of weeds, undergrowth or other dead or living vegetation Sec. 22-28(a)(2) $260.00 Refuse/underbrush/weeds a height of more than one foot Sec. 22-28(a)(3) $260.00 Abandoned/dilapidated structure Sec. 22-28(a)(5) $260.00 Nuisance noises Sec. 22-28(a)(7) $260.00 Nuisance odors Sec. 22-28(a)(8) $260.00 Animal carcasses of animals or fowl not disposed of within 24 hours after death Sec. 22-28(a)(9) $300.00 Water pollution Sec. 22-28(a)(10) $400.00 Accumulation of stagnant water permitted or maintained on any lot or piece of ground Sec. 22-28(a)(12) $260.00 Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot or cinders in unreasonable quantities Sec. 22-28(a)(13) $260.00 Unsheltered storage for a period of 30 days or more/dealing in junk Sec. 22-28(a)(14) $360.00 Dumping $400.00 Failure to obtain sign development order/permit and pay review fees Land Development Code, Article V, Sec. 5-6 $260.00 Violation of regulations and specifications concerning signs Land Development Code, Article V $400.00 Obstructing drainage Land Development Code, Article IV, Sec. 4-2.2(5)(e) $260.00 Failure to obtain a development order Land Development Code, Article II, Sec. 2.2 & 2.4 $260.00 Failure to have mobile home permitted or inspected Land Development Code, Article II, Sec. 2.2 & 2.4 $260.00 Abandoned/unmaintained mobile home Land Development Code, Article IV, Sec. 4-8.3(3)(b) $260.00 Occupying RV, camper or trailer outside mobile home park Chapter 70, Article II, Sec. 70-93 $300.00 Use of mobile home for purpose other than residence Land Development Code, Article IV, Sec. 4-2.2(3)(e) $300.00 Violation of a stop work order Land Development Code, Article I, Sec. 1-11 $500.00 Doing business without license or obtaining license by fraud Chapter 42, Article III, Sec. 62-107 $500.00 Operating without a Peddlers/Solicitors license Sec. 46-26 $260.00 Distributing hand bills, flyers or similar advertisement on automobiles Sec. 46-79(1) $260.00 Ringing any hand bell, beating or striking a pan, blowing a whistle, sounding gong, etc., crying out the sale of goods and merchandise on streets of city Sec. 46-79(2) $260.00 Selling goods or wares in the City's right-of-way or among vehicles in traffic Sec. 46-79(3) $260.00 Soliciting within 1000 feet of a school, public park or recreational facility Sec. 46-79(5) $260.00 Peddler/Solicitor using another's I.D. card Sec. 46-92 $260.00 Peddler/Solicitor remaining on private or public property after being asked to leave Sec. 46-79(13) $300.00 Violation of general zoning regulations Land Development Code, Article I, Sec. 1-11 $260.00 Parking of tractor trailers in residential areas Land Development Code, Article IV, Sec. 4-6.9 $260.00 Interference with Inspector Sec. 26-7 $500.00 Order to Correct Dangerous Conditions (Fire)/Failure to Comply with Order to Correct Dangerous Conditions Sec. 26-8 $500.00 Inhabiting a structure/Operating a business prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy 2004 Florida Building Code, Chapter 1, Sec. 110.1 $500.00 Street Address Violations NFPA 1:10.13.1.2; Marianna City Code, Sec. 26-11 1st Offense: Warning; 2 nd and continued offences: $260 Key Vault Violations NFPA 1:10.12.2 1 ST Offense: Warning (Correct within 5 DAYS); 2 nd and continued offences: $260 Fire Hydrant Violations NFPA 1:18.3.3.1 1 ST Offense: Warning; 2 nd and continued offences: $260.00 Fire Lane Violations NFPA 1:17.3.7.2 1 ST Offense: Warning (Correct immediately); 2 nd and continued offences: $260.00 Combustible Waste Violation NFPA 1:19.1.2 1 ST Offense: Warning (Correct immediately); 2 nd and continued offences: $260.00 Exit Door Violations NFPA 101:14.5.2.2 1 ST Offense: Warning (Correct immediately); 2 nd and continued offences: $500.00 Aisle, Walkway and Stairway Violations NFPA 101:7.5.1.1.1 1 ST Offense: Warning (Correct immediately); 2 nd and continued offences: $500.00 Emergency Lighting Violations NFPA 101:7.10.5.1 and 101.7.9.2.2 1 ST Offense: Warning (Correct within 5 days); 2 nd and continued offences: $260.00 Fire Extinguisher Violations NFPA 1:13.6.2; NFPA 1:13.6.6.8.2.2) 1 ST Offense: Warning (Correct within 5 days); 2 nd and continued offences: $260.00 Abandoned In Place Wiring Violations NFPA 1:11.1.14; NFPA 70:370-25 and NFPA 70:370-27 (3)(c) 1 ST Offense: Warning; 2 nd and continued offences: $260.00 Electrical Extension Cord Violations NFPA 1:11.1.5 1 ST Offense: Warning (Correct within 5 days); 2 nd and continued offences: $260.00 Elevator with Fire Fighter Service Violations NFPA 101-9.4.6 1 ST Offense: Warning; 2 nd and continued offences: $500.00 Fire Sprinkler Violations NFPA 69A: 46.041 1 ST Offense: Warning; 2 nd and continued offences: $500.00 Violations related to records of inspections, tests, and maintenance of fire sprinkler systems NFPA 1:13.3.3.4 1 ST Offense: Warning; 2 nd and continued offences: $260.00 Fire Department Connection Violations NFPA 25 9-7.1 1 ST Offense: Warning (Corrected in 30 days); 2 nd and continued offences: $500.00 Fire Alarm Violations NFPA 1:13.7.3.2.6.1 1 ST Offense: Warning (Corrected in 30 days); 2 nd and continued offences: $500.00 Violations related to records of fire alarm maintenance, repair and inspection NFPA 1:13.7.3.2.6.1 1 ST Offense: Warning (Corrected in 30 days); 2 nd and continued offences: $260.00 Refusal to sign Code Enforcement Citation Sec. 22-116 $260.00  
    Animal control citations are addressed in Chapter 10 of the City of Marianna Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 955, § 2, 8-5-08) 
Sec. 22-113. - Issuance; contents. 
(a)  An ordinance enforcement officer is authorized to issue a citation to a person when, based upon personal investigation, the officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a civil infraction in violation of a duly enacted code or ordinance and that the county court will hear the charge. 
(b)  Prior to issuing a citation, an enforcement officer shall provide notice to the person that the person has committed a violation of an ordinance and shall establish a reasonable time period within which the person must correct the violation. Such time period shall be no more than 30 days. If, upon personal investigation, an enforcement officer finds that the person has not corrected the violation within the time period, an enforcement officer may issue a citation to the person who has committed the violation. An enforcement officer is not required to provide the person with a reasonable time period to correct the violation prior to issuing a citation and may immediately issue a citation, if the ordinance enforcement officer has reason to believe that the violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety or welfare or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible. 
(c)  A citation issued by an ordinance enforcement officer shall contain: 
(1)  The date and time of issuance. 
(2)  The name and address of the person to whom the citation is issued. 
(3)  The date and time the civil infraction was committed. 
(4)  The facts constituting reasonable cause. 
(5)  The number or section of the code or ordinance violated. 
(6)  The name and authority of the ordinance enforcement officer. 
(7)  The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay the civil penalty or to contest the citation. 
(8)  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects to contest the citation. 
(9)  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects not to contest the citation. 
(10)  A conspicuous statement that, if the person fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed or fails to appear in court to contest the citation, judgment may be entered against the person for an amount up to the maximum civil penalty. 
(Ord. No. 955, § 2, 8-5-08) 
Sec. 22-114. - Deposit with county court. 
    After issuing a citation to an alleged violator, an ordinance enforcement officer shall deposit the original citation and one copy of the citation with the county court. 
(Ord. No. 955, § 2, 8-5-08) 
Sec. 22-115. - Procedure for contesting citation. 
(a)  Within 30 days of the issuance of a citation the person so charged may file a contest to such citation with the clerk of the county court. A copy of the contest must be furnished by the person to the city. The contest shall include the name and address of the person. 
(b)  The clerk of the county court shall cause the matter to be set before the county judge on the next reasonably available date not more than 60 days, with notices being sent by the clerk to the city and the person contesting the citation. 
(c)  The county judge shall, on the appointed date and time, hold a hearing to determine if the citation was properly issued and to hear any other matters pertaining to such citation, and shall make an adjudication upon the evidence so presented, and may assess a civil penalty up to the maximum set by the ordinance. The minimum standards of procedure, excluding pretrial, set forth in the Florida Rules of Small Claims shall apply. 
(d)  If the person fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed, or fails to appear in court to contest the citation, he shall be deemed to have waived his right to contest the citation. In such case, judgment may be entered against the person for an amount up to the maximum civil penalty. Additionally, any such person shall be subject to prosecution as set forth in section 1-14, City of Marianna Code of Ordinances. 
(e)  The judgment of the court, or a default judgment pursuant to subsection (d) of this section, shall have the same effect as any civil judgment of the county court, and bear interest at the legal rate. In addition, such judgment shall be a lien on the property, real or personal, on which the violation exists, and may be enforced as provided by F.S. § 162.09(3). The lien shall include all administrative, legal, postal, publication and processing fees. Such lien shall bear an interest rate from the date at a rate of 18 percent per annun. The city may enforce the lien upon the real property of the owner as provided for in F.S. Chapter 173, as amended from time to time. The lien upon the property shall be superior to all others except taxes. The city shall not commence any lien foreclosure action against any property for which a lien has been filed prior to the effective date of this subsection until the lien has been filed fro a period of two years. 
(Ord. No. 955, § 2, 8-5-08) 
Sec. 22-116. - Refusal to sign and accept citation. 
    Any person who willfully refuses to sign and accept a citation issued by an ordinance enforcement officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082 or 775.083. 
(Ord. No. 955, § 2, 8-5-08) 
Sec. 22-117. - Enforcement of building codes. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to the enforcement pursuant to F.S. §§ 553.79 and 553.80 of building codes adopted pursuant to F.S. § 553.73 as they apply to construction, provided that a building permit is either not required or has been issued by the county. For the purposes of this section, the term "building codes" means only those codes adopted pursuant to F.S. § 553.73. 
(Ord. No. 955, § 2, 8-5-08) 
Sec. 22-118. - Other means of enforcement. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the city from enforcing its ordinances by any other means. 
(Ord. No. 955, § 2, 8-5-08) 
Chapter 23 - CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT AND ESSENTIAL SERVICES ASSESSMENTS 
ARTICLE I. - INTRODUCTION 

Sec. 23-1. - Definitions. 
    When used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Annual assessment resolution means the resolution described in section 23-10 hereof, approving an assessment roll for a specific fiscal year. 
    Assessment may include capital costs or service costs, or any combination of those costs, associated with review, planning, investigation, analysis, permitting, notice, enforcement, remediation, improvement, provision of services, demolition or removal, or any combination of those, to abate a public nuisance. 
    Assessment area means any of specific areas created by resolution of the commission pursuant to section 23-4 hereof, that specially benefit from capital improvements or essential services. 
    Assessment coordinator means the city manager or such person's designee. 
    Assessment roll means the special assessment roll relating to capital improvements or essential services containing the information specified in section 23-6 hereof, approved by a final assessment resolution or an annual assessment resolution pursuant to section 23-9 or section 23-10 hereof. 
    Assessment unit means the apportionment unit utilized to determine the assessment for each parcel of property, as set forth in the initial assessment resolution. Assessment units may include, by way of example and not limitation, one or a combination of the following: front footage, land area, improvement area, equivalent residential connections or units, permitted land use, trip generation rates, rights to future trip generation capacity under applicable concurrency management regulations, property value or any other physical characteristic or reasonably expected use of the property that is related to the capital improvements or essential services to be funded from proceeds of the assessment. 
    Capital asset means property, plant and equipment and intangible assets intended or likely to produce benefits or relieve burdens in future accounting periods beyond the current period. 
    Capital cost means all or any portion of the costs that are properly attributable to the acquisition, design, permitting, preparation, construction, installation, reconstruction, renewal or replacement (including demolition, environmental mitigation and relocation) of a capital asset under generally accepted accounting principles; and including reimbursement to the city for any funds advanced for capital cost and interest on any interfund or intrafund loan for such purposes. 
    Capital improvements means one or more capital assets acquired, designed, permitted, prepared, constructed, installed or reconstructed, renewed or replaced (including demolition, environmental mitigation and relocation) in whole or in part by the city which provide a special benefit to, or relieve a burden attributable to, lands within an assessment area. 
    City means the City of Marianna, Florida. 
    Commission means the city commission of the City of Marianna, Florida. 
    Essential services means the services, facilities, or programs which provide a special benefit to, or relieve a burden attributable to, lands within an assessment area. 
    Final assessment resolution means the resolution described in section 23-9 hereof, which shall confirm, modify or repeal the initial assessment resolution and which shall be the final proceeding for the imposition of an assessment. 
    Fiscal year means the period commencing on October 1 of each year and continuing through the following September 30, or such other period as may be prescribed by law as the fiscal year for the city. 
    Government property means property owned by the United States of America, the State of Florida, a county, a special district, a municipal corporation, or any of their respective agencies or political subdivisions. 
    Initial assessment resolution means the resolution described in section 23-5 hereof, which shall be the initial proceeding for the imposition of an assessment. 
    Obligations means bonds or other evidence of indebtedness including but not limited to, notes, commercial paper, capital leases or any other obligation issued or incurred to finance capital improvements and secured, in whole or in part, by proceeds of the assessments. 
    Ordinance means this capital improvement and essential services assessment ordinance. 
    Pledged revenue means, as to any series of obligations, (A) the proceeds of such obligations, including investment earnings, (B) proceeds of the assessments pledged to secure the payment of such obligations, and (C) any other legally available non-ad valorem revenue pledged, at the commission's sole option, to secure the payment of such obligations, as specified by the ordinance and any resolution authorizing such obligations. 
    Property appraiser means the Jackson County Property Appraiser. 
    Resolution of intent means the resolution expressing the commission's intent to collect assessments on the ad valorem tax bill required by the uniform assessment collection act. Service cost means all or any portion of the expenses that are properly attributable to the provision of essential services under generally accepted accounting principles; and including reimbursement to the city for any funds advanced for such expenses and interest on any interfund or intrafund loan for such purposes. 
    Tax collector means the Jackson County Tax Collector. 
    Tax roll means the real property ad valorem tax assessment roll maintained by the property appraiser for the purpose of the levy and collection of ad valorem taxes. 
    Uniform Assessment Collection Act means F.S. §§ 197.3632 and 197.3635, or any successor statutes authorizing the collection of non-ad valorem assessments on the same bill as ad valorem taxes, and any applicable regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1031, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 23-2. - Interpretation. 
    Unless the context indicates otherwise, words importing the singular number include the plural number and vice versa; the terms "hereof," "hereby," "herein," "hereto," "hereunder" and similar terms refer to this article; and the term "hereafter" means after, and the term "heretofore" means before, the effective date of this article. Words importing either gender include the correlative words of the other gender unless the context indicates otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 1031, § 1, 2-3-15) 
ARTICLE II. - ASSESSMENTS 

Sec. 23-3. - Authority. 
    The commission is hereby authorized to impose assessments against property located within an assessment area to fund the capital cost or service cost of capital improvements or essential services incurred by the city. If more than one parcel is assessed, then the assessment shall be computed in a manner that fairly and reasonably apportions the capital costs or service costs among the parcels of property within an assessment area, based upon objectively determinable assessment units related to the value, use or physical characteristics of the property, except that where the special benefit or burden relief provided by a capital improvement or essential service is provided predominately to a single parcel of property, the resolution shall uniquely assess only that parcel the capital cost or service cost thereof, as in the case of the capital cost to abate a public nuisance on a single parcel of property. 
(Ord. No. 1031, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 23-4. - Creation of assessment areas. 
    The commission is hereby authorized to create assessment areas by resolution. Each assessment area shall encompass only that property specially benefited by the capital improvements or essential services proposed for funding from the proceeds of assessments to be imposed therein. The resolution creating each assessment area shall include brief descriptions of the proposed capital improvements or essential services, a description of the property to be included within the assessment area, and specific legislative findings that recognize the special benefit or burden relief to be provided by each proposed capital improvement or essential service to property within the assessment area. Properties in any assessment area need not be adjacent or contiguous to any other property in an assessment area. A resolution may assess only one parcel of property. 
(Ord. No. 1031, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 23-5. - Initial assessment resolution. 
    The initial proceeding for imposition of an assessment shall be the commission's adoption of an initial assessment resolution. The initial assessment resolution shall: 
(a)  Describe the capital improvements or essential services proposed for funding from proceeds of the assessments; 
(b)  Estimate, or if known state the service cost or capital cost; 
(c)  If more than one parcel of property is assessed, describe with particularity the proposed method of apportioning the service cost or capital cost among the parcels of property located within the assessment area, such that the owner of any parcel of property can objectively determine the amount of the assessment, based upon its value, use or physical characteristics; and 
(d)  Include specific legislative findings that recognize the equity provided by the apportionment methodology or, if applicable, that recognize the equity provided by assessing a predominately benefited or relieved, individual parcel the capital cost or service cost uniquely attributable to that parcel. 
(Ord. No. 1031, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 23-6. - Assessment roll. 
(a)  The assessment coordinator shall prepare a preliminary assessment roll that contains the following information: 
(1)  A summary description of each parcel of property (conforming to the description contained on the tax roll) subject to the assessment; 
(2)  The name of the owner of record of each parcel, as shown on the tax roll; 
(3)  The number of assessment units attributable to each parcel; 
(4)  If applicable, the estimated maximum annual assessment to become due in any fiscal year for each assessment unit; and 
(5)  If applicable, the estimated maximum annual assessment to become due in any fiscal year for each parcel. 
(b)  Copies of the initial assessment resolution and the preliminary assessment roll shall be on file in the office of the assessment coordinator and open to public inspection. The foregoing shall not be construed to require that the assessment roll be in printed form if the amount of the assessment for each parcel of property can be determined by use of a computer terminal or otherwise accessible through the internet or similar data base. 
(Ord. No. 1031, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 23-7. - Notice by publication. 
    After filing the assessment roll in the office of the assessment coordinator, as required by section 23-6(b) hereof, the assessment coordinator shall publish once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city a notice stating that at a meeting of the commission on a certain day and hour, not earlier than 20 calendar days from such publication, which meeting shall be a regular, adjourned or special meeting, the commission will hear objections of all interested persons to the final assessment resolution and approval of the assessment roll. The published notice shall conform to the requirements set forth in the uniform assessment collection act. 
(Ord. No. 1031, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 23-8. - Notice by mail. 
    In addition to the published notice required by section 23-7 hereof, the assessment coordinator shall provide notice of the proposed assessment by first class mail to the owner of each parcel of property subject to the assessment. The mailed notice shall conform to the requirements set forth in the uniform assessment collection act. Notice shall be mailed at least 20 calendar days prior to the hearing to each property owner at such address as is shown on the tax roll on the twentieth calendar day prior to the date of mailing. Notice shall be deemed mailed upon delivery thereof to the possession of the U.S. Postal Service. The assessment coordinator may provide proof of such notice by affidavit. 
Sec. 23-9. - Adoption of final resolution. 
    At the time named in such notice, or to which an adjournment or continuance may be taken, the commission shall receive written objections and hear testimony of interested persons and may then, or at any subsequent meeting of the commission, adopt the final assessment resolution which shall: 
(a)  Confirm, modify or repeal the initial assessment resolution with such amendments, if any, as may be deemed appropriate by the commission; 
(b)  Establish the maximum amount of the assessment for each assessment unit; 
(c)  Approve the assessment roll, with such amendments as it deems just and right; and 
(d)  Determine the method of collecting the assessments. 
(Ord. No. 1031, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 23-10. - Annual assessment resolution. 
    The commission shall adopt an annual assessment resolution during its budget adoption process for each fiscal year in which assessments will be imposed to approve the assessment roll for such fiscal year. The final assessment resolution shall constitute the annual assessment resolution for the initial fiscal year. The assessment roll, as prepared in accordance with the initial assessment resolution and confirmed or amended by the final assessment resolution, shall be confirmed or amended by the annual assessment resolution to reflect the then applicable portion of the cost of the capital improvements or essential services, or both, to be paid by assessments. If the proposed assessment for any parcel of property exceeds the maximum amount established in the notice provided pursuant to section 23-7 hereof or if an assessment is imposed against property not previously subject thereto, the commission shall provide notice to the owner of such property in accordance with sections 23-7 and 23-8 hereof and conduct a public hearing prior to adoption of the annual assessment resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1031, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 23-11. - Effect of assessment resolutions. 
    The adoption of the final assessment resolution or of an annual assessment requiring notice as provided in section 23-10 hereof, shall be the final adjudication of the issues presented (including, but not limited to, the apportionment methodology, the rate of assessment, the maximum annual assessment of each parcel, the adoption of the assessment roll and the levy and lien of the assessments), unless proper steps are initiated in a court of competent jurisdiction to secure relief within 20 days from the date of the commission's adoption of the final assessment resolution. The assessments for each fiscal year shall be established upon adoption of the annual assessment resolution. If the assessments are to be collected pursuant to the uniform assessment collection act, the assessment roll, as approved by the annual assessment resolution, shall be certified to the tax collector. 
(Ord. No. 1031, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 23-12. - Prepayment of assessments. 
(a)  The assessment imposed against any parcel of property to fund capital improvements shall be subject to prepayment at the option of the property owner, as follows: 
(1)  Prior to the issuance of obligations, the assessment coordinator shall provide first class mailed notice to the owner of each parcel of property subject to the assessment of the commission's intent to issue such obligations. On or prior to the date specified in such notice (which shall not be earlier than the thirtieth day following the date on which the notice is delivered to the possession of the U.S. Postal Service), or such later date as the commission may allow in its sole discretion, the owner of each parcel of property subject to the assessment shall be entitled to prepay the total assessment obligation. 
(2)  Following the date specified in the notice provided pursuant to section 23-12(a) hereof, or such later date as the commission may allow in its sole discretion, the owner of each parcel of property subject to the assessment shall be entitled to prepay the total remaining assessment upon payment of an amount equal to the sum of (a) such parcel's share of the principal amount of obligations then outstanding, (b) the premium associated with redemption of such parcel's share of the principal amount of obligations then outstanding, and (c) interest on such parcel's share of the principal amount of obligations then outstanding, from the most recent date to which interest has been paid to the next date following such prepayment on which the city can redeem obligations after providing all notices required by the ordinance or resolution authorizing issuance of such obligations; provided however, that during any period commencing on the date the annual assessment roll is certified for collection pursuant to the uniform assessment collection act and ending on the next date on which unpaid ad valorem taxes become delinquent, the city may reduce the amount required to prepay the assessments imposed against any parcel of property by the amount of the assessment certified for collection with respect to such parcel. 
(b)  At the city's election, the assessment imposed against any parcel of property may be subject to acceleration and mandatory prepayment if at any time a tax certificate has been issued and remains outstanding in respect of such property. In such event, the amount required for mandatory prepayment shall be the same as that required for an optional prepayment authorized by section 23-12(b) hereof. 
(c)  The amount of all prepayments computed in accordance with this section 23-12 shall be final. The city shall not be required to refund any portion of a prepayment if (1) the capital cost is less than the amount upon which such prepayment was computed, or (2) annual assessments will not be imposed for the full number of years anticipated at the time of such prepayment. 
(Ord. No. 1031, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 23-13. - Lien of assessments. 
(a)  Upon adoption of the annual assessment resolution for each fiscal year, assessments to be collected under the uniform assessment collection act shall constitute a lien against assessed property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district or municipal taxes and other non-ad valorem assessments. Except as otherwise provided by law, such lien shall be superior in dignity to all other liens, titles and claims, until paid. The lien shall be deemed perfected upon adoption by the commission of the annual assessment resolution and shall attach to the property included on the assessment roll as of the prior January 1, the lien date for ad valorem taxes. 
(b)  Upon adoption of the final assessment resolution, assessments to be collected under the alternative method of collection provided in section 23-18 hereof shall constitute a lien against assessed property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district or municipal taxes and other non-ad valorem assessments. Except as otherwise provided by law, such lien shall be superior in dignity to all other liens, titles and claims, until paid. The lien shall be deemed perfected on the date notice thereof is recorded in the Official Records of Jackson County, Florida. 
(Ord. No. 1031, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 23-14. - Revisions to assessments. 
    If any assessment made under the provisions of this article is either in whole or in part annulled, vacated or set aside by the judgment of any court, or if the commission is satisfied that any such assessment is so irregular or defective that the same cannot be enforced or collected, or if the commission has omitted the inclusion of any property on the assessment roll which property should have been so included, the commission may take all necessary steps to impose a new assessment against any property benefited by the capital improvement or essential service, following as nearly as may be practicable the provisions of this article, and in case such second assessment is annulled, the commission may levy and impose other assessments until a valid assessment is imposed. 
(Ord. No. 1031, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 23-15. - Procedural irregularities. 
    Any informality or irregularity in the proceedings in connection with the levy of any assessment under the provisions of this article shall not affect the validity of the same after the approval thereof, and any assessment as finally approved shall be competent and sufficient evidence that such assessment was duly levied, that the assessment was duly made and adopted, and that all proceedings related to such assessment were duly had, taken and performed as required by this article; and no variance from the directions hereunder shall be held material unless it be clearly shown that the party objecting was materially injured thereby. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section 23-15, any party objecting to an assessment imposed pursuant to this article must file an objection with a court of competent jurisdiction within the time periods prescribed herein. 
(Ord. No. 1031, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 23-16. - Correction of errors and omissions. 
(a)  No act of error or omission on the part of the commission, assessment coordinator, property appraiser, tax collector, or their deputies or employees, shall operate to release or discharge any obligation for payment of any assessment imposed by the commission under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The number of assessment units attributed to a parcel of property may be corrected at any time by the assessment coordinator. Any such correction which reduces an assessment shall be considered valid from the date on which the assessment was imposed and shall in no way affect the enforcement of the assessment imposed under the provisions of this article. Any such correction which increases an assessment or imposes an assessment on omitted property shall first require notice to the affected owner at the address shown on the tax roll notifying the owner of the date, time and place that the commission will consider confirming the correction and offering the owner an opportunity to be heard. 
(c)  After the assessment roll has been delivered to the tax collector in accordance with the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, any changes, modifications or corrections thereto shall be made in accordance with the procedures applicable to errors and insolvencies for ad valorem taxes. 
(Ord. No. 1031, § 1, 2-3-15) 
ARTICLE III. - COLLECTION OF ASSESSMENTS 

Sec. 23-17. - Method of collection. 
    Unless directed otherwise by the commission, assessments (other than assessments imposed against government property) shall be collected pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, and the city shall comply with all applicable provisions thereof, including but not limited to (1) entering into a written agreement with the property appraiser and the tax collector for reimbursement of necessary expenses, (2) certifying the assessment roll to the tax collector, and (3) adopting a resolution of intent after publishing weekly notice of such intent for four consecutive weeks preceding the hearing. The resolution of intent may be adopted either prior to or following the initial assessment resolution; provided however, that the resolution of intent must be adopted prior to January 1 (March 1 with consent of the property appraiser and tax collector) of the year in which the assessments are first collected on the ad valorem tax bill. Any hearing or notice required by this article may be combined with any other hearing or notice required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. 
(Ord. No. 1031, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 23-18. - Alternative method of collection. 
    In lieu of using the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, the city may elect to collect the assessment by any other method which is authorized by law or provided by this section 23-18 as follows: 
(a)  The city shall provide assessment bills by first class mail to the owner of each affected parcel of property, other than government property. The-bill or accompanying explanatory material shall include (1) a brief explanation of the assessment, (2) a description of the assessment units used to determine the amount of the assessment, (3) the number of assessment units attributable to the parcel, (4) the total amount of the parcel's assessment for the appropriate period, (5) the location at which payment will be accepted, (6) the date on which the assessment is due, and (7) a statement that the assessment constitutes a lien against assessed property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district or municipal taxes and other non-ad valorem assessments. 
(b)  A general notice of the lien resulting from imposition of the assessments shall be recorded in the Official Records of Jackson County, Florida. Nothing herein shall be construed to require that individual liens or releases be filed in the official records. 
(c)  The city shall have the right to appoint or retain an agent to foreclose and collect all delinquent assessments in the manner provided by law. An assessment shall become delinquent if it is not paid within 30 days from the due date. The city or its agent shall notify any property owner who is delinquent in payment of an assessment within 60 days from the date such assessment was due. Such notice shall state in effect that the city or its agent will initiate a foreclosure action and cause the foreclosure of such property subject to a delinquent assessment in a method now or hereafter provided by law for foreclosure of mortgages on real estate, or otherwise as provided by law. 
(d)  All costs, fees and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and title search expenses, related to any foreclosure action as described herein shall be included in any judgment or decree rendered therein. At the sale pursuant to decree in any such action, the city may be the purchaser to the same extent as an individual person or corporation. The city may join in one foreclosure action the collection of assessments against any or all property assessed in accordance with the provisions hereof. All delinquent property owners whose property is foreclosed shall be liable for an apportioned amount of reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the city and its agents, including reasonable attorney fees, in collection of such delinquent assessments and any other costs incurred by the city as a result of such delinquent assessments including, but not limited to, costs paid for draws on a credit facility and the same shall be collectible as a part of or in addition to, the costs of the action. 
(e)  In lieu of foreclosure, any delinquent assessment and the costs, fees and expenses attributable thereto, may be collected pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act; provided however, that (1) notice is provided to the owner in the manner required by law and this article, and (2) any existing lien of record on the affected parcel for the delinquent assessment is supplanted by the lien resulting from certification of the assessment roll or to the tax collector. 
(Ord. No. 1031, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 23-19. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
    The city and its agents, if any, shall maintain the duty to enforce the prompt collection of assessments by the means provided herein. The duties related to collection of assessments may be enforced at the suit of any holder of obligations in a court of competent jurisdiction by mandamus or other appropriate proceedings or actions. 
(Ord. No. 1031, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 23-20. - Government property. 
(a)  If assessments are imposed against government property, the city shall provide assessment bills by first class mail to the owner of each affected parcel of government property. The bill or accompanying explanatory material shall include (1) a brief explanation of the assessment, (2) a description of the assessment units used to determine the amount of the assessment, (3) the number of assessment units attributable to the parcel, (4) the total amount of the parcel's assessment for the appropriate period, (5) the location at which payment will be accepted, and (6) the date on which the assessment is due. 
(b)  Assessments imposed against government property shall be due on the same date as assessments against other property within the assessment area and, if applicable, shall be subject to the same discounts for early payment. 
(c)  An assessment shall become delinquent if it is not paid within 30 days from the due date. The city shall notify the owner of any government property that is delinquent in payment of its assessment within 60 days from the date such assessment was due. Such notice shall state in effect that the city will initiate a mandamus or other appropriate judicial action to compel payment. 
(d)  All costs, fees and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and title search expenses, related to any mandamus or other action as described herein shall be included in any judgment or decree rendered therein. All delinquent owners of government property against which a mandamus or other appropriate action is filed shall be liable for an apportioned amount of reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the city or its agents, including reasonable attorney fees, in collection of such delinquent assessments and any other costs incurred by the city as a result of such delinquent assessments including, but not limited to, costs paid for draws on a credit facility and the same shall be collectible as a part of, or in addition to, the costs of the action. 
(e)  As an alternative to the foregoing, an assessment imposed against government property may be collected on the bill for any utility service provided to such government property. The commission may also contract for such billing services with any utility not owned by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1031, § 1, 2-3-15) 
ARTICLE IV. - ISSUANCE OF OBLIGATIONS 

Sec. 23-21. - General authority. 
(a)  The commission shall have the power and is hereby authorized to provide by ordinance or resolution, at one time or from time to time in series, for the issuance of obligations to fund capital improvements and any amounts to be paid or accrued in connection with issuance of such obligations including but not limited to capitalized interest, transaction costs and reserve account deposits. 
(b)  The principal of and interest on each series of obligations shall be payable from pledged revenue. At the option of the commission, the city may agree, by ordinance or resolution, to budget and appropriate funds to make up any deficiency in the reserve account established for the obligations or in the payment of the obligations, from other non-ad valorem revenue sources. The commission may also provide, by ordinance or resolution, for a pledge of or lien upon proceeds of such non-ad valorem revenue sources for the benefit of the holders of the obligations. Any such ordinance or resolution shall determine the nature and extent of any pledge of or lien upon proceeds of such non-ad valorem revenue sources. 
(Ord. No. 1031, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 23-22. - Terms of the obligations. 
    The obligations shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates, shall mature at such times as may be determined by ordinance or resolution of the commission, and may be made redeemable before maturity, at the option of the city, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions, all as may be fixed by the commission. Said obligations shall mature not later than 40 years after their issuance. The commission shall determine by ordinance or resolution the form of the obligations, the manner of executing such obligations, and shall fix the denominations of such obligations, the place or places of payment of the principal and interest, which may be at any bank or trust company within or outside of the State of Florida, and such other terms and provisions of the obligations as it deems appropriate. The obligations may be sold at public or private sale for such price or prices as the commission shall determine by ordinance or resolution. The obligations may be delivered to any contractor to pay for the provision of capital improvements or may be sold in such manner and for such price as the commission may determine by ordinance or resolution to be for the best interests of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1031, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 23-23. - Variable rate obligations. 
    At the option of the commission, obligations may bear interest at a variable rate. 
(Ord. No. 1031, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 23-24. - Temporary obligations. 
    Prior to the preparation of definitive obligations of any series, the commission may, under like restrictions, issue interim receipts, interim certificates, or temporary obligations, exchangeable for definitive obligations when such obligations have been executed and are available for delivery. The commission may also provide for the replacement of any obligations which shall become mutilated, destroyed or lost. Obligations may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things other than those proceedings, conditions or things which are specifically required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1031, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 23-25. - Anticipation notes. 
    In anticipation of the sale of obligations, the commission may, by ordinance or resolution, issue notes and may renew the same from time to time. Such notes may be paid from the proceeds of the obligations, the proceeds of the assessments, the proceeds of the notes and such other legally available moneys as the commission deems appropriate by ordinance or resolution. Said notes shall mature within five years of their issuance and shall bear interest at a rate not exceeding the maximum rate provided by law. The commission may issue obligations or renewal notes to repay the notes. The notes shall be issued in the same manner as the obligations. 
(Ord. No. 1031, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 23-26. - Taxing power not pledged. 
    Obligations issued under the provisions of this article shall not be deemed to constitute a general obligation or pledge of the full faith and credit of the city within the meaning of the Constitution of the State of Florida, but such obligations shall be payable only from pledged revenue and, if applicable, proceeds of the assessments, in the manner provided herein and by the ordinance or resolution authorizing the obligations. The issuance of obligations under the provisions of this article shall not directly or indirectly obligate the city to levy or to pledge any form of ad valorem taxation whatsoever. No holder of any such obligations shall ever have the right to compel any exercise of the ad valorem taxing power on the part of the city to pay any such obligations or the interest thereon or to enforce payment of such obligations or the interest thereon against any property of the city, nor shall such obligations constitute a charge, lien or encumbrance, legal or equitable, upon any property of the city, except the pledged revenue. 
(Ord. No. 1031, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 23-27. - Trust funds. 
    The pledged revenue received pursuant to the authority of this article shall be deemed to be trust funds, to be held and applied solely as provided in this article and in the ordinance or resolution authorizing issuance of the obligations. Such pledged revenue may be invested by the city, or its designee, in the manner provided by the ordinance or resolution authorizing issuance of the obligations. The pledged revenue upon receipt thereof by the city shall be subject to the lien and pledge of the holders of any obligations or any entity other than the city providing credit enhancement on the obligations. 
(Ord. No. 1031, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 23-28. - Remedies of holders. 
    Any holder of obligations, except to the extent the rights herein given may be restricted by the ordinance or resolution authorizing issuance of the obligations, may, whether at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the state or granted hereunder or under such ordinance or resolution, and may enforce and compel the performance of all duties required by this part, or by such ordinance or resolution, to be performed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1031, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 23-29. - Refunding obligations. 
    The city may, by ordinance or resolution of the commission, issue obligations to refund any obligations issued pursuant to this article, or any other obligations of the city issued to finance capital improvements, and provide for the rights of the holders hereof. Such refunding obligations may be issued in an amount sufficient to provide for the payment of the principal of, redemption premium, if any, and interest on the outstanding obligations to be refunded. If the issuance of such refunding obligations results in an annual assessment that exceeds the estimated maximum annual assessments set forth in the notice provided pursuant to section 23-8 hereof, the commission shall provide notice to the affected property owners and conduct a public hearing in the manner required by article III of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1031, § 1, 2-3-15) 
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 23-30. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this article are severable; and if any section, subsection, sentence, clause or provision is held invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of this article shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 1031, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 23-31. - Alternative method. 
    This article shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized hereby and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing or which may hereafter come into existence. This article, being necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1031, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Chapter 26 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Fire prevention and control, F.S. ch. 633; local fire chief authorized to enforce laws and rules of state fire marshal, F.S. § 633.121; explosives (minimum standards), F.S. ch. 552; procedure to lawfully burn land, F.S. § 590.12; sale of fireworks, F.S. ch. 791. 

Sec. 26-1. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1986, § 7-13) 
Sec. 26-2. - Fire prevention codes-Adopted. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted by the city, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosions, the Fire Prevention Code, 1994 edition, including all and any amendments thereof, as published by the state department of insurance, division of the state fire marshal. One copy of such code is filed in the office of the fire chief. Such code is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out in length in this chapter, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(b)  There is hereby adopted by the city the Standard Fire Prevention Code, 1994 edition, including all amendments thereof, as published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc. One copy of such code is on file in the office of the fire chief. Such code is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as fully as if set out at length in this chapter, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(c)  There is hereby adopted by the city the National Fire Codes, 1994 edition, as published by the National Fire Protection Association. One copy of such code is on file in the office of the city clerk. Such code is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as fully as if set out at length in this chapter, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(d)  In the event of a conflict among the adopted codes, the strictest provisions shall prevail. 
(Code 1986, § 7-1) 
Sec. 26-3. - Same-Definitions. 
    The following words and terms, when used in the codes adopted in section 26-2, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
    Bureau of fire prevention means the bureau of fire prevention division of the fire department of the city, or any equivalent thereof. 
    Corporate counsel means the attorney for the city. 
    Fire marshal means the fire chief or his designee. 
    Municipality means the City of Marianna, Florida. 
(Code 1986, § 7-3) 
Sec. 26-4. - Same-Amendments to NFPA Standards 101. 
    Sections 1 through 4 of NFPA Standards 101, as adopted in section 26-2, are amended to read as follows: 
(1)  Alterations or changes to any building or structure, whether new or existing, shall be in conformity with the provisions of this code. 
(2)  If, within any 12-month period, alterations or repairs are done costing in excess of 50 percent of the then physical value of the building, such building shall be made to conform to the requirements of the code, and its amendments, for new buildings. 
(3)  If an existing building is damaged by fire or otherwise in excess of 50 percent of its then physical value before such damage occurred, it shall be made to conform to the requirements of this code, and its amendments, for new buildings. 
(4)  For the purpose of this section, physical value of the building shall be determined by the building official or his designated agent. 
(Code 1986, § 7-2) 
Sec. 26-5. - Appeals. 
    Whenever the city manager and fire chief shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit or when it is claimed that the provisions of the fire codes do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the fire codes have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal the decision to the city commission, sitting as a fire board of appeal, within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed. 
(Code 1986, § 7-4) 
Sec. 26-6. - Inspections. 
    The chief of the fire department shall inspect, or cause to be inspected by his appointed inspector, all buildings and premises, except the interiors of private dwellings, at least yearly, or as often as may be necessary to ascertain and cause to be corrected any condition liable to cause fire, or any violation of the provisions or the intent of the fire codes or any adopted ordinance affecting a fire hazard. 
(Code 1986, § 7-5) 
Sec. 26-7. - Interference with inspector. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder or interfere with a fire inspector in the discharge of his duties under the provisions of the codes adopted in this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 7-6) 
Sec. 26-8. - Order to correct dangerous conditions. 
(a)  Generally. Whenever the fire chief, or his designated representative authorized to make inspections, shall find in any building or upon any premises or other place, combustible or explosive matter or a dangerous accumulation of any highly flammable materials especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger property, or shall find obstructions to fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows liable to interfere with the operations of the fire department or egress of occupants in case of fire, or interior fire equipment not in serviceable condition, he shall order such material or condition to be removed or remedied. 
(b)  Service of order. The service of the order shall be made upon the occupant of the premises to which it is directed by either delivering a true copy of the order to such occupant personally or by delivering it to and leaving it with any person in charge of the premises. 
(c)  Compliance with order; appeals. The order shall forthwith be complied with by the owner or occupant of the premises or building, subject to appeal within 24 hours to the fire chief, who shall, within three days, review such order and file his decision thereon. Unless the order is revoked, it shall remain in full force and be obeyed by the owner or occupant. 
(d)  Failure to comply with order. Any owner or occupant failing to comply with any order issued under this section within three days after the service of the order shall be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1986, § 7-7) 
Sec. 26-9. - Interference with firefighters; obedience to orders of firefighters. 
(a)  No person shall resist, impede, obstruct or interfere with the movements of the fire chief or his assistant, or any firefighter, in the execution of their duty. 
(b)  No person shall refuse to obey any lawful order of any officer of the fire department at any fire, or meddle or interfere with any engine, hose, carriage, hook and ladder or other fire apparatus when engaged at or going to any fire. 
(c)  Any person may be required to remain beyond a certain line to be designated by the fire chief. 
(Code 1986, § 7-8) 
Sec. 26-10. - Fire lanes. 
(a)  Establishment. Whenever the fire chief shall determine that parking in front of or in the rear of commercial, industrial or instructional buildings shall constitute a fire hazard or any impediment to fire department equipment servicing fires in such buildings, he, jointly with the police chief, may establish a fire lane in front of or in the rear of the building where no motor vehicles may be parked. Upon direction of the fire chief and police chief, such fire lane shall be clearly marked, and a violation of the no-parking provision shall be enforced in the same manner that all no-parking violations within the city are enforced. 
(b)  Maintenance. The maintenance of any designated fire lane shall be the sole responsibility of the owner of the property upon which the fire lane is located. 
(Code 1986, § 7-9) 
Sec. 26-11. - Review of fire protection plans; building address numbers; hydrant specifications. 
(a)  When plans are submitted to the city for approval of proposed subdivisions, mobile home parks, multifamily dwellings, recreation or vehicle parks, commercial buildings or other structural developments, the fire chief or his designee shall review the proposed fire protection provisions in accordance with recognized practice. All buildings shall be conspicuously marked with identifying address numbers of not less than three inches in height on all new or existing structures. 
(b)  The following hydrant specifications are considered minimal, and the fire chief or his designee may require a higher level of fire protection for specific developments: 
(1)  All fire hydrants shall conform to the following: 
a.  Hydrants shall be accessible at all times, with hose connections readily available. 
b.  Parking shall not be permitted within 15 feet of any hydrant or post indicator valve. 
c.  Hydrants shall be painted for high visibility. 
d.  Hydrants shall be set with the lowest hose connections at least 18 inches above the finished grade. 
e.  All hydrants shall have at least one 41/2-inch outlet and two 21/2-inch outlets. 
(2)  Fire hydrants in single-family subdivisions shall be spaced at a distance of not more than 500 vehicular travel feet between hydrants. 
(3)  Fire hydrants in industrial, commercial or multifamily developments, mobile home parks, recreational structures for public congregations, and other high-value sites shall be spaced at a distance of not more than 300 vehicular travel feet between hydrants. 
(Code 1986, § 7-10(a), (b)(1)-(3)) 
Sec. 26-12. - Interference with or obstruction of hydrant. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, unless properly authorized in writing, other than an employee of the city or a member of the fire department in the performance of his duty, to take off or unscrew the cap from any city water hydrant in the city, or to interfere or meddle with such hydrant in any manner, or to obstruct access to such hydrant in any manner. 
(Code 1986, § 7-10(b)(4)) 
Sec. 26-13. - Posting of maximum occupancy in places of public assembly. 
    All places of public assembly shall be posted with a legible sign in contrasting colors, conspicuously located, stating the maximum number of occupants permitted. The number shall be determined as outlined in the fire prevention codes adopted in this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 7-10(b)(5)) 
Sec. 26-14. - Open burning. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, assist or participate in the open burning of trash, refuse, debris, grass, weeds, wood, natural growth or other material within the city limits unless such person has first obtained a permit therefor from the city in the manner provided in this section. 
(b)  Application for permit. A person desiring a city permit for open burning shall first apply therefor by making written or verbal application to the fire chief or his designee, who is hereby designated and authorized as the lawfully constituted agent for the city in such matters. 
(c)  Criteria for granting permit; conditions. The fire chief or his designee, on the city's behalf, shall consider the information provided in the application and all the attending circumstances relating thereto, including the nature of the weather conditions, and reasonable probabilities of fire hazards, smoke, fumes or any obnoxious or annoying consequences to the owners and occupiers of lands and buildings in the surrounding area. If the fire chief or his designee, on behalf of the city, shall reasonably conclude that there exists a need to issue the permit applied for, and that no hazard or nuisance will be thereby created, and that no detriment to the public health, safety, welfare or well-being of the citizens and residents of the city shall exist, he shall endorse the permit with his written approval; otherwise he shall deny the application. The fire chief or his designee is hereby authorized to impose limitations, precautions or conditions on the actual burning process which may be necessary to meet the requirements of public safety, including stopping or halting the burning process if required. Any cost or expense that may accrue to the city by way of supervision, cleanup or damage to public or private property is the sole responsibility of the person requesting the burning permit, whose name appears on the permit. 
(d)  Appeals. Any person adversely affected by a decision of the fire chief or his designee in the enforcement or interpretation of this section may appeal to the city manager within three days after such decision, and the city manager may approve or deny such appeal. If the complaining party does not agree with such decision of the city manager, he may appeal to the city commission within three days after such decision by serving notice of such appeal upon the city clerk. All such appeals shall be scheduled on the agenda of the city commission to be heard and determined by the commission in public session at which the complaining party may present such facts and arguments as appropriate. The decision of the city commission on such matters shall be final. 
(Code 1986, § 7-11) 
Sec. 26-15. - Fireworks. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail, or use or explode any fireworks within the city, except in supervised displays after receiving permission from the city commission. 
(b)  Seizure of illegal fireworks. Any police officer or local fire official shall seize, take, remove or cause to be removed, at the expense of the owner, all stocks of fireworks or combustibles offered or exposed for sale, stored or held in violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 7-12) 
State Law reference- Sale of fireworks, F.S. ch. 791. 
Chapter 30 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1049, § 2, adopted Dec. 6, 2016, repealed the former ch. 30, §§ 30-31-30-42, 30-56-30-59, 30-76-30-80, and enacted a new ch. 30 as set out herein. The former ch. 30 pertained to floods and derived from the Code of 1986, §§ 8-1-8-11, 8-26-8-29, 8-46-8-50; Ord. No. 907, § 2, adopted Jan. 6, 2004 and Ord. No. 995, § 2, adopted Feb. 1, 2011. 

ARTICLE I. - ADMINISTRATION 
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Title. 
    These regulations shall be known as the Floodplain Management Ordinance of the City of Marianna, hereinafter referred to as "this ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-2. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all development that is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area, including but not limited to the subdivision of land; filling, grading, and other site improvements and utility installations; construction, alteration, remodeling, enlargement, improvement, replacement, repair, relocation or demolition of buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code; placement, installation, or replacement of manufactured homes and manufactured buildings; installation or replacement of tanks; placement of recreational vehicles; installation of swimming pools; and any other development. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-3. - Intent. 
    The purposes of this chapter and the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code are to establish minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flooding through regulation of development in flood hazard areas to: 
(1)  Minimize unnecessary disruption of commerce, access and public service during times of flooding; 
(2)  Require the use of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize future flood damage; 
(3)  Manage filling, grading, dredging, mining, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion potential; 
(4)  Manage the alteration of flood hazard areas, watercourses, and shorelines to minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial functions of the floodplain; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public and private facilities and utilities; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development offlood hazard areas; 
(7)  Minimize the need for future expenditure of public funds for flood control projects and response to and recovery from flood events; and 
(8)  Meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program for community participation as set forth in 44 C.F.R. § 59.22. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-4. - Coordination with the Florida Building Code. 
    This chapter is intended to be administered and enforced in conjunction with the Florida Building Code. Where cited, ASCE 24 refers to the edition of the standard that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-5. - Warning. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter and the Florida Building Code, as amended by this community, is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside of mapped special flood hazard areas, or that uses permitted within such flood hazard areas, will be free from flooding or flood damage. The flood hazard areas and base flood elevations contained in the flood insurance study and shown on flood insurance rate maps and the requirements of 44 C.F.R. §§ 59 and 60 may be revised by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, requiring this community to revise these regulations to remain eligible for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. No guaranty of vested use, existing use, or future use is implied or expressed by compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-6. - Disclaimer of liability. 
    This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city commission or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Secs. 30-7-30-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - APPLICABILITY 

Sec. 30-31. - General. 
    Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-32. - Areas to which this chapter applies. 
    This chapter shall apply to all flood hazard areas within the city as established in section 30-33 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-33. - Basis for establishing flood hazard areas. 
    The flood insurance study for Jackson County, Florida and incorporated areas dated December 17, 2010 and all subsequent amendments and revisions, and the accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM), and all subsequent amendments and revisions to such maps, are adopted by reference as a part of this chapter and shall serve as the minimum basis for establishing flood hazard areas. Studies and maps that establish flood hazard areas are on file at the Municipal Development Department, City Hall, 2898 Green Street, Marianna, Florida, 32446. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-34. - Submission of additional data to establish flood hazard areas. 
    To establish flood hazard areas and base flood elevations, pursuant to article I, division 5 of this chapter, the floodplain administrator may require submission of additional data. Where field surveyed topography prepared by a Florida licensed professional surveyor or digital topography accepted by the community indicates that ground elevations: 
(1)  Are below the closest applicable base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as flood hazard area and subject to the requirements of this chapter and, as applicable, the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(2)  Are above the closest applicable base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as special flood hazard area unless the applicant obtains a letter of map change that removes the area from the special flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-35. - Other laws. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-36. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This chapter supersedes any ordinance in effect for management of development in flood hazard areas. However, it is not intended to repeal or abrogate any existing ordinances including but not limited to land development regulations, zoning ordinances, stormwater management regulations, or the Florida Building Code. In the event of a conflict between this chapter and any ordinance, the more restrictive shall govern. This chapter shall not impair any deed restriction, covenant or easement, but any land that is subject to such interests shall also be governed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-37. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Secs. 30-38-30-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR 

Sec. 30-61. - Designation. 
    The municipal development director is designated as the floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator may delegate performance of certain duties to other employees. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-62. - General. 
    The floodplain administrator is authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The floodplain administrator shall have the authority to render interpretations of this chapter consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter and may establish policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies, and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided in this chapter without the granting of a variance pursuant to article I, division 7 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-63. - Applications and permits. 
    The floodplain administrator, in coordination with other pertinent offices of the community, shall: 
(1)  Review applications and plans to determine whether proposed new development will be located in flood hazard areas; 
(2)  Review applications for modification of any existing development in flood hazard areas for compliance with the requirements of this chapter; 
(3)  Interpret flood hazard area boundaries where such interpretation is necessary to determine the exact location of boundaries; a person contesting the determination shall have the opportunity to appeal the interpretation; 
(4)  Provide available flood elevation and flood hazard information; 
(5)  Determine whether additional flood hazard data shall be obtained from other sources or shall be developed by an applicant; 
(6)  Review applications to determine whether proposed development will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(7)  Issue floodplain development permits or approvals for development other than buildings and structures that are subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, when compliance with this chapter is demonstrated, or disapprove the same in the event of noncompliance; and 
(8)  Coordinate with and provide comments to the building official to assure that applications, plan reviews, and inspections for buildings and structures in flood hazard areas comply with the applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-64. - Substantial improvement and substantial determinations. 
    For applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures, the floodplain administrator, in coordination with the building official, shall: 
(1)  Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are made; 
(2)  Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or structure; 
(3)  Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; the determination requires evaluation of previous permits issued for improvements and repairs as specified in the definition of "substantial improvement"; and 
(4)  Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance with the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code and this chapter is required. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-65. - Modifications of the strict application of the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
    The floodplain administrator shall review requests submitted to the building official that seek approval to modify the strict application of the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code to determine whether such requests require the granting of a variance pursuant to article I, division 7 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-66. - Notices and orders. 
    The floodplain administrator shall coordinate with appropriate local agencies for the issuance of all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-67. - Inspections. 
    The floodplain administrator shall make the required inspections as specified in article I, division 6 of this chapter for development that is not subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall inspect flood hazard areas to determine if development is undertaken without issuance of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-68. - Other duties of the floodplain administrator. 
    The floodplain administrator shall have other duties, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Establish, in coordination with the building official, procedures for administering and documenting determinations of substantial improvement and substantial damage made pursuant to section 30-64 of this chapter; 
(2)  Require that applicants proposing alteration of a watercourse notify adjacent communities and the state division of emergency management, state floodplain management office, and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(3)  Require applicants who submit hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses to support permit applications to submit to FEMA the data and information necessary to maintain the flood insurance rate maps if the analyses propose to change base flood elevations, flood hazard area boundaries, or floodway designations; such submissions shall be made within six months of such data becoming available; 
(4)  Review required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by this chapter and the Florida Building Code to determine that such certifications and documentations are complete; and 
(5)  Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate boundaries of the city are modified. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-69. - Floodplain management records. 
    Regardless of any limitation on the period required for retention of public records, the floodplain administrator shall maintain and permanently keep and make available for public inspection all records that are necessary for the administration of this chapter and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, including flood insurance rate maps; letters of map change; records of issuance of permits and denial of permits; determinations of whether proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by the Florida Building Code and this chapter; notifications to adjacent communities, FEMA, and the state related to alterations of watercourses; assurances that the flood carrying capacity of altered watercourses will be maintained; documentation related to appeals and variances, including justification for issuance or denial; and records of enforcement actions taken pursuant to this chapter and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. These records shall be available for public inspection at the Municipal Development Department, City Hall, 2898 Green Street, Marianna, Florida 32446. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Secs. 30-70-30-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PERMITS 

Sec. 30-91. - Permits required. 
    Any owner or owner's authorized agent (hereinafter "applicant") who intends to undertake any development activity within the scope of this chapter, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, which is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area shall first make application to the floodplain administrator, and the building official if applicable, and shall obtain the required permit(s) and approval(s). No such permit or approval shall be issued until compliance with the requirements of this chapter and all other applicable codes and regulations has been satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-92. - Floodplain development permits or approvals. 
    Floodplain development permits or approvals shall be issued pursuant to this chapter for any development activities not subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Depending on the nature and extent of proposed development that includes a building or structure, the floodplain administrator may determine that a floodplain development permit or approval is required in addition to a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-93. - Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. 
    Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. §§ 59 and 60), floodplain development permits or approvals shall be required for the following buildings, structures and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code and any further exemptions provided by law, which are subject to the requirements of this chapter: 
(1)  Railroads and ancillary facilities associated with the railroad. 
(2)  Nonresidential farm buildings on farms, as provided in F.S. § 604.50. 
(3)  Temporary buildings or sheds used exclusively for construction purposes. 
(4)  Mobile or modular structures used as temporary offices. 
(5)  Those structures or facilities of electric utilities, as defined in F.S. § 366.02, which are directly involved in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity. 
(6)  Chickees constructed by the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida or the Seminole Tribe of Florida. As used in this paragraph, the term "chickee" means an open-sided wooden hut that has a thatched roof of palm or palmetto or other traditional materials, and that does not incorporate any electrical, plumbing, or other non-wood features. 
(7)  Family mausoleums not exceeding 250 square feet in area which are prefabricated and assembled on site or preassembled and delivered on site and have walls, roofs, and a floor constructed of granite, marble, or reinforced concrete. 
(8)  Temporary housing provided by the department of corrections to any prisoner in the state correctional system. 
(9)  Structures identified in F.S. § 553.73(10)(k), are not exempt from the Florida Building Code if such structures are located in flood hazard areas established on flood insurance rate maps. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-94. - Application for a permit or approval. 
    To obtain a floodplain development permit or approval the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the city. The information provided shall: 
(1)  Identify and describe the development to be covered by the permit or approval. 
(2)  Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be conducted by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitively locate the site. 
(3)  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed development is intended. 
(4)  Be accompanied by a site plan or construction documents as specified in article I, division 5 of this chapter. 
(5)  State the valuation of the proposed work. 
(6)  Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent. 
(7)  Give such other data and information as required by the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-95. - Validity of permit or approval. 
    The issuance of a floodplain development permit or approval pursuant to this chapter shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any violation of this chapter, the Florida Building Code, or any other ordinance of this community. The issuance of permits based on submitted applications, construction documents, and information shall not prevent the floodplain administrator from requiring the correction of errors and omissions. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-96. - Expiration. 
    A floodplain development permit or approval shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the work commences. Extensions for periods of not more than 180 days each shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause shall be demonstrated. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-97. - Suspension or revocation. 
    The floodplain administrator is authorized to suspend or revoke a floodplain development permit or approval if the permit was issued in error, on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of this chapter or any other ordinance, regulation or requirement of this community. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-98. - Other permits required. 
    Floodplain development permits and building permits shall include a condition that all other applicable state or federal permits be obtained before commencement of the permitted development, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The Northwest Florida Water Management District; F.S. § 373.036. 
(2)  Florida Department of Health for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems; F.S. § 381.0065, and Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. 
(3)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities subject to the Joint Coastal Permit; F.S. § 161.055. 
(4)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities that affect wetlands and alter surface water flows, in conjunction with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(5)  Federal permits and approvals. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Secs. 30-99-30-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SITE PLANS AND CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS 

Sec. 30-121. - Information for development in flood hazard areas. 
    The site plan or construction documents for any development subject to the requirements of this chapter shall be drawn to scale and shall include, as applicable to the proposed development: 
(1)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zone(s), base flood elevation(s), and ground elevations if necessary for review of the proposed development. 
(2)  Where base flood elevations, or floodway data are not included on the FIRM or in the flood insurance study, they shall be established in accordance with section 30-122(2) or (3) of this chapter. 
(3)  Where the parcel on which the proposed development will take place will have more than 50 lots or is larger than five acres and the base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM or in the flood insurance study, such elevations shall be established in accordance with section 30-122(1) of this chapter. 
(4)  Location of the proposed activity and proposed structures, and locations of existing buildings and structures. 
(5)  Location, extent, amount, and proposed final grades of any filling, grading, or excavation. 
(6)  Where the placement of fill is proposed, the amount, type, and source of fill material; compaction specifications; a description of the intended purpose of the fill areas; and evidence that the proposed fill areas are the minimum necessary to achieve the intended purpose. 
(7)  Existing and proposed alignment of any proposed alteration of a watercourse. 
    The floodplain administrator is authorized to waive the submission of site plans, construction documents, and other data that are required by this chapter but that are not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the proposed development is such that the review of such submissions is not necessary to ascertain compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-122. - Information in flood hazard areas without base flood elevations (approximate zone A). 
    Where flood hazard areas are delineated on the FIRM and base flood elevation data have not been provided, the floodplain administrator shall: 
(1)  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices. 
(2)  Obtain, review, and provide to applicants base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source or require the applicant to obtain and use base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source. 
(3)  Where base flood elevation and floodway data are not available from another source, where the available data are deemed by the floodplain administrator to not reasonably reflect flooding conditions, or where the available data are known to be scientifically or technically incorrect or otherwise inadequate: 
(a)  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices; or 
(b)  Specify that the base flood elevation is two feet above the highest adjacent grade at the location of the development, provided there is no evidence indicating flood depths have been or may be greater than two feet. 
(4)  Where the base flood elevation data are to be used to support a letter of map change from FEMA, advise the applicant that the analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA, and that it shall be the responsibilityof the applicant to satisfy the submittal requirements and pay the processing fees. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-123. - Additional analyses and certifications. 
    As applicable to the location and nature of the proposed development activity, and in addition to the requirements of this section, the applicant shall have the following analyses signed and sealed by a state-licensed engineer for submission with the site plan and construction documents: 
(1)  For development activities proposed to be located in a regulatory floodway, a floodway encroachment analysis that demonstrates that the encroachment of the proposed development will not cause any increase in base flood elevations; where the applicant proposes to undertake development activities that do increase base flood elevations, the applicant shall submit such analysis to FEMA as specified in section 30-124 of this chapter and shall submit the conditional letter of map revision, if issued by FEMA, with the site plan and construction documents. 
(2)  For development activities proposed to be located in a riverine flood hazard area for which base flood elevations are included in the flood insurance study or on the FIRM and floodways have not been designated, hydrologic and hydraulic analyses that demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated flood hazard area encroachments, will not increase the base flood elevation more than one foot at any point within the community. This requirement does not apply in isolated flood hazard areas not connected to a riverine flood hazard area or in flood hazard areas identified as zone AO or zone AH. 
(3)  For alteration of a watercourse, an engineering analysis prepared in accordance with standard engineering practices which demonstrates that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse will not be decreased, and certification that the altered watercourse shall be maintained in a manner which preserves the channel's flood-carrying capacity; the applicant shall submit the analysis to FEMA as specified in section 30-124 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-124. - Submission of additional data. 
    When additional hydrologic, hydraulic or other engineering data, studies, and additional analyses are submitted to support an application, the applicant has the right to seek a letter of map change from FEMA to change the base flood elevations, change floodway boundaries, or change boundaries of flood hazard areas shown on FIRMs, and to submit such data to FEMA for such purposes. The analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Secs. 30-125-30-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 30-151. - General. 
    Development for which a floodplain development permit or approval is required shall be subject to inspection. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-152. - Development other than buildings and structures. 
    The floodplain administrator shall inspect all development to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-153. - Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. 
    The floodplain administrator shall inspect buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-154. - Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, lowest floor inspection. 
    Upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the owner of a building, structure or facility exempt from the Florida Building Code, or the owner's authorized agent, shall submit to the floodplain administrator: 
(1)  If a design flood elevation was used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor, the certification of elevation of the lowest floor prepared and sealed by a Florida licensed professional surveyor; or 
(2)  If the elevation used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor was determined in accordance with section 30-122(3)(b) of this chapter, the documentation of height of the lowest floor above highest adjacent grade, prepared by the owner or the owner's authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-155. - Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, final inspection. 
    As part of the final inspection, the owner or owner's authorized agent shall submit to the floodplain administrator a final certification of elevation of the lowest floor or final documentation of the height of the lowest floor above the highest adjacent grade; such certifications and documentations shall be prepared as specified in section 30-154 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-156. - Manufactured homes. 
    The floodplain administrator shall inspect manufactured homes that are installed or replaced in flood hazard areas to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the conditions of the issued permit. Upon placement of a manufactured home, certification of the elevation of the lowest floor shall be submitted to the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Secs. 30-157-30-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - VARIANCES AND APPEALS 

Sec. 30-181. - General. 
    The city commission shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of this chapter. Pursuant to F.S. § 553.73(5), the city commission shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-182. - Appeals. 
    The city commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the administration and enforcement of this chapter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city commission may appeal such decision to the circuit court, as provided by Florida statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-183. - Limitations on authority to grant variances. 
    The city commission shall base its decisions on variances on technical justifications submitted by applicants, the considerations for issuance in section 30-187 of this chapter, the conditions of issuance set forth in section 30-188 of this chapter, and the comments and recommendations of the floodplain administrator and the building official. The city commission has the right to attach such conditions as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-184. - Restrictions in floodways. 
    A variance shall not be issued for any proposed development in a floodway if any increase in base flood elevations would result, as evidenced by the applicable analyses and certifications required in section 30-123 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-185. - Historic buildings. 
    A variance is authorized to be issued for the repair, improvement, or rehabilitation of a historic building that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 12 Historic Buildings, upon a determination that the proposed repair, improvement, or rehabilitation will not preclude the building's continued designation as a historic building and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the building. If the proposed work precludes the building's continued designation as a historic building, a variance shall not be granted and the building and any repair, improvement, and rehabilitation shall be subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-186. - Functionally dependent uses. 
    A variance is authorized to be issued for the construction or substantial improvement necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, as defined in this chapter, provided the variance meets the requirements of section 30-184, is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, and all due consideration has been given to use of methods and materials that minimize flood damage during occurrence of the base flood. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-187. - Considerations for issuance of variances. 
    In reviewing requests for variances, the city commission shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all other applicable provisions of the Florida Building Code, this chapter, and the following: 
(1)  The danger that materials and debris may be swept onto other lands resulting in further injury or damage; 
(2)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed development, including contents, to flood damage and the effect of such damage on current and future owners; 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed development to the community; 
(5)  The availability of alternate locations for the proposed development that are subject to lower risk of flooding or erosion; 
(6)  The compatibility of the proposed development with existing and anticipated development; 
(7)  The relationship of the proposed development to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area; 
(8)  The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(9)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and debris and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(10)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-188. - Conditions for issuance of variances. 
    Variances shall be issued only upon: 
(1)  Submission by the applicant, of a showing of good and sufficient cause that the unique characteristics of the size, configuration, or topography of the site limit compliance with any provision of this chapter or the required elevation standards. 
(2)  Determination by the city commission that: 
(a)  Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the land that render the lot undevelopable; increased costs to satisfy the requirements or inconvenience do not constitute hardship; 
(b)  The granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances; and 
(c)  The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(3)  Receipt of a signed statement by the applicant that the variance, if granted, shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the court in such a manner that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land; and 
(4)  If the request is for a variance to allow construction of the lowest floor of a new building, or substantial improvement of a building, below the required elevation, a copy in the record of a written notice from the floodplain administrator to the applicant for the variance, specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the proposed elevation of the lowest floor, stating that the cost of federal flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced floor elevation (up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage), and stating that construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Secs. 30-189-30-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 30-211. - Violations. 
    Any development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this chapter that is performed without an issued permit, that is in conflict with an issued permit, or that does not fully comply with this chapter, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. A building or structure without the documentation of elevation of the lowest floor, other required design certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter or the Florida Building Code is presumed to be a violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-212. - Authority. 
    For development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this chapter and that is determined to be a violation, the floodplain administrator is authorized to serve notices of violation or stop work orders to owners of the property involved, to the owner's agent, or to the person or persons performing the work. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-213. - Unlawful continuance. 
    Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a notice of violation or a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove or remedy a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Secs. 30-214-30-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL 

Sec. 30-241. - Scope. 
    Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings shown in this section. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-242. - Terms defined in the Florida Building Code. 
    Where terms are not defined in this chapter and are defined in the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in that code. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-243. - Terms not defined. 
    Where terms are not defined in this chapter or the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Secs. 30-244-30-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 30-271. - Definitions. 
    Alteration of a watercourse. A dam, impoundment, channel relocation, change in channel alignment, channelization, or change in cross-sectional area of the channel or the channel capacity, or any other form of modification which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the riverine flow of water during conditions of the base flood. 
    Appeal. A request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
    ASCE 24. A standard titled Flood Resistant Design and Construction that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. ASCE 24 is developed and published by the American Society of Civil Engineers, Reston, VA. 
    Base flood. A flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] The base flood is commonly referred to as the "100-year flood" or the "1-percent-annual chance flood." 
    Base flood elevation. The elevation of the base flood, including wave height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
    Basement. The portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
    Design flood. The flood associated with the greater of the following two areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
(1)  Area with a floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any year; or 
(2)  Area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
    Design flood elevation. The elevation of the "design flood," including wave height, relative to the datum specified on the community's legally designated flood hazard map. In areas designated as zone AO, the design flood elevation shall be the elevation of the highest existing grade of the building's perimeter plus the depth number (in feet) specified on the flood hazard map. In areas designated as zone AO where the depth number is not specified on the map, the depth number shall be taken as being equal to two feet. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
    Development. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, tanks, temporary structures, temporary or permanent storage of equipment or materials, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavations, drilling operations or any other land disturbing activities. 
    Encroachment. The placement of fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or other development into a flood hazard area which may impede or alter the flow capacity of riverine flood hazard areas. 
    Existing building and existing structure. Any buildings and structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before December 6, 1983. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before December 6, 1983. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The federal agency that, in addition to carrying out other functions, administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land from: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood damage-resistant materials. Any construction material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
    Flood hazard area. The greater of the following two areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
(1)  The area within a floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any year. 
(2)  The area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The official map of the community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
    Flood insurance study (FIS). The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that contains the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map (if applicable), the water surface elevations of the base flood, and supporting technical data. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
    Floodplain administrator. The office or position designated and charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter (may be referred to as the floodplain manager). 
    Floodplain development permit or approval. An official document or certificate issued by the community, or other evidence of approval or concurrence, which authorizes performance of specific development activities that are located in flood hazard areas and that are determined to be compliant with this chapter. 
    Floodway. The channel of a river or other riverine watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
    Floodway encroachment analysis. An engineering analysis of the impact that a proposed encroachment into a floodway is expected to have on the floodway boundaries and base flood elevations; the evaluation shall be prepared by a qualified state-licensed engineer using standard engineering methods and models. 
    Florida Building Code. The family of codes adopted by the Florida Building Commission, including: Florida Building Code, Building; Florida Building Code, Residential; Florida Building Code, Existing Building; Florida Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Plumbing; Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas. 
    Functionally dependent use. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, including only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities; the term does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls or foundation of a structure. 
    Historic structure. Any structure that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood hazard area requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 12 Historic Buildings. 
    Letter of map change (LOMC). An official determination issued by FEMA that amends or revises an effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study. Letters of map change include: 
(1)  Letter of map amendment (LOMA): An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area. 
(2)  Letter of map revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features. 
(3)  Letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F): A determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard area. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with the community's floodplain management regulations. 
(4)  Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a letter of map revision may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. 
    Light-duty truck. As defined in 40 C.F.R. 86.082-2, any motor vehicle rated at 8,500 pounds gross vehicular weight rating or less which has a vehicular curb weight of 6,000 pounds or less and which has a basic vehicle frontal area of 45 square feet or less, which is: 
(1)  Designed primarily for purposes of transportation of property or is a derivation of such a vehicle; or 
(2)  Designed primarily for transportation of persons and has a capacity of more than 12 persons; or 
(3)  Available with special features enabling off-street or off-highway operation and use. 
    Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area of a building or structure, including basement, but excluding any unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, other than a basement, usable solely for vehicle parking, building access or limited storage provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the non-elevation requirements of the Florida Building Code or ASCE 24. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
    Manufactured home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is eight feet or more in width and greater than 400 square feet, and which is built on a permanent, integral chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle" or "park trailer." [Also defined in 15C-1.0101, F.A.C.] 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Market value. The price at which a property will change hands between a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither party being under compulsion to buy or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts. As used in this chapter, the term refers to the market value of buildings and structures, excluding the land and other improvements on the parcel. Market value may be established by a qualified independent appraiser, actual cash value (replacement cost depreciated for age and quality of construction), or tax assessment value adjusted to approximate market value by a factor provided by the property appraiser. 
    New construction. For the purposes of administration of this chapter and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after December 6, 1983 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after December 6, 1983. 
    Park trailer. A transportable unit which has a body width not exceeding 14 feet and which is built on a single chassis and is designed to provide seasonal or temporary living quarters when connected to utilities necessary for operation of installed fixtures and appliances. [Defined in F.S. § 320.01.] 
    Recreational vehicle. A vehicle, including a park trailer, which is: [See F.S. § 320.01.) 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Special flood hazard area. An area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are shown on FIRMs as zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, V1-V30, VE or V. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 202.] 
    Start of construction. The date of issuance of permits for new construction and substantial improvements, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement is within 180 days of the date of the issuance. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns. 
    Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing, grading, or filling), the installation of streets or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations, the erection of temporary forms or the installation of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main buildings. For a substantial improvement, the actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 202.] 
    Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a building or structure whereby the cost of restoring the building or structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the damage occurred. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 202.] 
    Substantial improvement. Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a building or structure taking place over the life of the structure, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the improvement or repair is started. For each building or structure, the life of the structure begins on the date of the first permit issued for improvement or repair of that building or structure subsequent to February 1, 2011. If the structure has incurred "substantial damage," any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repairwork performed. The term does not, however, include either: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Variance. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, or the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, which permits construction in a manner that would not otherwise be permitted by this chapter or the Florida Building Code. 
    Watercourse. A river, creek, stream, channel or other topographic feature in, on, through, or over which water flows at least periodically. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Secs. 30-272-30-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD RESISTANT DEVELOPMENT 
DIVISION 1. - BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES 

Sec. 30-301. - Design and construction of buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. 
    Pursuant to section 30-93 of this chapter, buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code, including substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage of such buildings, structures and facilities, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of ASCE 24. Structures exempt from the Florida Building Code that are not walled and roofed buildings shall comply with the requirements of article III, division 7 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Secs. 30-302-30-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 30-331. - Minimum requirements. 
    Subdivision proposals, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-332. - Subdivision plats. 
    Where any portion of proposed subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, lies within a flood hazard area, the following shall be required: 
(1)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zones, and design flood elevations, as appropriate, shall be shown on preliminary plats and final plats; 
(2)  Where the subdivision has more than 50 lots or is larger than five acres and base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM, the base flood elevations determined in accordance with section 30-122(1) of this chapter; and 
(3)  Compliance with the site improvement and utilities requirements of article III, division 3 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Secs. 30-333-30-360. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SITE IMPROVEMENTS, UTILITIES AND LIMITATIONS 

Sec. 30-361. - Minimum requirements. 
    All proposed new development shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-362. - Sanitary sewage facilities. 
    All new and replacement sanitary sewage facilities, private sewage treatment plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems), and on-site waste disposal systems shall be designed in accordance with the standards for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems in Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the facilities and discharge from the facilities into flood waters, and impairment of the facilities and systems. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-363. - Water supply facilities. 
    All new and replacement water supply facilities shall be designed in accordance with the water well construction standards in Chapter 62-532.500, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-364. - Limitations on sites in regulatory floodways. 
    No development, including but not limited to site improvements, and land disturbing activity involving fill or regrading, shall be authorized in the regulatory floodway unless the floodway encroachment analysis required in section 30-123(1) of this chapter demonstrates that the proposed development or land disturbing activity will not result in any increase in the base flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-365. - Limitations on placement of fill. 
    Subject to the limitations of this chapter, fill shall be designed to be stable under conditions of flooding including rapid rise and rapid drawdown of floodwaters, prolonged inundation, and protection against flood-related erosion and scour. In addition to these requirements, if intended to support buildings and structures (zone A only), fill shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
Secs. 30-366-30-390. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MANUFACTURED HOMES 

Sec. 30-391. - General. 
    All manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed by an installer that is licensed pursuant to F.S. § 320.8249, and shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15C-1, F.A.C. and the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-392. - Limitations on installation in floodways. 
    New installations of manufactured homes shall not be permitted in floodways. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-393. - Foundations. 
    All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed on permanent, reinforced foundations that are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 and this chapter. Foundations for manufactured homes subject to section 30-397 of this chapter are permitted to be reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-394. - Anchoring. 
    All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This anchoring requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for wind resistance. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-395. - Elevation. 
    Manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved shall comply with section 30-396 or 30-397 of this chapter, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-396. - General elevation requirement. 
    Unless subject to the requirements of section 30-397, all manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located: 
(1)  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
(2)  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
(3)  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
(4)  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall be elevated such that the bottom of the frame is at or above the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (zone A). 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-397. - Elevation requirement for certain existing manufactured home parks and subdivisions. 
    Manufactured homes that are not subject to section 30-396 of this chapter, including manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, unless on a site where substantial damage as result of flooding has occurred, shall be elevated such that either the: 
(1)  Bottom of the frame of the manufactured home is at or above the elevation required in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (zone A); or 
(2)  Bottom of the frame is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are not less than 60 inches in height above grade. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-398. - Enclosures. 
    Enclosed areas below elevated manufactured homes shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 for such enclosed areas. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-399. - Utility equipment. 
    Utility equipment that serves manufactured homes, including electric, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Secs. 30-400-30-430. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND PARK TRAILERS 

Sec. 30-431. - Temporary placement. 
    Recreational vehicles and park trailers placed temporarily in flood hazard areas shall: 
(1)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or 
(2)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, which means the recreational vehicle or park model is on wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanent attachments such as additions, rooms, stairs, decks and porches. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-432. - Permanent placement. 
    Recreational vehicles and park trailers that do not meet the limitations in section 30-431 of this chapter for temporary placement shall meet the requirements of article III, division 4 of this chapter for manufactured homes. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Secs. 30-433-30-460. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - TANKS 

Sec. 30-461. - Underground tanks. 
    Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-462. - Above-ground tanks, not elevated. 
    Above-ground tanks that do not meet the elevation requirements of section 30-463 of this chapter shall be permitted in flood hazard areas provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-463. - Above-ground tanks, elevated. 
    Above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be attached to and elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement during conditions of the design flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-464. - Tank inlets and vents. 
    Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be: 
(1)  At or above the design flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during conditions of the design flood; and 
(2)  Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Secs. 30-465-30-490. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - OTHER DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 30-491. - General requirements for other development. 
    All development, including man-made changes to improved or unimproved real estate for which specific provisions are not specified in this chapter or the Florida Building Code, shall: 
(1)  Be located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  Meet the limitations of section 30-364 if located in a regulated floodway; 
(3)  Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood; 
(4)  Be constructed of flood damage-resistant materials; and 
(5)  Have mechanical, plumbing, and electrical systems above the design flood elevation, or meet the requirements of ASCE 24, except that minimum electric service required to address life safety and electric code requirements is permitted below the design flood elevation provided it conforms to the provisions of the electrical part of building code for wet locations. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-492. - Fences in regulated floodways. 
    Fences in regulated floodways that have the potential to block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, shall meet the limitations of section 30-364. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-493. - Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways in regulated floodways. 
    Retaining walls and sidewalks and driveways that involve the placement of fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of section 30-364. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Sec. 30-494. - Roads and watercourse crossings in regulated floodways. 
    Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water crossings and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel from one side of a watercourse to the other side, that encroach into regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of section 30-364. Alteration of a watercourse that is part of a road or watercourse crossing shall meet the requirements of section 30-123(3). 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 2, 12-6-2016) 
Chapter 34 - HUMAN RELATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Civil rights, F.S. ch. 760; human rights act, F.S. § 760.01 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Fair housing act, F.S. § 760.20 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrator means that person appointed by the city manager pursuant to section 34-41. 
    Age, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, refers exclusively to persons who are 18 years of age or older. 
    Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under sections 34-61-34-64. 
    Family means one or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling. 
    Housing or housing accommodation means any building, structure or portion thereof, mobile home or trailer, or other facility which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof, mobile home or trailer or other facility. 
    Lending institution means any bank, insurance company, savings and loan association or any other person or organization regularly engaged in the business of lending money, guaranteeing loans, or sources of credit information including, but not limited to, credit bureaus. 
    Owner means any person including, but not limited to, a lessee, sublessee, assignee, manager or agent, and also including the city and its departments or other subunits, having the right of ownership or possession or the authority to sell or lease any housing accommodation. 
    Person means one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mortgage companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, or public corporations including, but not limited to, the city or any department or subunit of the city. 
    Real estate agent means any real estate broker, any real estate salesman or any other person, employee, agent or otherwise, engaged in the management or operation of any real property. 
    Real estate broker or salesman means a person, whether licensed or not, who, for or with the expectation of receiving a consideration, lists, sells, purchases, exchanges, rents or leases real property, or who negotiates or attempts to negotiate any of these activities, or who holds himself out as engaged in these activities, or who negotiates or attempts to negotiate a loan secured or to be secured by mortgage or other encumbrance upon real property, or who is engaged in the business of listing real property in a publication or a person employed by or acting on behalf of any of these. 
    Real estate transaction means the sale, purchase, exchange, rental or lease of real property, and any contract pertaining thereto. 
    Rent means lease, sublease, assignment or rental, including any contract to do any of the foregoing or otherwise granting, for a consideration, the right to occupy premises that are not owned by the occupant. 
    Respondent means any person against whom a complaint is filed pursuant to this article. 
    Sale means any contract to sell, exchange, convey, transfer or assign legal or equitable title to, or a beneficial interest in real property. 
(Code 1986, § 10-17) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-27. - Declaration of policy of article. 
    It is the policy of the city, in keeping with the laws of the United States of America and the spirit of the state constitution to promote, through fair, orderly and lawful procedure, the opportunity for each person so desiring to obtain housing of his choice in this city without regard to race, color, ancestry, national origin, religion, sex, physical handicap, mental handicap, marital status, familial status or age, and to that end, to prohibit discrimination in housing by any person. 
(Code 1986, § 10-16) 
Secs. 34-28-34-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 34-41. - Administrator-Appointment. 
    The authority and responsibility for administering this article shall be vested in the city manager who shall appoint an administrator. 
(Code 1986, § 10-46) 
Sec. 34-42. - Same-Powers and duties. 
    As part of his powers and duties the administrator shall: 
(1)  Receive written complaint as provided in section 34-43 relative to alleged unlawful acts under this article when a complainant seeks the administrator's good offices to conciliate. 
(2)  Upon receiving a written complaint, make such investigations as the administrator deems appropriate to ascertain facts and issues. 
(3)  Utilize methods of persuasion, conciliation, and mediation or information adjustment of grievances. 
(4)  Establish, administer or review programs at the request of the city manager and make reports on such programs to the city manager. 
(5)  Bring to the attention of the city manager items that may require the city commission's notice or action to resolve. 
(6)  Render to the city manager annual written reports of his activities under the provisions of this article along with such comments and recommendations as he may choose to make. 
(7)  Cooperate with and render technical assistance to federal, state, local and other public and private agencies, organizations and institutions which are formulating or carrying on programs to prevent or eliminate the unlawful discriminatory practices covered by the provisions of this article. 
(8)  Whenever the administrator determines that there is probable cause to believe that there has been a violation of the provisions of this article, he shall refer the matter, along with the facts he has gathered in his investigations, to the proper county, state or federal authorities for appropriate legal action. 
(9)  The administrator shall promulgate, publish and distribute the necessary forms, rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 10-47) 
Sec. 34-43. - Complaints-Filing. 
(a)  A person who claims that another person has committed a discriminatory housing practice against him may report that offense to the administrator by filing an informal complaint within 60 days after the date of the alleged discriminatory housing practice and not later. 
(b)  The administrator shall treat a complaint referred by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development or the Attorney General of the United States under the Fair Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, as an informal complaint filed under subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  An informal complaint must be in writing, verified or affirmed, on a form to be supplied by the administrator and shall contain the following: 
(1)  Identity of the respondent. 
(2)  Date of offense and date of filing the informal complaint. 
(3)  General statement of facts of the offense including the basis of the discrimination (race, color, ancestry, national origin, religion, sex, physical handicap, mental handicap, marital status, familial status, or age). 
(4)  The name and signature of the complainant. 
(d)  Each complaint shall be held in confidence by the administrator unless and until the complainant and the respondent consent in writing that it shall be made public. 
(e)  Within 15 days after the filing of the informal complaint, the administrator shall transmit a copy of the complaint to each respondent named therein by certified mail, return receipt requested. Thereupon the respondent may file a written, verified informal answer to the informal complaint within 20 days of the date of receipt of the informal complaint. 
(f)  An informal complaint or answer may be amended at any time, and the administrator shall furnish a copy of each amended informal complaint or answer to the respondent or complainant, respectively, as promptly as practicable. 
(g)  The administrator shall assist complainants or respondents when necessary in the preparation and filing of informal complaints or answers or any amendments thereto. 
(Code 1986, § 10-48) 
Sec. 34-44. - Same-Processing. 
(a)  Within 30 days after the filing of an informal complaint, the administrator shall make such investigation as he deems appropriate to ascertain facts and issues. If the administrator shall deem that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation has occurred and can be resolved by conciliation, he shall attempt to conciliate the matter by methods of initial conference and persuasion with all interested parties and such representatives as the parties may choose to assist them. Conciliation conferences shall be informal, and nothing said or done in the course of the informal conference with the individuals to resolve the dispute may be made public or used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding by either party without the written consent of both the complainant and the respondent. The administrator or any employee of the administrator who shall make public any information in violation of this section shall be declared guilty of a violation of a city ordinance and shall be subject to penalty as set forth in section 1-14. 
(b)  If the parties desire to conciliate, the terms of the conciliation shall be reduced to writing in the form approved by the administrator and must be signed and verified by the complainant and respondent and approved by the administrator. The conciliation agreement is for conciliation purposes only and does not constitute an admission by any party that rights have been violated. 
(c)  If the administrator decides that there is probable cause to believe that a particular alleged discriminatory housing practice has been committed, the administrator shall take no further action with respect to the alleged offense. 
(d)  If the administrator with a particular matter, which involves a contravention of this article: 
(1)  Fails to conciliate a complaint after the parties, in good faith, have attempted such conciliation; or 
(2)  Determines that the violation alleged in the complaint cannot be resolved by conciliation, 
he shall notify both the complainant and the respondent within 30 days of the failure or the determination, and he shall proceed as provided in section 34-42. 
(Code 1986, § 10-49) 
Sec. 34-45. - Additional remedies. 
    The procedures prescribed by this article do not constitute an administrative prerequisite to another action or remedy available under other law. Further, nothing in this article shall be deemed to modify, impair or otherwise affect any right or remedy conferred by the state constitution or federal or state laws, and the provisions of this article shall be in addition to those provided by such other laws. 
(Code 1986, § 10-50) 
Sec. 34-46. - Education and public information. 
    The administrator may conduct educational and public informational activities that are designed to promote the policy of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 10-51) 
Sec. 34-47. - Untruthful complaints or testimony. 
    It shall be a violation of this article for any person knowingly and willfully to make false or untrue statements, accusations or allegations in his complaint or to give false testimony concerning violations of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 10-52) 
Secs. 34-48-34-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - UNLAWFUL HOUSING PRACTICES 

Sec. 34-61. - Sale or rental. 
    Except as provided in section 34-65, it shall be unlawful and a discriminatory housing practice for an owner, or any other person engaging in a real estate transaction, or for a real estate broker, because of race, color, ancestry, national origin, religion, sex, physical handicap, mental handicap, marital status, familial status, or age to: 
(1)  Refuse to engage in a real estate transaction with a person or otherwise make unavailable or deny housing to any person. 
(2)  Discriminate against a person in the terms, conditions or privileges of a real estate transaction, or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith, or because of his exercise of his right to free association. 
(3)  Refuse to receive or to fail to transmit a bona fide offer to engage in a real estate transaction with a person. 
(4)  Refuse to negotiate for a real estate transaction with a person. 
(5)  Represent to a person that housing is not available for inspection, sale, rental or lease when in fact it is so available, or to fail to bring a property listing to his attention or to refuse to permit him to inspect the housing. 
(6)  Steer any person away from or to any housing. 
(7)  Make, print, publish, circulate, post or mail, or cause to be made, printed, published or circulated, any notice, statement, advertisement or sign, or to use a form of application or photograph for a real estate transaction or, except in connection with a written affirmative action plan, to make a record or oral or written inquiry in connection with a prospective real estate transaction, which indicates directly or indirectly an intent to make a limitation, specifically, or discrimination with respect thereto. 
(8)  Offer, solicit, accept, use or retain a listing of housing with the understanding that a person may be discriminated against in a real estate transaction or in the furnishing of facilities or service in connection therewith. 
(9)  Induce or attempt to induce any person to transfer an interest in any housing by representations regarding the existing or potential proximity of housing owned, used or occupied by any person protected by the terms of this article. 
(10)  Make any misrepresentations concerning the listing for sale or rental, or the anticipated listing for sale or rental, or the sale or rental of any housing in any area in the city for the purpose of inducing or attempting to induce any such listing or any of the above transactions. 
(11)  Retaliate or discriminate in any manner against any person because of his opposing a practice declared unlawful by this article, or because he has filed a complaint, testified, assisted or participated in any manner in any investigation, proceeding or conference under this article. 
(12)  Aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce any person to engage in any of the practices prohibited by the provisions of this article, or to obstruct or prevent any person from complying with the provisions of this article, or any conciliation agreement entered into under this article. 
(13)  By canvassing to compel any unlawful practices prohibited by the provisions of this article. 
(14)  Otherwise to deny to, or withhold, any housing accommodations from a person. 
(15)  Promote, induce, influence or attempt to promote, induce or influence by the use of postal cards, letters, circulars, telephone, visitation or any other means, directly or indirectly, a property owner, occupant, or tenant to list for sale, sell, remove from, lease, assign, transfer, or otherwise dispose of any housing by referring as a part of a process or pattern of inciting neighborhood unrest, community tension, or fear of racial, color, religious, nationality or ethnic change in any street, block, neighborhood, or any change in any other area, to the race, color, religion, or national origin of actual or anticipated neighbors, tenants or other prospective buyers of any housing. 
(16)  Cause to be made any untrue or intentionally misleading statement or advertisement, or in any other manner, attempt as part of a process or pattern of inciting neighborhood unrest, community tension or fear of racial, color, religious, nationality or ethnic change in any street, block, neighborhood, or any other area, to obtain a listing of any housing for sale, rental, assignment, transfer or other disposition, where such statement, advertisement or other representation is false or materially misleading, or where there is insufficient basis to judge its truth or falsity to warrant making the statement, or to make any other material misrepresentations in order to obtain such listing, sale, removal from, lease, assignment, transfer or other disposition of housing. 
(17)  Place a sign or display any other device either purporting to offer for sale, lease, assignment, transfer or other disposition or tending to lead to the belief that a bona fide offer is being made to sell, lease, assign, transfer or otherwise dispose of any housing that is not in fact available or offered for sale, lease, assignment, transfer or other disposition. 
(Code 1986, § 10-31) 
Sec. 34-62. - Block busting. 
    It shall be unlawful and a discriminatory housing practice for a person, for the purpose of inducing a real estate transaction for which he may benefit financially to: 
(1)  Represent that a change has occurred or will or may occur in the composition, with respect to race, color, ancestry, national origin, religion, sex, physical handicap, mental handicap, marital status, familial status, or age, of the owners or occupants in the block, neighborhood or area in which the housing accommodation is located. 
(2)  Represent that this change will or may result in the lowering of property values, an increase in criminal or antisocial behavior, or a decline in the quality of schools in the block, neighborhood or area in which the housing accommodation is located. 
(3)  Make, as part of a process or pattern of discouraging the purchase, rental, occupancy or otherwise of any housing in a particular block, neighborhood or area, any representation to a person known to be a prospective purchaser, that such block or neighborhood, or area may undergo, is undergoing or has undergone, a change with respect to racial, color, religious, nationality or ethnic composition of such block or neighborhood area. 
(4)  Engage in, or hire to be done, or to conspire with others to commit actions or activities of any nature, the purpose of which is to coerce, cause panic, incite unrest or create or play upon fear, with the purpose of either discouraging or inducing or attempting to induce, the sale, purchase, rental or lease or the listing for any of the above, of any housing accommodation. 
(5)  For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or not sell or rent or not rent any housing by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person protected by the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 10-32) 
Sec. 34-63. - Financing. 
    It shall be unlawful and a discriminatory housing practice for any lending institution to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining housing, or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance, because of the race, color, ancestry, national origin, religion, sex, physical handicap, mental handicap, marital status, familial status or age of such person or of any person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance, or the purposes of such loan or other assistance, or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of the housing in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall impair the scope or effectiveness of the exceptions contained in section 34-65. 
(Code 1986, § 10-33) 
Sec. 34-64. - Brokerage services. 
    It shall be unlawful and a discriminatory housing practice to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization or facility related to the business of selling or renting housing, or to discriminate against such person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation because of race, color, ancestry, national origin, religion, sex, physical handicap, mental handicap, marital status, familial status, or age. 
(Code 1986, § 10-34) 
Sec. 34-65. - Exemptions and exceptions. 
(a)  Nothing in sections 34-61-34-64 shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society, or any nonprofit charitable or educational institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting or from advertising the sale, rental or occupancy of housing which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons. Nor shall anything in this article prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(b)  Nothing in sections 34-61-34-64, other than section 34-61(7), shall apply to: 
(1)  Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner, provided that such private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family houses at any one time. In the case of the sale of any such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period. In addition the bona fide private individual owner shall not own any interest in, nor shall there be owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any rights to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses at any one time. The sale or rental of any single-family house shall be excepted from the application of this article only if the house is sold or rented: 
a.  Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesperson, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting housing, or of any employee or agency of any such broker, agent, salesperson, or person; and 
b.  Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of subsection 34-61(7). 
Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title. 
(2)  Rooms or units in housing containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his residence, provided that the owner sells or rents such rooms or units: 
a.  Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesperson, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting housing, or of any employee or agency of any such broker, agent, salesperson or person; and 
b.  Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of section 34-61(7). 
Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title. 
(c)  For the purposes of subsection (b) of this section, a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting housing if: 
(1)  He has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as principal, other than in the sale of his own personal residence, in providing sale of his own personal residence, in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any housing or any interest therein; 
(2)  He has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence, in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any housing or any interest therein; or 
(3)  He is the owner of any housing designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families. 
(d)  Nothing in sections 34-61-34-64 shall be construed to: 
(1)  Bar any person from restricting sales, rentals, leases or occupancy, or from giving preference to persons of a given age for bona fide housing intended solely for minors. 
(2)  Make it an unlawful act to require that a person have legal capacity to enter into a contract or lease. 
(3)  Bar any person from advertising or from refusing to sell or rent any housing which is planned exclusively for, and occupied exclusively by individuals of one sex, to any individual of the opposite sex. 
(4)  Bar any person from selling, renting or advertising any housing which is planned exclusively for, and occupied exclusively by, unmarried individuals to unmarried individuals only. 
(5)  Bar any person from advertising or from refusing to sell or rent any housing which is planned exclusively for married couples without children or from segregating families with children to special units of housing. 
(6)  Bar any person from refusing to sell or rent any housing to unmarried individuals cohabiting contrary to law. 
(7)  Bar any person from refusing a loan or other financial assistance to any person whose life expectancy, according to generally accepted mortality tables, is less than the term for which the loan is requested. 
(Code 1986, § 10-35) 
Chapter 38 - OFFENSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Penalty for misdemeanors, F.S. §§ 775.082, 775.083; discharging firearms in public, F.S. § 790.15. 

Sec. 38-1. - State misdemeanors. 
    It shall be unlawful to commit within the city any act which is or shall be recognized by the laws of the state as a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1986, § 12-1) 
Case Law reference- Adoption of state law relating to misdemeanors by city upheld, see McFarland v. Roberts , 74 So.2d 88 (Fla. 1954); also Orr v. Quigg , 135 Fla. 653, 185 So. 726 and Wright v. Worth , 83 Fla. 204, 91 So. 87; adoption of state law misdemeanors by reference includes laws both in existence at the time and those later adopted by the state legislature, see State v. Smith , 189 So.2d 846 (Fla. 4th D.C.A. 1966). Follows rule in Hecht v. Shaw , 112 Fla. 762, 151 So. 333 (1933). "...when the adopting statute makes no reference to any particular statute or part of statute by its title or otherwise, but refers to the law generally which governs a particular subject, the reference in such a case includes not only the law in force at the date of the adopting act, but also all subsequent laws on the particular subject referred to...." 
(1) 
A municipality may enact an ordinance which creates an offense against municipal law for the same act that constitutes an offense against state law. Jaramillo v. City of Homestead , 322 So.2d 496 (Fla. 1975); 
(2) 
A municipality by ordinance may adopt state misdemeanor statutes by specific reference or by general reference, such as that contained in an ordinance making it unlawful to commit, within city limits, any act which is or shall be recognized by the laws of the state as a misdemeanor. Id.; 
(3) 
An adoption by general reference of a misdemeanor statute permits subsequent amendments, revisions and repeals of the laws by the state legislature to apply to the municipal ordinances. Id. 
State Law reference- State law misdemeanors; see Florida Statutes general index under heading "Crimes" for listing of state law misdemeanors; penalty for misdemeanors, F.S. §§ 775.082, 775.083. 
Sec. 38-2. - Court costs assessed. 
    Pursuant to F.S. § 943.25(13), the city does hereby assess an additional $2.00 of court costs to be set aside in a special fund to be used for such expenditures permitted in F.S. § 943.25(13). 
Charter reference- Police, art. IV. 
Sec. 38-3. - Merchandise on public property-Prohibited. 
    No person shall use or occupy any portion of any public park, street, or sidewalk within the city for the purpose of selling or offering for sale any goods, wares or merchandise. 
(Code 1986, § 12-2) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58. 
Sec. 38-4. - Same-Exceptions. 
    Section 38-3 shall not be construed to apply to: 
(1)  Farmers or growers selling from house to house, whose own products are offered for sale or sold; 
(2)  Persons who sell and deliver merchandise by vehicles from an established place of business; 
(3)  Merchants who display their goods on the sidewalk adjacent to their place of business in such manner as not to obstruct or impede the traffic thereon; 
(4)  Licensed peddlers or hawkers selling from house to house; and 
(5)  Crippled, infirm or indigent persons selling on the sidewalks, provided such crippled, infirm or indigent persons do so with permission of the chief of police. 
(Code 1986, § 12-3) 
Sec. 38-5. - Constructing, maintaining and using fences with exposed electric wires. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, maintain or use a fence, for whatever purpose, consisting of exposed electric wire, whether used alone or in connection with any other type of fence within the city, unless the electric fence is established within an area enclosed by a legal fence, as defined by state law, and does not abut the lands of another. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the city fire and safety inspector to notify the city manager of any violation of this section coming to his attention. If, upon investigation, the city manager determines that this section has, prima facie, been violated, he shall immediately notify the owner or occupant upon which such electric fence is located to immediately cease and desist from further use of electric current in such fence. Notice shall be given by personal service or by registered mail. If, upon further investigation, the city manager finds that the owner or occupant of such premises has not complied with his order, the city manager shall have authority, after immediate but due notice, to terminate electric service to such fence, or if necessary to the locality concerned and to enforce discontinuance of electric service until the improper use of electric current has terminated. 
(Code 1986, § 12-4) 
Cross reference- Fences, pt. III, § 4-2.2.5. 
State Law reference- Fences, F.S. § 588.011. 
Chapter 42 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58. 
State Law reference- Recreation, F.S. ch. 418. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1-42-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RECREATION COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to create recreation commission, F.S. ch. 418. 

Sec. 42-26. - Established. 
    There is hereby established for the city an advisory body designated as the city recreation commission. 
(Code 1986, § 13-16) 
Sec. 42-27. - Membership-Composition; compensation. 
    The recreation commission shall be composed of five members who shall serve without compensation, although members may be reimbursed for expenses incurred in the course of their official duties. 
(Code 1986, § 13-17) 
Sec. 42-28. - Same-Appointment; terms; vacancies. 
    The members of the recreation commission shall be appointed by, and shall serve at the pleasure of, the city commission. Each member appointed shall serve for a term of three years or until his successor is appointed. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled by appointment of the city commission for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(Code 1986, § 13-18) 
Sec. 42-29. - Internal organization. 
    The recreation commission shall hold its organization meeting in January of each year and organize by electing one of their members as chairman, and shall elect, appoint or designate such other officers as may be necessary for the functions of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 851, § 1, 11-6-96; Ord. No. 886, 4-3-01) 
Sec. 42-30. - Function, powers. 
(a)  The duties of the city recreation commission shall be to act in an advisory capacity to the city commission and to the parks and recreation department in the study, planning and conduct of the public recreation programs. It shall also advise the city commission as to the use of playgrounds, athletic fields, recreation centers, and other recreation facilities and activities conducted on any of the properties owned, controlled by, or on loan to the city. 
(b)  The recreation commission may, in cooperation with the parks and recreation department, provide for the coordination and conduct of any special cultural or recreational activity made possible through the involvement of citizen volunteers that is an activity beyond the scope of the in-house abilities or the planned and budgeted activities of the department. 
(Ord. No. 851, § 1, 11-6-96; Ord. No. 886, 4-3-01) 
Sec. 42-31. - Finances. 
    The recreation commission, in behalf of the city commission, may solicit or receive any gifts or bequests of money or property, or any proceeds from the conduct of special programs referred to in section 42-30(b) realized after the satisfaction of all related cost; the funds from which shall be placed in a special revenue fund account by the city and used for the specific purposes designated by the donor, or by the recreation commission in the absence of donor restriction, for playgrounds, parks, improvements thereto, or other recreational purposes. 
(Ord. No. 851, § 1, 11-6-96; Ord. No. 886, 4-3-01) 
Sec. 42-32. - Reports. 
    The recreation commission shall make such full and complete reports to the city commission as is necessary to keep the city commission reasonably informed and advised or as may be requested by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 851, § 1, 11-6-96; Ord. No. 886, 4-3-01) 
Secs. 42-33-42-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 42-51. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person convicted of any violations under this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 829, § 3, 8-2-94) 
Sec. 42-52. - Reservations of facilities; fees. 
(a)  Reservations for picnic tables and/or other designated park areas are prohibited. However, advanced reservations for McClane Community Center will be accepted. 
(b)  A permit fee for advanced reservation of the community center will be a designated amount set by the city commission. Permits may be applied for and fees paid at the office of the department of leisure services. 
(c)  Reserved and scheduled use of any city park or recreational facility must be accompanied by a facility use agreement approved by the department of leisure services. 
(Ord. No. 829, § 1(c), 8-2-94) 
Sec. 42-53. - Camping facilities. 
    It shall be unlawful to camp in any city park or recreational facility unless otherwise authorized and posted. 
(Ord. No. 829, § 1(a), 8-2-94) 
Sec. 42-54. - Alcoholic beverages. 
    It shall be unlawful to consume, sell, or cause to be sold, any beer, wine, liquor, or alcoholic beverages of any kind, in any city park or recreational facility. 
(Ord. No. 829, § 1(b), 8-2-94) 
Sec. 42-55. - Vehicles and parking facilities. 
(a)  No person shall park any vehicle, camper, trailer or any towed conveyance in any area not specifically authorized or designated. 
(b)  There shall be no overnight parking of any vehicle, camper, trailer, or any towed conveyance in any area unless otherwise posted. 
(c)  No motorized vehicle shall be allowed on any portion of the recreational facility other than designated roads or parking. 
(Ord. No. 829, § 1(d), 8-2-94) 
Sec. 42-56. - Sanitation. 
(a)  Failure to dispose of all garbage, refuse, including paper, cans, bottles, waste materials, and rubbish in designated containers or removal from the site or area constitutes a violation of this article. 
(b)  No person or company shall use city park or recreational facility refuse containers for dumping of household or commercial garbage, refuse, or trash brought from private property. 
(Ord. No. 829, § 1(e), 8-2-94) 
Sec. 42-57. - Pets and animals. 
(a)  No dog, cat, or other small animal shall be allowed into a city park or recreational facility unless it is crated, caged, or upon a leash not longer than six feet or otherwise under physical restraint at all times. 
(b)  No horses or other saddle animals shall be allowed in a city park or recreational facility unless there are accommodations to allow entry and use of the facility. 
(Ord. No. 829, § 1(f), 8-2-94) 
Sec. 42-58. - Public behavior. 
    It shall be unlawful to incite or participate in riots or indulge in boisterous, abusive, threatening, indecent, or disorderly conduct or behavior in any city park or recreational facility. Anyone in violation of this section may be forcibly ejected from the park or recreational facility, or arrested, and shall not be entitled to a refund of any fee or rental. 
(Ord. No. 829, § 1(g), 8-2-94) 
Sec. 42-59. - Destruction of property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, deface, or remove any native wild or domestic tree, shrub, plant, or wildflower in any city park or recreational facility. 
(b)  Destroying, injuring, defacing, removing, or disturbing in any manner any real, personal, or public property in any city park or recreational facility shall be unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 829, § 1(h), 8-2-94) 
Sec. 42-60. - Fires. 
    Building a fire outside of stoves, grills, fireplaces, or other places provided for such purpose shall be unlawful. All fires shall be attended to at all times and, upon abandonment, the same fire shall be completely extinguished. 
(Ord. No. 829, § 1(i), 8-2-94) 
Sec. 42-61. - Firearms and fireworks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a duly authorized law enforcement officer, to carry into any city park or recreational facility any form of firearm. 
(b)  No person shall discharge or explode any firecrackers, torpedoes, rockets, cap pistols, or any other fireworks of any nature within a city park or recreational facility. Public fireworks displays authorized by the city shall be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 829, § 1(j), 8-2-94) 
Sec. 42-62. - Audio devices. 
(a)  No person shall operate or use any audio devices, including radio, television, musical instruments, or any other noise producing devices such as electrical generators, and equipment driven by motor engines, in such a manner at such times as to disturb other persons. 
(b)  No person shall operate or use any public address system, whether fixed, portable, or vehicle mounted, except when such operation has been approved by the department of public services. 
(Ord. No. 829, § 1(k), 8-2-94) 
Sec. 42-63. - Closed areas and closing hours. 
(a)  No person shall be allowed to enter or use a site or area, or portion of a site or area, which is closed to public use. 
(b)  No person shall be admitted or allowed to remain in any city park after the designated closing hour except for the purpose of camping where designated, or as approved by the department of leisure services. 
(Ord. No. 829, § 1(l), 8-2-94) 
Sec. 42-64. - Personal injuries and accidents. 
    The city shall not be responsible for any accident or injury to any person while on a city park or recreational facility property or using any facilities thereto. Any person entering a city park or recreational facility shall, by such entrance, waive any claim against the city or its agents for any accident or injury occurring while on or within a city park or recreational facility. 
(Ord. No. 829, § 1(m), 8-2-94) 
Sec. 42-65. - Lost or stolen articles. 
    The city shall not be responsible for any property or article lost or stolen from any bathhouse, restroom, park building, recreational facility, parking area or other area of a city park. 
(Ord. No. 829, § 1(n), 8-2-94) 
Sec. 42-66. - Commercial use. 
    No person shall utilize any city park or recreational facilities to generate personal or corporate business, unless specifically authorized by the city commission. Such prohibited uses include, but are not limited to, the sale, or the display for sale, of any merchandise; the servicing or repairing of any vehicle, except the rendering of emergency services; the storage of vehicles being serviced or repaired on abutting property or elsewhere; the solicitation for sale of goods, property, fundraiser or service; and the display of advertising of any sort. Nonprofit civic organizations may conduct activities in city parks, such as sales of food or merchandise or fundraisers, if the civic organization obtains a permit from the city for such activity. 
(Ord. No. 829, § 1(o), 8-2-94) 
Sec. 42-67. - Citation authority. 
    The staff and employees of the department of leisure services shall be empowered to issue verbal and written corrective notices. 
(Ord. No. 829, § 2, 8-2-94) 
Sec. 42-68. - Fees established. 
    All fees and charges for participation in city parks and recreation programs, all special activities coordinated by the recreation commission, and or the utilization of any city facilities shall be established by resolution adopted by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 886, 4-3-01) 
Chapter 46 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Solicitation of charitable funds act, F.S. § 496.01 et seq.; local regulation, F.S. § 496.132; peddling at camp meeting, F.S. § 871.03. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1-46-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT 

Sec. 46-26. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit orders for any goods, wares or merchandise, books, magazines or other things, or for the purpose of making demonstrations or exhibitions of goods, wares or merchandise or other things of value without having first procured a permit as provided by section 46-27. 
(Code 1986, § 14-1) 
Sec. 46-27. - Application; contents. 
    In order to procure a permit for any purpose mentioned in section 46-26, the applicant shall file with the chief of police a written application signed by the applicant and sworn to by him before some officer authorized to administer oaths under the laws of the state, which application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Date of application; 
(2)  Name and address of applicant; 
(3)  Name and address of the person by whom the applicant is employed or whom such applicant represents, if any; 
(4)  The place of residence and nature of employment of applicant during the preceding year; 
(5)  The nature and character of the goods, wares, merchandise or the subscription contracts for any magazine, newspaper, book or periodical to be offered by the applicant; 
(6)  A personal description of the applicant; 
(7)  If employed, credentials establishing the exact relationship of the applicant with the employer; 
(8)  A photograph of the applicant taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, which picture shall be two inches by two inches, showing head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner; 
(9)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, including misdemeanor or the violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor; and 
(10)  Such other information as the chief of police shall require should he deem it necessary for the protection or the safety of the residents of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 14-2) 
Sec. 46-28. - Investigation of applications; grant and refusal; records of applications. 
    The chief of police shall investigate each applicant for permits required by this article. The chief of police shall have ten days within which to make such investigation. He shall refuse a permit when he finds that the applicant has been convicted of a criminal violation. He shall keep each application on file, together with a record of his action thereon, subject to inspection by any person at any reasonable time. 
(Code 1986, § 14-3) 
Sec. 46-29. - Fee; disposition. 
    The person applying for such permit shall pay the sum of $10.00 for each permit issued, which moneys shall be deposited in the general fund account of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 14-4) 
Sec. 46-30. - Garden or farm produce excepted. 
    This article shall not apply to the sale or soliciting of orders for the sale of farm, agricultural, grove, horticultural, floricultural, tropical piscicultural or tropical fish farm products grown or produced by such person in the state. The sale of such commodities as authorized by and including any exceptions in F.S. § 205.064, is included in this section. 
(Code 1986, § 14-5) 
Secs. 46-31-46-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND ITINERANT VENDORS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-51. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor means any person, whether a resident of the city or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise within the city, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad boxcar, or boat, public room in hotels, lodginghouses, apartments, shops, or any street, alley, or other place within the city, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at public auction; provided, however, that such definition shall not be construed to include any person who, while occupying such temporary location, does not sell from stock, but exhibits samples only for the purpose of securing orders for future delivery. The person so engaged shall not be relieved from complying with the provisions of this article merely by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer or by conducting such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. 
(Code 1986, § 14-21) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-52. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1986, § 14-35) 
Secs. 46-53-46-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 46-66. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for a transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor to engage in such business within the city without first obtaining an itinerant merchant permit, therefore in compliance with the provisions of this article. An itinerant merchant permit shall be issued to only one person and shall not be transferable. 
(Code 1986, § 14-22; Ord. No. 900, § 2, 9-3-02) 
Sec. 46-67. - Application. 
    Applicants for an itinerant merchant permit under this article, shall file a written sworn application signed by the applicant, with the city clerk, showing: 
(1)  The name of the person having the management or supervision of the applicant's business during the time that it is proposed that it will be carried on in the city. 
(2)  The local address of such person while engaged in such business. 
(3)  The permanent address of such person. 
(4)  The capacity in which such person will act, that is, whether as proprietor, agent or otherwise. 
(5)  The name and address of the person for whose account the business will be carried on, if any; and, if a corporation, under the laws of what state the same is incorporated. 
(6)  The place in the city where it is proposed to carry on the applicant's business and the length of time during which it is proposed that the business shall be conducted. 
(7)  A statement of the nature, character and quality of the goods, wares or merchandise to be sold or offered for sale by the applicant in the city; the invoice value and quality of such goods, wares and merchandise; whether the same are proposed to be sold from stock in possession or from stock in possession and by sample; at auction; by direct sale or by direct sale and by taking orders for future delivery, where the goods or property proposed to be sold are manufactured or produced and where such goods or products are located at the time the application is filed. 
(8)  A brief statement of the nature and character of the advertising done or proposed to be done in order to attract customers, and, if required by the city clerk, copies of all such advertising whether by handbills, circular, newspaper advertising or otherwise, shall be attached to the application as exhibits thereto. 
(9)  Whether or not the person having the management or supervision of the applicant's business has been convicted of a crime, misdemeanor or the violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of such offense and the punishment assessed therefor. 
(10)  Credentials from the person for which the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as such representative. 
(11)  Such other reasonable information as to the identity or character of the person having the management or supervision of the applicant's business or the method or plan of doing such business as the city clerk may deem proper to fulfill the purpose of this article in the protection of the public good, to include the physical description of the applicant (race, sex, height, weight, eye color, hair color, complexion and body build) and driver's license. 
(Code 1986, § 14-23; Ord. No. 900, § 2, 9-3-02) 
Sec. 46-68. - Investigation of applicant and issuance. 
    Upon receipt of the application required by section 46-67, an investigation of the person's business responsibility or moral character will be made as necessary to the protection of the public good. The clerk shall submit a copy of the application to the chief of police for fingerprints, photographs, and a criminal investigation with state and federal agencies. Those agencies shall report any criminal justice information to the clerk within 60 days after receipt of the fingerprints and copy of the application. If, as a result of the investigation, the character and business reputation appear to be satisfactory, the city clerk shall so certify in writing, and permit shall be issued by the city clerk. The city clerk shall keep a full record in his/her office of all permits issued and provide a copy to the city code enforcement officer. Such permit shall contain the number of the permit, the date the permit is issued, the nature of the business authorized to be carried on, the amount of the permit fee paid, the expiration date of the permit the name of the person authorized to carry on the business, and the name and address of the company. 
(Code 1986, § 14-24; Ord. No. 900, § 2, 9-3-02; Ord. No. 906, § 2, 8-5-03) 
Sec. 46-69. - Fees. 
    Applicants under this article shall pay a fee of $250.00 to the city clerk for each permit issued, plus all processing fees associated with the background checks from state and federal agencies. The city clerk will deposit the moneys collected into the general fund account of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 14-25; Ord. No. 900, § 2, 9-3-02; Ord. No. 906, § 2, 8-5-03) 
Sec. 46-70. - Service of process. 
    Before any permits, as provided in this article, shall be issued for engaging in business as an itinerant merchant in the city, such applicant shall file with the city clerk an instrument nominating and appointing the city clerk, or the person performing the duties of such position, his true and lawful agent with full power and authority to acknowledge service of notice of process for and on behalf of the applicant in respect to any matters connected with or arising out of the business transacted under such permit. Immediately upon service of process upon the city clerk, the city clerk shall send to the permit holder or applicant at his last known address, by registered mail, a copy of the process. 
(Code 1986, § 14-26; Ord. No. 900, § 2, 9-3-02) 
Sec. 46-71. - Posting. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the application, there will be a waiting period of not more than 60 days, after which the clerk shall issue an itinerant merchant permit in the form of a laminated identification card, which shall bear the photograph of the permit holder, the permit holder's full name, date of birth, race and sex, the name and address of the permit holder's employer or statement "self employed," the signature of the permit holder, a permit number, an expiration date, and the telephone number consumers may call to verify validity of the permit. 
(b)  The permit issued under this article shall be posted conspicuously in the place of business named therein. Separate licenses shall be issued for each place of business and shall be posted conspicuously in each place of business. 
(Code 1986, § 14-27; Ord. No. 900, § 2, 9-3-02) 
Sec. 46-72. - Transfer. 
    No permit shall be transferred without written consent from the mayor as evidenced by an endorsement on the face of the permit by the city clerk showing to whom the permit is transferred and the date of the transfer. 
(Code 1986, § 14-28; Ord. No. 900, § 2, 9-3-02) 
Sec. 46-73. - Duty of police to enforce. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the police officers and the code enforcement officer of the city to examine all places of business and persons in their respective territories, subject to the provisions of this article, to determine if this article has been complied with and to enforce the provisions of this article against any person found to be violating this article. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any police officer or code enforcement officer of the city to require any person seen peddling to produce his itinerant merchant permit or home solicitation permit issued by the city, and to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person found to be violating the same. 
(c)  The city clerk shall not issue an itinerant merchant's permit if the chief of police verifies any of the following have occurred: 
(1)  The applicant has been convicted of: 
a.  A felony involving fraud, deceit or offense involving moral turpitude, unless such conviction occurred at least five years prior to the date of the application, or any offense involving sexual misconduct with minors, keeping or residing in a house of ill fame, solicitation of a lewd or unlawful act, prostitution or pandering, unless such conviction occurred at least five years prior to the date of application; or 
b.  An offense involving the use of or threat to use force or violence upon the person of another, unless such conviction occurred at least five years prior to the date of the application. 
For the purposes of this subsection, conviction shall include any disposition of a criminal case resulting in the imposition against the applicant of a fine, probation, incarceration, or other adverse sentence of a punitive nature, whether or not the applicant has been formally adjudicated guilty. 
(2)  The applicant has made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of fact or a material omission of fact in the permit application or in any document required by the city in conjunction herewith; or 
(3)  The applicant has had a permit or license, similar to the one being applied for, denied, revoked or suspended for any of the above causes by the city or by any other state or local agency within five years prior to the date of application. 
A person denied an itinerant merchant's permit pursuant to subsections (1)a. and b. of this section may not apply for a license for a period of one year following the denial. 
The clerk, upon denying an application, shall promptly notify the applicant of the denial and state the particular grounds for such denial. 
(Code 1986, § 14-29; Ord. No. 900, § 2, 9-3-02) 
Sec. 46-74. - Records. 
    The city clerk shall deposit the record of fingerprints of the permittee together with a permit number, with the chief of police. The chief of police shall report to the city clerk and code enforcement officer any complaints against any person permitted under the provisions of this article and any conviction for violation of this article. The city clerk and code enforcement officer shall keep a record of all such permits and of such complaints and violations. 
(Code 1986, § 14-30; Ord. No. 900, § 2, 9-3-02) 
Sec. 46-75. - Revocation. 
    The permits issued pursuant to this article may be revoked by the mayor, after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for permit; 
(2)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection with the selling of goods, wares or merchandise; 
(3)  Any violation of this article; 
(4)  Conviction of the permit holder of any felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; and 
(5)  Conducting the business permitted under this article in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(6)  Any violation of the hours of solicitation (10:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.); and 
(7)  Any violation by the holder of the permit of any of the ordinances of the city or of any state or federal law. 
(Code 1986, § 14-31; Ord. No. 900, § 2, 9-3-02) 
Sec. 46-76. - Notice of revocation hearing. 
    Notice of hearing for revocation of a permit shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the permit holder at his last known address at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(Code 1986, § 14-32; Ord. No. 900, § 2, 9-3-02) 
Sec. 46-77. - Appeal. 
    Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city clerk in regard to the denial of application for permit, or in connection with the revocation of a permit, shall have the right to appeal to the city commission. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the city commission, within 14 days after notice of the decision by the city clerk has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal. The city commission shall set the time and place for a hearing on the appeal, and notice of the hearing shall be given to the person in the same manner as provided in this article for notice of hearing on revocation. The order of the city commission on such appeal shall be final. 
(Code 1986, § 14-33; Ord. No. 900, § 2, 9-3-02) 
Sec. 46-78. - Expiration. 
    All permits issued under the provisions of this article shall expire 180 days after the date of issuance of such permit, unless a prior date is fixed therein. 
(Code 1986, § 14-34; Ord. No. 900, § 2, 9-3-02) 
Sec. 46-79. - Prohibitions. 
    It is unlawful for any individual solicitor, agent or peddler, as defined in this chapter, to: 
(1)  Distribute handbills or similar advertising by throwing or placing the same in or upon any automobile or other vehicle in the city. 
(2)  Shout, blow a horn, ring a bell, or use any sound device, including any loudspeaking radio or sound amplifying system upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or other public place of the city, or upon any private premises in the city where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other public places for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which such licensee proposes to sell. 
(3)  Sell or offer to sell any goods, wares or merchandise from vehicles while on any public streets or rights-of-way within the city limits, to include sidewalk areas. 
(4)  Conduct solicitation among vehicles in traffic. 
(5)  Conduct solicitation within 1,000 feet of the property line of a school, publicly operated park or recreational facility within the town. 
(6)  Erect any signage in violation of the City of Marianna Sign Ordinance. 
(7)  Cause or permit the accumulation of trash, garbage, or debris at the permit site without proper disposal thereof. 
(8)  Beg or solicit gifts or money or to exhibit his person for the purpose of obtaining gifts or money. 
(9)  Enter the premises of a private residence or commercial property for the purpose of selling or soliciting orders for goods, wares or merchandise, personal services or information, when a "No Solicitors" sign is posted. 
(10)  Contact, disturb or annoy, directly or by means, tools or equipment, any other person in the city for the purpose of promoting or selling any real or personal property or any service, except those specifically permitted under valid city licenses or permits. 
(11)  Conduct solicitation in areas designated either physically or in a development order issued by the city for public, commercial, industrial, office, or residential parking. 
(12)  Conduct solicitation in any manner, which constitutes a danger to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(13)  Remain upon any residential, commercial, industrial or office property after the owner or occupant requests the solicitor depart. 
(14)  Approach side, back or rear doors on residential, commercial, industrial, office or governmental property within the city. 
(15)  Distribute or cause to be distributed any paper, handbill, circular, dodger or other advertising matter on any residential, industrial, governmental or commercial property without the consent of the owner or lessee, or on any of the streets, avenues, parks or other public space within the city, without the consent of the city. 
(16)  Obstruct, impede or interfere with the free flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(17)  Take polls, sale or distribute and request information from motorists upon the public road rights-of-way. 
(18)  Operate on property owned by the city. 
(19)  Operate within 100 feet of a street or roadway intersection, nor within five feet of a public sidewalk. 
(20)  Have any exclusive right to any location in the public streets, alleys, or other public places, nor shall any be permitted a stationary location, nor shall he be permitted to operate in such a way as would restrict or interfere with the ingress and egress of an abutting property owner or tenant, or create or become a public nuisance, increase traffic congestion or delay, or constitute a hazard to traffic, life or property, or create an obstruction to adequate access for fire, police or sanitation vehicles. No person shall obstruct the free, convenient, and normal use of any public street, highway or road by impeding, hindering stifling, retarding or restraining traffic or passage thereon, by standing or approaching motor vehicles of a police officer or code enforcement officer exercised in good faith shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the peddling activity constitutes a traffic or pedestrian impediment or hazard or access obstruction. A peddler shall move his location at least 200 feet from the last location occupied before stopping to conduct business and shall not return to the same location until 24 hours has elapsed. 
(Ord. No. 900, § 2, 9-3-02) 
Sec. 46-80. - Exemptions. 
    Exempt from the provisions of this article are the following persons and activities: 
(1)  Garage and yard sales on residential properties within the city. 
(2)  Sales operations at city approved fairs, carnivals, bazaars, or like expositions or attractions of a duration of less than seven days sponsored exclusively by, not-for-profit charitable, philanthropic, civic, political, educational or religious organizations. 
(3)  Holiday seasonal sales in any business or industrial districts sponsored exclusively by: not-for-profit charitable, philanthropic, civic, political, educational or religious organizations. 
(Ord. No. 900, § 2, 9-3-02) 
Sec. 46-81. - Interstate commerce not regulated. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to any sale, act or thing, the regulation or licensing of which would constitute regulation or licensing of interstate commerce. 
(Ord. No. 900, § 2, 9-3-02) 
Sec. 46-82. - Religious institutions. 
    Nothing in chapter 46 of this Code shall be construed as being applicable to any religious institution organized and operated exclusively for religious purposes and not operated for the pecuniary profit of any person, if the solicitations by such established church or religious society are conducted among the members, thereof by other officers or members voluntarily and without remuneration for making such solicitation, or if the solicitors are in the form of collections or contributions at the regular assemblies or services of any such established church or religious society. 
(Ord. No. 900, § 2, 9-3-02) 
Secs. 46-83-46-86. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DOOR-TO-DOOR SELLING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-87. - Definition. 
    Door-to-door selling is defined to mean the practice of going in and upon private residences or private businesses in the incorporated area of Marianna, Florida by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants and transient vendors of merchandise, not having been requested or invited so to do by the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of said private residences, for the purpose of soliciting orders for, or for the sale, lease, or rental of consumer goods, wares, merchandise or services. The term door-to-door selling shall also include any transaction in which the seller or a person acting for the seller engages in a personal solicitation of the sale, lease or rental at a place other than at the seller's fixed location business establishment where goods or services are offered or exhibited for sale, lease or rental, and the buyer's agreement or offer to purchase is given to the seller and the sale, lease or rental is consummated at a place other than at the seller's fixed location business establishment. 
(Ord. No. 900, § 2, 9-3-02; Ord. No. 906, § 2, 8-5-03) 
Sec. 46-88. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-14 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 900, § 2, 9-3-02) 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 46-89. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage, on behalf of himself or others, in the business of door-to-door selling without having first obtained a solicitation permit from the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  The following are excluded from the operation of this article: 
(1)  Bona fide agents, business representatives, or salesmen making calls or soliciting orders at the usual place of business of a customer regarding products or services for the use in connection with the customer's business; 
(2)  Solicitors, salesmen, or agents making a call or business visit upon the express invitation, oral or written, of an inhabitant of the premises or his agent; 
(3)  Telephone solicitors, salesmen, or agents making calls which involve transactions that are unsolicited by the consumer and consummated by telephone and without any other contract between the buyer and the seller or its representative prior to delivery of the goods or performance of the services; 
(4)  Solicitors, salesmen, or agents conducting a sale, lease or rental of consumer goods, or services by sample, catalog, or brochure for future delivery; 
(5)  Minors or students conducting sales associated with school or youth civic organization fundraisers. 
(6)  Minors conducting home solicitation sales under the supervision of an adult supervisor who holds a valid home solicitation sale permit. Minors excluded from operation of this section must, however, carry personal identification which includes their full name, date of birth, residence address, employer, and the name and permit number of their adult supervisor. The city clerk shall issue courtesy identification cards containing that information to minors, upon application; and 
(7)  Those sellers or their representatives that currently have an itinerant merchant permit. 
(Ord. No. 900, § 2, 9-3-02; Ord. No. 906, § 2, 8-5-03) 
Sec. 46-90. - Application, fees and issuance. 
(a)  Application for a solicitation permit shall be made to the city clerk on a form provided by the clerk, which shall contain at least the following information: 
(1)  A complete set of fingerprints of the applicant taken by an authorized law enforcement agency; 
(2)  The signature of the applicant; 
(3)  The full name, local residence address and home phone number of the applicant; 
(4)  The permanent residence address of the applicant; 
(5)  The name and address of the applicant's employer and the business phone number; 
(6)  The applicant's sex and race; 
(7)  The applicant's date of birth; and 
(8)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of or has pleaded guilty or nolo contendere to any crime, the nature of the offense, and the punishment or penalty assessed thereof. 
(b)  Each such application shall be accompanied by a filing fee in the amount of $50.00 plus all processing fees associated with the background checks from state and federal agencies payable to the city clerk to cover the cost of filing and processing the application, to be retained by the city clerk. The clerk shall submit a copy of the application to the chief of police for fingerprints, photographs, and a criminal background investigation with state and federal agencies. Those agencies shall report any criminal justice information to the clerk within 60 days after receipt of the fingerprints and copy of the application. 
(c)  Upon receipt of the application, there will be a waiting period of not more than 60 days, after which the clerk shall issue a home solicitation permit in the form of a laminated identification card, which shall bear the photograph of the permit holder, the permit holder's full name, date of birth, race and sex, the name and address of the permit holder's employer or statement "self employed," the signature of the permit holder, a permit number, an expiration date, and the telephone number consumers may call to verify validity of the permit. The permit shall be worn by the solicitor in a prominent place for display and identification at all times while engaged in the business of door-to-door selling. 
(Ord. No. 900, § 2, 9-3-02; Ord. No. 906, § 2, 8-5-03) 
Sec. 46-91. - Duty to enforce. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the police officers and code enforcement officer of the city to examine all places of business and persons in their respective territories, subject to the provisions of this article, to determine if this article has been complied with, and to enforce the provisions of this article against any person found to be violating this article. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any police officer or code enforcement officer of the city to require any person seen conducting door-to-door sales to produce his solicitation permit issued by the city, and to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person found to be violating the same. 
(c)  The city clerk shall not issue a solicitation permit if the chief of police verifies any of the following have occurred: 
(1)  The applicant has been convicted of: 
a.  A felony involving fraud, deceit or offense involving moral turpitude, unless such conviction occurred at least five years prior to the date of the application, or any offense involving sexual misconduct with minors, keeping or residing in a house of ill fame, solicitation of a lewd or unlawful act, prostitution or pandering, unless such conviction occurred at least five years prior to the date of application; or 
b.  An offense involving the use of or threat to use force or violence upon the person of another, unless such conviction occurred at least five years prior to the date of the application. 
For the purposes of this subsection, conviction shall include any disposition of a criminal case resulting in the imposition against the applicant of a fine, probation, incarceration, or other adverse sentence of a punitive nature, whether or not the applicant has been formally adjudicated guilty; 
(2)  The applicant has made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of fact or a material omission of fact in the permit application or in any document required by the city in conjunction herewith; or 
(3)  The applicant has had a permit or license, similar to the one being applied for, denied, revoked or suspended for any of the above causes by the city or by any other state or local agency within five years prior to the date of application. 
A person denied a solicitation permit pursuant to subsections (1)a. and b. of this section may not apply for a license for a period of one year following the denial. 
(d)  The city clerk, upon denying an application, shall promptly notify the applicant of the denial and state the particular grounds for such denial. 
(Ord. No. 900, § 2, 9-3-02) 
Sec. 46-92. - Transfer. 
    Solicitation permits shall not be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 900, § 2, 9-3-02) 
Sec. 46-93. - Records. 
    The city clerk shall deposit the records of fingerprints of the permittee, together with a permit number, with the chief of police. The chief of police shall report to the city clerk and code enforcement officer any complaints against the person permitted under the provisions of this article and any conviction for violation of this article. The city clerk and the code enforcement officer shall keep a record of all such permits and of such complaints and violations. 
(Ord. No. 900, § 2, 9-3-02) 
Sec. 46-94. - Revocation. 
    The permits issued pursuant to this article may be revoked by the mayor, after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for permit; 
(2)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection with the selling of goods, wares or merchandise; 
(3)  Any violation of this article; 
(4)  Conviction of the permittee of any felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
(5)  Conducting the business permitted under this article in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public; 
(6)  Any violation of the hours of solicitation (10:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday); and 
(7)  Any violation by the holder of the permit of any of the ordinances of the city or of any state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 900, § 2, 9-3-02) 
Sec. 46-95. - Notice of revocation hearing. 
    Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee at his last known address at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 900, § 2, 9-3-02) 
Sec. 46-96. - Appeal. 
    Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city in regard to the denial of application for license, or in connection with the revocation of a license, shall have the right to appeal to the city commission. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the city commission, within 14 days after notice of the decision by the city clerk has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal. The city commission shall set the time and place for the hearing on the appeal, and notice of the hearing shall be given to the person in the same manner as provided in this article for notice of hearing for revocation. The order of the city commission on such appeal shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 900, § 2, 9-3-02) 
Sec. 46-97. - Expiration. 
    All home solicitation permits under the provision of this article shall expire 180 days after the date of issuance of such permit, unless a prior date is fixed therein. 
(Ord. No. 900, § 2, 9-3-02; Ord. No. 906, § 2, 8-5-03) 
Chapter 50 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Land development regulations, pt. III. 
State Law reference- State comprehensive planning, F.S. § 23.011 et seq.; local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act, F.S. § 163.3161 et seq.; referral of land development regulation to local planning agency or separate zoning commission, F.S. § 163.3194. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1-50-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING BOARD 

Sec. 50-26. - Established. 
    Pursuant to F.S. ch. 163, part II, there is hereby established the city planning board, hereafter referred to as "the board." 
(Code 1986, § 15-16) 
Sec. 50-27. - Composition. 
    The planning board shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 15-17) 
Sec. 50-28. - Terms of office. 
    Members of the planning board shall be appointed for terms of three years each. Members shall hold office until a successor has been appointed and qualified. 
(Code 1986, § 15-18) 
Sec. 50-29. - Filling vacancies. 
(a)  Any vacancy on the planning board occurring during the unexpired term of an appointed member shall be filled by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city commission, for the remainder of the term. 
(b)  Any vacancy in the membership of the planning board shall be filled within 30 days after the vacancy occurs. The city commission, by the affirmative vote of a majority of its members, may remove any member of the planning board for cause, after written notice and public hearing. 
(Code 1986, § 15-19) 
Sec. 50-30. - Election and designation of officers; duties of secretary. 
    The planning board shall elect a chairman and a vice-chairman from among its members. The duly elected and acting city clerk shall be secretary to the planning board and shall keep and maintain accurate minutes and records of proceedings before the planning board. 
(Code 1986, § 15-20) 
Sec. 50-31. - Meetings. 
(a)  The planning board shall hold regular meetings at least once in each calendar month. Special meetings may be held upon the call of the chairman or upon the written request of any two members of the planning board. 
(b)  All meetings of the planning board shall be open to the public. 
(c)  The planning board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact and shall keep a properly indexed record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
(d)  The chairman, or some member of the planning board, shall attend each regular meeting of the city commission so as to report upon the planning board's activities and shall further attend any special meeting of the city commission, when so requested. 
(Code 1986, § 15-21) 
State Law reference- Public meetings and records, F.S. § 286.011. 
Sec. 50-32. - General powers and duties. 
    The planning board shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Acquire and maintain such information and materials as are necessary to an understanding of past trends, present conditions and forces at work to cause changes in these conditions. Such information material may include maps and photographs of manmade and natural physical features of the area concerned, statistics on past trends and present conditions with respect to population, property values, economic base, land use and such other information as is important or likely to be important in determining the amount, direction and kind of development to be expected in the area and its various parts. 
(2)  Prepare, adopt and from time to time amend and revise a comprehensive and coordinated general plan for meeting present requirements and such future requirements as may be foreseen, including provisions for comprehensive zoning and the regulation of subdivision and other land areas. 
(3)  Establish principles and policies for guiding action in the development of the city. 
(4)  Conduct such public hearings as may be required to gather information necessary for the drafting, establishment and maintenance of the comprehensive plan and such additional public hearings as are required or specified by law. 
(5)  Make or cause to be made any necessary special studies on the location, condition and adequacy of special facilities in the city. These may include, but are not limited to, studies on housing, commercial and industrial conditions and facilities, public and private utilities and traffic, transportation and parking. 
(6)  Consider all proposals and requests for amendments relating to the boundaries of the various zoning districts as are now, or may later be established, and the regulations applicable to the districts. 
(7)  Render advisory reports to the city commission, setting forth its recommendations therein. 
(8)  Perform any other duties which may lawfully be exercised by it under the provisions of F.S. ch. 163. 
(Code 1986, § 15-23) 
Secs. 50-33-50-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LOCAL PLANNING AGENCY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Mandate for local planning agency, F.S. § 163.3167(6). 

Sec. 50-56. - Designation and establishment. 
    Pursuant to, and in accordance with, F.S. § 163.3174, there is hereby established the city local planning agency to consist of the five members of the city's planning board, previously appointed by the city commission and the successors in office to the members of such board. The terms of the members of the local planning agency shall be the same as the terms to which members are appointed to the comprehensive planning board. The members of the agency shall hold office during such terms, and until their successors have been appointed and have qualified. 
(Code 1986, § 15-36) 
Sec. 50-57. - Duties and responsibilities. 
    The local planning agency shall: 
(1)  Conduct the comprehensive planning program and prepare the comprehensive plan or elements or portions thereof for the city, as provided in F.S. § 163.3171 et seq. 
(2)  Coordinate the comprehensive plan or elements or portions thereof with the comprehensive plans of other appropriate local governments and the state. 
(3)  Recommend to the city commission the adoption of such comprehensive plans, zoning regulations, subdivision regulations, and other programs as may be requested by the city commission, or as may be beneficial to the direction of orderly growth of the city. 
(4)  Monitor and oversee the effectiveness and status of the comprehensive plan and recommend to the city commission such changes in the plan as may, from time to time, be required. 
(Code 1986, § 15-37) 
Sec. 50-58. - Organization, rules and procedures. 
    The local planning agency shall, upon its establishment as provided in section 50-56, select one or more of its members as officers, provide for public meetings, expenditure of available financial support and the accomplishment of its duties as provided in and authorized by such rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 15-39) 
Sec. 50-59. - Public meetings and records. 
    All meetings of the local planning agency shall be public, and all records maintained by the agency shall be deemed public records. The local planning agency shall encourage participation in its functions by the general public. 
(Code 1986, § 15-40) 
State Law reference- Public meetings and records, F.S. § 286.011. 
Sec. 50-60. - Appropriations. 
    The city commission shall appropriate funds at its discretion to the agency for expenses necessary in the conduct of its work. The agency may, in order to accomplish the purposes and activities required by the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and land development regulation act, F.S. § 163.3161 et seq., expend such sums as appropriated and other sums made available for its use from fees, gifts, state or federal grants, state or federal loans and from other sources. The acceptance of loans or grants must have the prior approval of the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 15-41) 
Chapter 54 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 70. 
State Law reference- Florida litter law, F.S. § 403.413; resource recovery and management, F.S. § 403.701 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial means all businesses. 
    Garbage means all household waste that can be placed in 32-gallon garbage containers with handles and tightfitting lid. 
    Garbage container means a garbage can of galvanized metal, or durable plastic of the type commonly sold as and for garbage containers with a maximum capacity of 32 gallons and having handles upon the sides thereof, or a bail by which it may be lifted and a tightfitting metal or plastic lid with a handle, constructed in a manner to permit the free discharge of its contents. 
    Plastic bag container means a plastic bag constructed of polyethylene or other heavy plastic material meeting the National Sanitation Foundation standards of 1.5 mils and not exceeding a 32-gallon capacity with a securing closure. 
    Residential means all residents of the city excluding all commercial accounts. 
    Roads, streets, or highway right-of-way means the entire width between the boundaries of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is opened to the use of the public for the purpose of vehicular travel. 
    Trash means all grass clippings, leaves, tree limbs, small debris, cloth, paper, cardboard, tin cans, glass and other similar materials. This includes anything that will be put out by residents except: Any limbs or shrub trimmings more than three inches in diameter and over six feet long, furniture, appliances, construction debris, concrete blocks, metal, roof shingles, stumps or trees. 
(Code 1986, § 9-32) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 54-2. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
(a)  Any person who shall cause, allow, permit or suffer any trash by such person to be placed on the roads in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be charged an appropriate penalty as listed in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1986, § 9-36) 
Sec. 54-3. - Dumping household garbage and trash in dumpsters; penalties for violation of section. 
(a)  Generally. It is unlawful for any person, other than the owner of a business where a dumpster is located, to dump household garbage and/or trash into any dumpster within the city. 
(b)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to persons who are the owners of a business inside the city limits who have a dumpster at their place of business. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person not the owner of a business where a dumpster is located, inside the city found to be dumping household garbage and/or trash into any dumpster shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1986, § 9-1) 
Sec. 54-4. - Charges and rates-Established. 
(a)  The monthly rates for garbage and trash collection for the residential and commercial customers shall be set by the city commission. 
(b)  All citizens of the city will be offered the garbage and trash collection services and will be required to pay for the service, whether they use the service or not. 
(c)  The monthly charge for the garbage and trash collection will be billed on the water, sewer and gas, and failure to pay by the 15th of the following month will subject the resident to having their utilities disconnected. 
(Code 1986, § 9-34) 
Sec. 54-5. - Same-Appeals, exemptions and exceptions. 
(a)  Any person shall have the right to appeal to the city manager the monthly rate for garbage and trash collection. 
(b)  In addition, there shall be two types of exceptions and exemptions: 
(1)  The first type of exception or exemption would consist of a resident not living in a house that has the water, sewer and gas turned on. The resident should contact the city manager about exempting him from the garbage and trash collection charge. 
(2)  The second type of exception and exemption must be based on personal income and hardship and shall be heard by a committee. 
(c)  The committee to hear exceptions and exemptions in subsection (b)(2) of this section shall be comprised of five members. The members shall be selected by the city commission. Each city commissioner shall appoint one citizen from his district to sit on the committee. The committee shall meet once a month or as needed to hear resident requests to review their financial ability to pay the garbage and trash collection rate. The committee shall make recommendations to the city manager to adjust the monthly garbage and trash collection rates based on the resident's hardship. The final decision to adjust the monthly garbage and trash collection rate shall rest with the city manager. 
(Code 1986, § 9-35) 
Secs. 54-6-54-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION 

Sec. 54-31. - Garbage. 
    All occupied dwellings, apartments, multidwelling establishments, hotels, mobile homes, motels, motor courts, campsites, recreation areas, public eating places, drive-ins, places of business, or other similar establishments, shall have a garbage collection service. Residential and commercial collection shall be as follows: 
(1)  Residential collection. A twice-weekly garbage collection service for all residential accounts shall be provided. Each resident can have up to two garbage containers. The garbage containers are to be placed at the immediate rear or side of the home. The garbage containers are not to be placed in garages, carports, or porches for pickup. 
(2)  Commercial collection. A minimum of two pickups per week service for commercial customers shall be provided. 
a.  Small commercial accounts may have two garbage containers and pickups, shall not exceed three times per week. 
b.  Commercial I accounts may have up to four garbage containers and pickups, shall not exceed three times per week. 
c.  Commercial II accounts are all commercial customers with a volume of more than four garbage containers with pickups three times a week. These accounts shall use a dumpster. 
(Code 1986, § 9-33(a)) 
Sec. 54-32. - Trash and other items. 
    Once weekly trash collection service shall be provided for all occupied dwellings, apartments, multidwelling establishments, hotels, mobile homes, motels, motor courts, campsites, recreation areas, public eating places, drive-ins, places of business, or other similar establishments. All trash is to be placed at the edge of the street or curb to be picked up by the trash collections. All trash collection shall be limited by the following: 
(1)  Limbs and shrub trimmings may not exceed three inches in diameter and may not be over six feet long. 
(2)  All leaves and grass trimmings shall be placed in a plastic bag container and the container must be tied to prevent spillage. 
(3)  Any leaves, pine straw and/or grass trimmings not placed in plastic bag containers for pickup may be left next to the curb on the property owner's property and the property owner may call the city to collect the leaves, pine straw and/or grass trimmings and the property owner shall be charged extra for the demand pickup. The charge will be based on rates set by the city commission. 
(4)  No furniture, appliances, construction debris, concrete blocks, metal, roof shingles, large limbs, stumps or trees shall be placed on curbside for regular weekly pickup. These items may be: 
a.  Hauled by the occupant; 
b.  Hauled through a contract hauler; or 
c.  Hauled based on rates set by the city commission. 
(Code 1986, § 9-33(b)) 
Sec. 54-33. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article for the occupant of any premises within the city to allow garbage, trash, filth, or other types of refuse, to accumulate upon premises occupied by such occupant. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person to place or cause to be placed any garbage, trash, filth, shells or other types of refuse, upon the property of another person. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person to deposit, discard, throw, place, or pile any trash, litter of any type, paper, garbage, cans, cartons, bottles, or other waste or discarded materials along any public street, sidewalk or right-of-way within the city; provided, however, that materials left on property by the respective property owners for collection shall be excluded from the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1986, § 9-33(c)) 
Secs. 54-34-54-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISPOSAL OF HAZARDOUS WASTES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Nuisances, § 22-26 et seq. 
State Law reference- Resource recovery and management, F.S. § 403.701 et seq.; hazardous waste defined, F.S. § 403.703(21). 

Sec. 54-56. - Responsibility of creator of waste. 
    Any person creating or generating any material or substance defined or designated as a hazardous waste shall be responsible for the transportation of such material or substance in a manner and to a facility operated in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Environmental Protection Agency. 
(Code 1986, § 9-21) 
Sec. 54-57. - City is not responsible for disposal. 
    The city shall not be responsible for the collection, transportation or disposal of materials or substances defined or designated as hazardous wastes by generators within its corporate limits or upon any property owned or controlled by the city. 
(Code 1986, § 9-22) 
Sec. 54-58. - Authority to establish enforcement procedure. 
    The city manager is hereby authorized and directed to establish such administrative rules and procedures as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 9-23) 
Chapter 58 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Restrictions on storing merchandise on public property, § 38-3; parks and recreation areas, ch. 42; parades, processions and public demonstration permits, § 66-5. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 58-1-58-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Trench excavation safety, F.S. § 553.60 et seq. 

Sec. 58-26. - Work involving tearing up and relaying streets and sidewalks; permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to do any construction or repair work involving the tearing up and relaying of any street, or part of street or to obstruct, excavate, dig up or into or any way disturb any street or part of street, pavement, curb, gutter or underground utility line, including removal of earth from ditches, or to break street curbs or sidewalks for driveways, off-street parking or any other purpose, or to lay or repair any sidewalk or any driveway or other concrete apron or approach from the paved or travelled portion of any street to adjacent property or to build, erect or plant any building, fence, wall or hedge along or near the street lines of any lot or parcel of land or to authorize the same, in the city, without first procuring from the city manager a written permit therefor. 
(Code 1986, §§ 6-3, 16-16) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 70. 
Sec. 58-27. - Application for permit; fee. 
    Any person desiring to obtain a permit for any of the purposes set forth in section 58-26 shall file a written application with the city manager setting forth specifically the nature of the work to be performed, the location thereof, the time at which the same will commence, the length of time required for completion, whether the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic will be interrupted and the name of the individual who will supervise the performance of such work. The city manager shall also obtain the agreement of the applicant to repair any damage caused to municipally owned property and shall also require such proof of financial responsibility as may be necessary to satisfy himself that the applicant will make such repairs. The application shall be accompanied by a fee as set by the city commission, which fee shall be on file at city hall. 
(Code 1986, § 16-17) 
Sec. 58-28. - Referral of application. 
    Upon receipt of the application and fee required by section 58-27, it shall be referred to the appropriate departments of the city to determine whether the proposed work will unduly interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or cause undue damage to or otherwise interfere with the delivery of utility services furnished by the city or by any private organization. Each department of the city shall cooperate with the applicant so as to coordinate the performance of the work with a minimum of damage or inconvenience. 
(Code 1986, § 16-18) 
Sec. 58-29. - Permit contents; specifications. 
    The permit provided for in this article shall be issued under such conditions as may be prescribed by the city commission, shall accurately describe the portion of the street to be affected, shall make provision for the replacement of that part of the street which is to be replaced in the same condition as when disturbed, and shall state a definite time within which the permit shall be operative. No permit shall be issued for the erection, building or planting of any building, fence, wall or hedge along or near the street lines of any lot or parcel of land unless the same shall be erected, built or planted along a line at least 30 feet from the centerline of the paved or travelled portion of the street, provided if any such street is more than 60 feet wide, then along a line of at least half the width of the street from the centerline. No permit shall be issued for laying or repairing any driveway or other concrete apron or approach from the paved or travelled portion of any street to adjacent property unless sufficient space shall be provided and marked for sidewalks or pedestrian traffic, which shall generally conform in width and direction to surrounding sidewalk or pedestrian spaces, and unless the driveway, apron or approach shall be laid not more than two inches below the top of the concrete street curb along the property, or, if none exists, then the height of the concrete street curb nearest the property shall be taken as the unit of measurement. 
(Code 1986, § 6-4) 
Sec. 58-30. - Uncovering a Y or other connection; protection with barricades and lights. 
    Any excavation made by agents or employees of the city in the streets for the purpose of uncovering a Y or other connections to the sanitary sewer system or storm drainage system of the city in order to enable plumbing contractors to make connections thereto shall be protected by barricades and lights as provided by the plumbing contractor for whom the Y or other connections to the sanitary sewer system or storm drainage system of the city are uncovered. 
(Code 1986, § 6-5) 
Sec. 58-31. - Safety precautions. 
    It shall be the duty of the city manager to require the applicant to take such safety precautions for the protection of life and property as he may deem expedient in connection with the performance of the work, including, if necessary, the use of flagmen, warning signs and barricades, as required by state regulations. 
(Code 1986, §§ 6-5, 16-19) 
State Law reference- Safety barriers required, F.S. § 336.045. 
Secs. 58-32-58-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 58-51. - Building materials on thoroughfares; time allowed to remain. 
    In and about the construction, reconstruction, repair or alteration of any building, when it shall become necessary that any lumber, brick, rock, steel or other building material, or any such material or any other articles to be used in such construction or removed from such building shall be placed upon any sidewalk, street or other public thoroughfare in the city, the same shall be removed therefrom within 24 hours from the time it shall be placed there. 
(Code 1986, § 6-6) 
Sec. 58-52. - Permit for temporary storage. 
    In and about any construction, reconstruction, repair or alteration of any building in the city, when it shall appear to be impractical to fully comply with the provisions of section 58-51, the chief of police shall be authorized to give permission in writing to stake out or fence off a certain portion or part of any sidewalk or street abutting or adjoining such building which may be used for the temporary storage of material to be used thereon or therein. 
(Code 1986, § 6-7) 
Sec. 58-53. - Disrupting use of thoroughfare; time for restoring to use. 
    When, in the construction, reconstruction, repair or alteration of any building in the city, it shall become necessary, proper or expedient to repair, alter or change any part of any sidewalk or street abutting or adjoining such building, all necessary construction or repairs to such sidewalk or street shall be completed and the sidewalk or street restored to public use within five days from the time any portion of such sidewalk or street is blockaded, disrupted, torn up or otherwise rendered unfit for use by the public. 
(Code 1986, § 6-8) 
Sec. 58-54. - Walls, shelters or sheds-Erection for protection of pedestrians. 
    Where the work involved shall adjoin or abut any street or sidewalk and the necessary construction, reconstruction, repairs or alterations, or any part of it shall exceed the height of 12 feet, it shall be necessary to erect a wall between the construction and the public sidewalk or street adjoining or abutting the same, or to erect a shelter or shed over such sidewalk or street abutting the same of sufficient proportions, height, width, thickness and strength to fully protect pedestrians walking over or along such sidewalk or street from any falling articles or debris. 
(Code 1986, § 16-32) 
Sec. 58-55. - Same-Time of erection. 
    The protective wall, shelter or shed mentioned in section 58-54 shall be erected at the time of or before such necessary construction, reconstruction, alteration or repair shall reach a height of 12 feet. 
(Code 1986, § 16-34) 
Secs. 58-56-58-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - POLES AND WIRES 

Sec. 58-76. - Placing; supervision; removal by city official. 
    It shall be the duty of the city manager to so direct the placing of poles, wires, cables and other apparatus in the streets, alleys and public places of the city that the same shall cause as little obstruction as possible, either to public travel on such thoroughfares or to the private use and enjoyment of adjacent property. It shall also be his duty, and he shall have authority, to compel the removal of unsafe or superfluous poles or apparatus. 
(Code 1986, § 6-53) 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 70. 
Sec. 58-77. - Notice to remove; penalty; illegal erection. 
    Any person owning and using any such poles or apparatus who shall fail or refuse, after five days' notice from the city manager, to remove any such poles or apparatus deemed by him unsuitable, unsafe or improperly located, or the location of which he shall require to be changed shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-14. The erection or use of any poles rejected or condemned by the city manager shall subject the offender, upon conviction, to a like penalty. 
(Code 1986, § 6-54) 
Sec. 58-78. - Utility; assigning zones; use by city. 
    On any pole of any electric light, power, telephone, cable television or telegraph company used jointly by two or more such companies, each company shall be allotted a special zone, and shall confine its wires to that zone. Spaces shall be measured from the tops of poles downward, and a suitable zone on every pole shall at all times be reserved from the free use of the city in stringing its fire alarm or police wires. 
(Code 1986, § 6-55) 
Sec. 58-79. - Dead wires; removal; detaching telephone wires. 
    The city manager shall cause all wires, except telephone wires, that have not been used for 30 days, and which are known as dead wires, to be removed at once at the expense of the owners of such wires. All dead wires of telephone companies shall be detached from the buildings with which they have been connected. 
(Code 1986, § 6-56) 
Sec. 58-80. - Temporary removal of wires; city manager's authority. 
    Whenever builders or persons engaged in repairing, painting, etc., find it necessary to remove wires from buildings in accomplishing their work, the owner of such building or the contractor engaged thereon shall serve the city manager with written notice 24 hours before such contemplated work is begun, and the city engineer shall have the authority in his discretion to direct the owners of such wires to remove the wires. 
(Code 1986, § 6-57) 
Sec. 58-81. - Violations; shutting off current. 
    In any case of failure to comply with this article, the city manager shall have authority, after due notice, to cut out lights or current in any locality concerned and to enforce discontinuance of the same until such requirements are complied with. 
(Code 1986, § 6-58) 
Secs. 58-82-58-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 58-101-58-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CEMETERY 

Sec. 58-111. - Installation of vaults in city-owned cemeteries. 
(a)  Generally. The tops of all vaults installed within city-owned cemeteries located in the city shall be at least eight inches below ground level. 
(b)  Penalty for violation of section. Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1986, § 16-1) 
Chapter 62 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal finance and taxation, F.S. § 166.201 et seq.; ad valorem taxes, F.S. § 166.211; ad valorem taxation generally, F.S. ch. 192 et seq.; tax appraisals and collections performed by county, F.S. § 193.116. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 62-1-62-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INSURANCE PREMIUM TAX 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 62-26-62-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CASUALTY INSURANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Excise tax on casualty insurance premiums authorized, F.S. § 185.08. 

Sec. 62-36. - Levied. 
    In addition to any other lawful license or excise tax now levied by the city, an excise or license tax is assessed and imposed on every insurance company, corporation or other insurer now engaged in or carrying on, or who shall hereafter engage in or carry on, the business of casualty insuring as shown by the records of the state department of insurance, in the amount of 0.85 percent of the gross amount of receipts of premiums from policyholders on all premiums collected on casualty insurance policies covering property within the city. 
(Code 1986, § 17-1) 
Sec. 62-37. - Payment and collection. 
    The excise or license tax provided for in this division shall be payable and collected in the manner provided for by F.S. ch. 185. 
(Code 1986, § 17-2) 
Sec. 62-38. - Proceeds placed in police officers' pension fund. 
    All moneys received by the city under the provisions of sections 62-36 and 62-37 shall be paid immediately into its pension fund for police officers. 
(Code 1986, § 17-3) 
Secs. 62-39-62-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROPERTY INSURANCE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Excise tax authorized, F.S. § 175.101. 

Sec. 62-51. - Levied. 
    In addition to any other lawful license or excise tax now levied by the city, an excise or license tax is assessed and imposed on every insurance company, corporation or other insurer now engaged in or carrying on, or who shall hereafter engage in or carry on, the business of property insurance, as shown by the records of the state department of insurance, an excise or license tax in addition to any lawful license or excise tax now levied by each of the municipalities respectively, amounting to 1.85 percent of the gross amount of receipts of premiums from policyholders on all premiums collected on property insurance policies covering property within the city, respectively. In the case of multiple peril policies with a single premium for both the property and casualty coverages in such policies, 70 percent of such premium shall be used as the basis for the 1.85-percent tax. 
(Code 1986, § 17-4) 
Sec. 62-52. - Collection and payment. 
    All moneys derived from the tax imposed by section 62-51 shall be payable and collected in the manner provided in F.S. ch. 175, providing for the creation and administration of a firefighters' pension trust fund. 
(Code 1986, § 17-5) 
Sec. 62-53. - Proceeds placed in firefighters' relief and pension fund. 
    All moneys derived from the tax imposed by section 62-51 will hereby be appropriated to the firefighters' relief and pension fund of the city, which shall be administered in accordance with the provisions of F.S. ch. 175. 
(Code 1986, § 17-6) 
Secs. 62-54-62-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC SERVICE TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities, ch. 70. 
State Law reference- Municipal levy of public service tax, F.S. § 166.231. 

Sec. 62-76. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any purchaser willfully failing or refusing to pay the hereby imposed tax where the seller has not elected to assume and pay such tax, and any seller violating the provisions of this article, or any officer, agent, or employee of any seller violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to punishment for a second degree misdemeanor, a fine of $500.00 and/or 30 days in jail. 
(Code 1986, § 17-27) 
Sec. 62-77. - Levied. 
    There is hereby levied by the city on each and every purchase in the city of electricity, gas (natural or manufactured, including liquefied petroleum gas), and water service a tax equal to the percentage of the charge made by the seller of such electricity, gas, and water service to the consumer, as set out in section 62-78, which tax shall, in every case, be paid by the purchaser, for the use of the city, to the seller of such electricity, gas and water service at the time of paying the charge of such service, but not less often than monthly. 
(Code 1986, § 17-21) 
Sec. 62-78. - Amounts. 
(a)  The tax hereby levied on the purchases of electricity, gas and water services shall be ten percent of the charge made by the seller of such service using for billing purposes any present or future domestic, residential or commercial rate schedule; that is, ten percent of the charge made by the seller of such electricity, gas and water service when used for domestic, residential or commercial purposes and so rated by the seller. 
(b)  The tax hereby levied on the purchase of electricity, gas, and water services shall be ten percent on the charge made by the seller thereof using for billing purposes any present or future industrial lighting or industrial power rate schedule, that is, ten percent of the charge made by the seller of such electricity and gas when used for industrial purposes and so rated by the seller. 
(Code 1986, § 17-22) 
Sec. 62-79. - Collection; collection periods; discontinuing service for nonpayment. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every seller of electricity, gas (natural or manufactured, including liquefied petroleum gas), and water service to collect from the purchaser, for the use of the city, the tax hereby levied, at the time of collecting the selling price charged for each transaction, and to report and pay over, on or before the last day of each calendar month, unto the city clerk, all such taxes levied and collected during the preceding calendar month. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any seller to collect the price of any sale of electricity, gas (natural gas or manufactured, including liquefied petroleum gas), and water service, without at the same time collecting the tax hereby levied in respect to such sales, unless such seller shall elect to assume and pay such tax without collecting the same for the purchaser. Any seller failing to collect such tax at the time of collecting the price of any sale, where the seller has not elected to assume and pay such tax, shall be liable to the city for the amount of such tax in like manner, as if the same had been actually paid to the seller, and the city commission shall cause to be brought all suits and actions and to take all proceedings in the name of the city as may be necessary for the recovery of such tax; provided, however, that the seller shall not be liable for the payment of such tax upon uncollected bills. 
(c)  If any purchaser shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay the seller, the seller's charge, and the tax hereby imposed and as hereby required on account of the sale for which such charge is made, or either, the seller shall have and is hereby vested with right, power and authority immediately to discontinue further service to such purchaser until the tax, and the seller's bill shall have been paid in full. 
(Code 1986, § 17-23) 
Sec. 62-80. - Records; information; filing; open for inspection. 
(a)  Each and every seller of electricity, gas (natural or manufactured, including liquefied petroleum gas), and water service shall keep complete records showing all sales in the city of such commodities or service, which records shall show the price charged upon each sale, the date of the sale, and the date of payment of the sale, and such records shall be kept open for inspection by the authorized agents of the city during business hours on all business days, and such duly authorized agents of the city shall have the right, power and authority to make such transcripts thereof during such times as they may desire. 
(b)  In addition to making such records available, every seller is hereby required to execute and file, not later than the last day of each month, at the office of the city clerk, a sworn statement on a form prescribed by the city clerk setting forth the amount of such tax to which the city became entitled under the provisions of this article on account of bills paid by purchasers during the preceding fiscal month, and contemporaneously with the filing of such statement shall pay the amount of tax to which the city is entitled to the city clerk, to be deposited to the credit of such funds of the city to be utilized for such purposes as the city commission may prescribe by ordinance or resolution. 
(Code 1986, § 17-24) 
Sec. 62-81. - Computing for monthly bill collection periods. 
    In all cases where the seller of electricity, gas (natural or manufactured, including liquefied petroleum gas), and water service collects the price at monthly periods, the tax hereby levied may be computed on the aggregate amount of purchases during such period, provided that the amount of tax to be collected shall be the nearest whole cent to the amount computed. 
(Code 1986, § 17-25) 
Sec. 62-82. - Purchases deemed consummated. 
    For the purpose of this article a purchase shall be determined to be made in the city in every instance where electricity, gas (natural or manufactured, including liquefied petroleum gas), and water service is delivered to a purchaser residing within the limits of the city, regardless of whether the residence or business or headquarters of the seller is located within the limits of the city or elsewhere. The tax hereby levied on all purchases of electricity, gas or water shall apply to all purchases of electricity, gas or water, whether delivered through the medium of a meter or other measuring device, or otherwise to premises located in the city. 
(Code 1986, § 17-26) 
Secs. 62-83-62-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to levy occupational license tax, F.S. § 205.042; conditions for levy, F.S. § 205.043. 

Sec. 62-106. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Merchandise means any goods, wares or commodities bought or sold in the usual course of trade. 
    Merchant means any person engaged in the business of selling merchandise at retail or wholesale. 
    Sale means the transfer of ownership, title or possession, transfer, exchange or barter, whether conditional or otherwise, for a consideration. 
(Ord. No. 840, § II(17-41), 9-26-95; Ord. No. 864, § 2, 5-4-99) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 62-107. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on, conduct or engage in any business, trade, occupation or profession, or do any other thing mentioned in the schedule in section 62-111 within the city, without having first paid the occupational tax or having obtained the license required, and any person giving information required by this article that is false or otherwise violating this article shall be subject to the penalty set out in section 1-14. 
    Additionally, any person who conducts or engages in any business, trade, occupation, or profession who does not pay the required occupational tax and/or obtain the license required within 150 days after the initial notice of tax due shall be subject to having utilities associated with the business, trade, occupation, or profession disconnected until such time as the occupational tax is paid and/or the license is acquired. 
(Code 1986, § 17-55(a); Ord. No. 840, § II(17-54), 9-26-95; Ord. No. 864, § 2, 5-4-99) 
Sec. 62-108. - Additional penalty. 
    Any person who engages in or manages any business, occupation, or profession without first having obtained an occupational license shall be subject to a penalty of 25 percent of the license determined to be due, in addition to any other penalty provided for in this article. 
(Code 1986, § 17-55(b); Ord. No. 864, § 2, 5-4-99) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.053(2). 
Sec. 62-109. - Civil actions and penalties for violation of article. 
    Any person who engages in any business, occupation, or profession covered by this article, who does not pay the required occupational license tax within 150 days after the initial notice of tax due, and who does not obtain the required occupational license is subject to civil actions and penalties, including court costs, reasonable attorneys' fees, additional administrative costs incurred as a result of collection efforts, and a penalty of up to $250.00. 
(Ord. No. 864, § 2, 5-4-99) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.053(3). 
Sec. 62-110. - Levied. 
    The occupational license tax is levied for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business, profession, or occupation within the city on: 
(1)  Any person who maintains a permanent business location or branch office within the city, for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business within the city. 
(2)  Any person who maintains a permanent business location or branch office within the city, for the privilege of engaging in or managing any profession or occupation within the city. 
(3)  Any person who does not qualify under subsection (1) or subsection (2) of this section and who transacts any business or engages in any occupation or profession in interstate commerce, if the license tax is not prohibited by section 8 of Article I of the United States Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 864, § 2, 5-4-99) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.042. 
Sec. 62-111. - License schedule. 
    A license tax is hereby levied upon and shall be collected from every person exercising the privilege of carrying on or engaging in the businesses, professions or occupations specifically enumerated in this section in the amounts as fixed in this section. Each such amount, unless otherwise specifically stated, is the amount payable as a license tax for exercising such privilege or carrying on or engaging in such business, profession or occupation mentioned for each. No person shall carry on or engage in any business, occupation or profession prescribed and designated in this section without having first paid the license tax as provided or complied with the terms as follows: 
Agency/broker (insurance licenses separately): (Agency charged one fee depending on number of agents/brokers). Agency/broker shall include, but not be limited to, real estate agents or brokers, insurance agents or companies, mortgage brokers. Insurance shall include, but not be limited to, fire, casualty, health, life. 
0-3 agents/brokers\$100.00 
4-6 agents/brokers\162.50 
7 or more agents/brokers\225.00 
Automobiles/other vehicle activity: 
Dealers/shops\300.00 
Mobile homes\200.00 
Farm and tractor\200.00 
Used car only\100.00 
Motorcycle\50.00 
Vehicle leasing\50.00 
Miscellaneous\50.00 
Buses/terminals/ticket office/station\100.00 
Banking and lending institutions: 
Commercial banks\300.00 
Finance companies\225.00 
Bail bondsman\200.00 
Canvassers or solicitors \50.00 
Contractors: 
General contractors\300.00 
Bricklayer\75.00 
Painters\75.00 
Paper hangers\75.00 
Pipefitters\75.00 
Plasterers\75.00 
Plumbers\75.00 
Roofers\75.00 
Miscellaneous\75.00 
Entertainment/amusement: 
Amusement park\75.00 
Bowling alley\75.00 
Circuses, traveling shows, etc.\75.00 
Pool halls\75.00 
Lounge\75.00 
Game rooms\75.00 
Bingo Parlors\75.00 
Miscellaneous\75.00 
Fortuneteller and clairvoyant \50.00 
Gas and oil dealers: 
Gas-wholesale dealers\300.00 
Gasoline filling stations\100.00 
Liquid petroleum gas\200.00 
Junk dealers/thrift shops \150.00 
Manufacturers: 
Covered square footage only: 
1-10,000 square feet\300.00 
10,001-30,000 square feet\400.00 
30,001-40,000 square feet\500.00 
40,001-50,000 square feet\600.00 
Merchants: 
Square footage from 0-5,000\75.00 
Square footage from 5,001-10,000\150.00 
Square footage from 10,001-20,000\300.00 
Square footage from 20,001-40,000\400.00 
Square footage over 40,001\500.00 
Miscellaneous business or unclassified \100.00 
Professional: (Business charged one fee depending on number of professionals) Professionals shall include, but not be limited to, certified public accountants, acupuncturist, appraiser, architect, attorney, chiropractor, dentist, doctor, draftsman, engineer, funeral director/embalmers, masseurs, midwife, optometrist, physical therapist, psychiatrist, psychologist, surveyor, veterinarian. 
0-2 professionals\$100.00 
3-4 professionals\$200.00 
5 or more professionals\$300.00 
Rental units: 
Apartments, each\5.00 
Minimum\25.00 
Hotels/motels, each room\5.00 
Minimum\50.00 
Mobile home parks, each space\5.00 
Minimum\25.00 
Overnight park, each space\5.00 
Minimum\25.00 
Restaurants: 
Each seat\1.00 
Minimum\25.00 
Drive through/drive up, additional\100.00 
Schools: 
1-20 students\25.00 
21-50 students\50.00 
51-100 students\75.00 
101 and over, each students\100.00 
Schools include dance, preschools, day care, barber, beautician, martial arts, nursery, private education and music. 
Services \50.00 
Includes but is not limited to dry cleaners, laundry, barber/beauty salon, tanning salons, repairs not otherwise classified, printers and miscellaneous service-oriented business. 
Vehicle repair/service: 
0-3 bays\50.00 
Each additional bay\5.00 
Vending machines: 
Small machines (gum, newspaper, etc.)\2.50 
Drink, prize, snack, sandwich\5.00 
Video, rides, music, photo and others not specifically mentioned\10.00 
This is a flat fee for each machine regardless of the type machine. This fee is to be paid by the owner of the machine. 
Warehouse/storage: \25.00 
Plus, per 1,000 covered square feet or fraction thereof\1.00 
Utility: 
Electric companies\300.00 
Telephone\300.00 
Others\300.00 
(Ord. No. 840, § II(17-51), 9-26-95; Ord. No. 864, § 2, 5-4-99) 
Sec. 62-112. - Mandatory compliance. 
    No person shall exercise any of the privileges nor carry on or engage in or conduct any of the businesses, occupations or professions specifically enumerated in this article without paying a license tax at the time and in the amount provided in this article or fail to make reports to the city clerk as provided or violate any other provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 840, § II(17-42), 9-26-95; Ord. No. 864, § 2, 5-4-99) 
Sec. 62-113. - Separate license for each location. 
    If any person operates any of the businesses provided for in this article at more than one location, each location shall be considered a separate business and a separate license therefor is required unless otherwise provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 840, § II(17-43), 9-26-95; Ord. No. 864, § 2, 5-4-99) 
Sec. 62-114. - Issuance; records. 
(a)  All licenses shall be made out and issued by the city clerk or deputy upon payment of the occupational license tax, and shall be signed by him. 
(b)  A list of all such licenses shall be preserved, showing the date of issuance, the name of the party to whom issued, the number of the license and the nature of the business or occupation licensed. 
(Ord. No. 840, § II(17-44), 9-26-95; Ord. No. 864, § 2, 5-4-99) 
Sec. 62-115. - License year. 
(a)  All occupational taxes or licenses under this article shall apply per annum, except as otherwise provided. 
(b)  All licenses sold by August 1 of each year are due and payable on or before September 30 of each year, and expire on September 30 of the succeeding year. If September 30 falls on a weekend or holiday, the tax is due and payable on or before the first working day following September 30. 
(c)  Any person who shall commence any business, trade, occupation, or profession or any other thing mentioned in the schedule for which a license per annum is required may purchase a license for the remainder of the license year if commencing after April 1 at one-half the price required to be paid per annum, and such licenses shall expire on September 30. 
(Code 1986, § 17-50; Ord. No. 840, § II(17-45), 9-26-95; Ord. No. 864, § 2, 5-4-99) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.053. 
Sec. 62-116. - Delinquent licenses. 
    All occupational taxes or licenses shall be paid immediately when due, as provided in section 62-115. Those licenses not renewed when due and payable shall be considered delinquent and subject to a delinquency penalty of ten percent for the month of October, plus an additional five percent penalty for each month of delinquency thereafter until paid; provided, however, that the total delinquency penalty shall not exceed 25 percent of the occupational license fee for the delinquent establishment. 
(Code 1986, § 17-52; Ord. No. 840, § II(17-46), 9-26-95; Ord. No. 864, § 2, 5-4-99) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.053(1). 
Sec. 62-117. - Transfer of license. 
    Any occupational license may be transferred to a new owner when there is a bona fide sale of the business upon payment of a transfer fee of up to ten percent of the annual license tax, but not less than $3.00 nor more than $25.00 and presentation of evidence of the sale and the original license. Upon written request and presentation of the original license, any occupational license may be transferred from one location to another location in the same municipality upon payment of a transfer fee of up to ten percent of the annual license tax, but not less than $3.00 nor more than $25.00. 
(Code 1986, § 17-51; Ord. No. 840, § II(17-47), 9-26-95; Ord. No. 864, § 2, 5-4-99) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.043(2), (3). 
Sec. 62-118. - Tax not in lieu of other taxes. 
    License taxes imposed and collected by this article shall not be construed to exempt from other forms of taxation property used in the licensed business or occupation. 
(Ord. No. 840, § II(17-48), 9-26-95; Ord. No. 864, § 2, 5-4-99) 
Sec. 62-119. - Duty of corporation officers and agents. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of all officers and agents of all corporations to see that all corporations comply with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  All officers or agents of any corporation required by this article to be licensed which shall carry on or conduct any business without having made the payment and otherwise complied with the terms of this article shall be subject to the same penalty or penalties imposed upon persons violating the provisions of this article. 
(c)  The members of any firm who fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of this article shall likewise be subject to the same penalty or penalties imposed upon persons violating the provisions hereof. 
(d)  In the absence of any owner, proprietor, manager or agent, any person operating or in charge of any business being conducted without the requirements of this article having been complied with shall be subject to the same penalty or penalties imposed upon persons violating provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 840, § II(17-49), 9-26-95; Ord. No. 864, § 2, 5-4-99) 
Sec. 62-120. - Manufacturer selling from place of manufacture. 
(a)  A manufacturer engaged in business in this city not otherwise designated as being specifically subject to a merchant's license (see definition of "merchant" in section 62-106) may, without a merchant's license, sell at the place of manufacture the goods, wares and merchandise manufactured by him at such place of manufacture. 
(b)  When such manufacturer sells at or from a different place or store other than the place of manufacture, he shall be considered a merchant and his license shall be based on sales made from such other different place or store. 
(Ord. No. 840, § II(17-50), 9-26-95; Ord. No. 864, § 2, 5-4-99) 
Sec. 62-121. - Occupations falling into more than one classification. 
    When any occupation, business, profession or privilege falls into more than one of the classifications contained in section 62-120, such occupation, business, profession or privilege shall be required to comply with the license required of each such classification or privilege unless otherwise stated by such classification. 
(Ord. No. 840, § II(17-52), 9-26-95; Ord. No. 864, § 2, 5-4-99) 
Sec. 62-122. - Revocation; cancellation. 
    In addition to any other penalties provided for in this article, and in addition to any other remedy provided for the enforcement of this article, any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to having his license revoked and canceled. Upon the conviction of any person of the violation of any of the terms or provisions of this article, the city clerk may thereupon, in his discretion, revoke and cancel the license of such person so convicted, and the renewal or reissuance of such license prior to the end of the fiscal year in which issued shall be in the discretion of and by action of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 840, § II(17-53), 9-26-95; Ord. No. 864, § 2, 5-4-99) 
Secs. 62-123-62-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE TAX[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Taxation on telecommunications service, F.S. § 166.231(9)(a)2. 

Sec. 62-141. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any purchaser willfully failing or refusing to pay the hereby imposed tax, where the seller has not elected to assume and pay such tax, and any seller violating the provisions of this article, or any officer, agent, or employee of any seller violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1986, § 17-66) 
Sec. 62-142. - Levied; amount. 
    There is hereby levied by the city on each and every purchase of telecommunication services within the city, which originates and terminates in this state, a tax at a rate of seven percent of the total charge for such service, excluding telephone charges collected on site, access charges, and any customer access line charges paid to the local telephone company, (the seller). This tax shall, in every case, be paid by the purchaser, for the use of the city, to the seller of the telecommunication services at the time of paying the charge thereof, but not less often than monthly. 
(Code 1986, § 17-61) 
Sec. 62-143. - Collection; reporting; discontinuance of service for nonpayment. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the seller of telecommunications services to collect from the purchaser, for the use of the city, the tax hereby levied, at the time of collecting the selling price charged for each transaction, and to report and pay over, on or before the last day of each calendar month, unto the city clerk, all such taxes levied and collected during the preceding calendar month. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the seller to collect the price of any sale of telecommunication services without, at the same time, collecting the tax hereby levied in respect to such sale, unless the seller shall elect to assume and pay such tax without collecting the tax from the purchaser. Any seller failing to collect such tax at the time of collecting the price of any sale, where the seller has not elected to assume and pay such tax, shall be liable to the city for the amount of such tax in like manner as if the same had been actually paid to the seller. The city commission shall cause to be brought all suits and actions to take all proceedings in the name of the city as may be necessary for the recovery of such tax; provided, however, that the seller shall not be liable for the payment of such tax upon uncollected bills. 
(c)  If any purchaser shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay to the seller, the seller's charge, and the tax hereby imposed and as hereby required on account of the sale for which such charge is made, or either, the seller shall have and is hereby vested with the right, power and authority immediately to discontinue further service to such purchaser until the tax and the seller's bill shall have been paid in full. 
(Code 1986, § 17-62) 
Sec. 62-144. - Recordkeeping; open to public inspection; sworn statement of tax amounts. 
(a)  Each and every seller of telecommunication services shall keep complete records showing all sales in the city of such services, which records shall show the price charged upon each sale, the date of the sale, and the date of payment. Such records shall be kept open for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city during business hours on all business days, and the duly authorized agents of the city shall have the right, power and authority to make transcripts during such times as they may desire. 
(b)  In addition to making such records available, every seller is hereby required to execute and file, not later than the last day of each month, at the office of the city clerk, a sworn statement on a form prescribed by the city clerk setting forth the amount of such tax to which the city became entitled under the provisions of this article on account of bills paid by purchasers during the preceding fiscal month, and contemporaneously with the filing of such statement shall pay the amount of such tax to which the city is entitled to the city clerk to be deposited to the credit of such funds of the city to be utilized for such purposes as the city commission may prescribe by ordinance or resolution. 
(Code 1986, § 17-63) 
Sec. 62-145. - Tax levied only on certain purchases. 
    The tax hereby levied on telecommunication services is levied only upon purchases within the municipalities of telecommunications service which originates and terminates in this state at a rate not to exceed seven percent of the total charge for such service, excluding public telephone charges collected on the site, access charges, and any customer access line charges paid to a local telephone company. A purchase is within the city if the communication originates or terminates within the city and is billed to a purchaser, telephone or telephone number, or telecommunication number or device within the city. 
(Code 1986, § 17-64) 
Sec. 62-146. - Purchases deemed consummated. 
    For the purpose of this article, a purchase shall be determined to be made in the city in every instance where the telecommunication service is delivered to a purchaser residing within the limits of the city, regardless of whether the residence or business or headquarters of the seller be located within the limits of the city or elsewhere. 
(Code 1986, § 17-65) 
Sec. 62-147. - Appropriation of proceeds of tax to general fund. 
    The proceeds of the tax hereby levied are hereby appropriated to the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 17-67) 
Secs. 62-148-62-166. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 

Sec. 62-167. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform licensing regulations to ensure sexually oriented businesses are operated by persons and in a manner that prevents casual high-risk sexual activity, prostitution, drug use, other criminal activity, or logistical difficulties and risks of physical endangerment to police officers responsible for policing such businesses. 
(b)  Intent. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access to sexually oriented entertainment. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 2, 11-5-13) 
Sec. 62-168. - Reserved. 
Sec. 62-169. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows: 
    Applicant. Any person, including any spouse of an individual owner, or any other entity required to submit any documentation and/or receive any approvals for operating sexually oriented business or working within a sexually oriented business within the City of Marianna. 
    Bath house, sexually oriented. An enterprise where a portion of its business is offering baths and/or showers with other persons present who are nude or displaying specified anatomical areas. 
    Body painting studio, sexually oriented. An establishment where a portion of its business is the application of paint or other substance to or on the human body by any means of application, technique or process when the subject's body displays for the patron's view specified anatomical areas. 
    Business, sexually oriented. Any of the following businesses: sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub; sexually oriented entertainment; sexually oriented motion picture theater; sexually oriented video viewing kiosk, booth or arcade; sexually oriented encounter center; sexually oriented media store; sexually oriented bathhouse; sexually oriented massage business; sexually oriented retail establishment; sexually oriented body painting studio; sexually oriented lingerie or swimwear modeling studio; sexually oriented modeling/photography studio; sexually oriented escort business; or any other such business establishment whose purpose is offering sexually oriented entertainment, media or merchandise. Signs, advertisements or an establishment name including verbal or pictorial allusions to sexual stimulation or gratification or by references to "adult," "XXX" or similar terms, shall be considered evidence that the establishment holds itself out to the public as a sexually oriented business. Each such business is considered a separate land use for purposes of these regulations. For the purpose of this article, a business is not a sexually oriented business if its inventory, square footage, and product value devoted to sexually oriented merchandise (including media) is ten percent or less and it offers no onsite sexually oriented entertainment. 
    Business license, sexually oriented. Any license applied for under the City of Marianna Code of Ordinances section 62 article VI, establishing licensing requirements for sexually oriented businesses. 
    Cabaret or nightclub, sexually oriented. A building or portion of a building which provides or allows the provision of live sexually oriented entertainment to its customers or which holds itself out to the public as an establishment where sexually oriented entertainment is available, but such definition shall not include any sexually oriented use prohibited by this section. Signs, advertisements or an establishment name including verbal or pictorial allusions to sexual stimulation or gratification or by references to "adult entertainment," "strippers," "showgirls," "exotic dancers," "gentleman's club," "XXX" or similar terms, shall be considered evidence that the establishment holds itself out to the public as a sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub. 
    Chief of police. The chief of police for the City of Marianna, Florida, or a designated agent. 
    Child care facility. A facility providing supervision for children 13 years of age or younger that are not residents at that facility and care is given in return for compensation. 
    Customer. A person who: 
(1)  Enters a business in return for the payment of an admission fee or any other form of consideration or gratuity; 
(2)  Enters a business and purchases, rents, or otherwise partakes of any material, merchandise, goods, entertainment, or other services offered therein; or 
(3)  Enters a business other than as an employee, vendor, service person, or delivery person. 
    Display publically. The act of exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting, or in any fashion displaying in any location, whether public or private, an item or activity in such a manner that it may be readily seen and its content or character distinguished by normal unaided vision from a street, highway, or public sidewalk, or from the property of others or from any portion of the premises where items and materials other than sexually oriented media or merchandise are offered for sale or rent to the public. 
    Educational facility. A public or private kindergarten, primary, secondary or postsecondary educational facility offering instruction in the branches of learning and study required to be taught by the Florida Department of Education; and such federally-funded educational programs for preschool children as the Head Start Program. 
    Employee. Any person who renders any service whatsoever for or to the customers of an establishment subject to this article or who works in or about an establishment subject to this article. 
    Encounter center, sexually oriented. A business or enterprise that offers physical contact between two or more persons when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity, for the purpose of engaging in specified sexually activity or touching specified anatomical areas, but not including a sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub. 
    Entertainer, sexually oriented. Any person paid by some form of remuneration to provide entertainment to customers at a sexually oriented business; entertainment may consist of dancing, singing, modeling, acting, other forms of performing, or individual conversations with customers whereby the entertainer is paid any form of remuneration directly or indirectly for such conversations. 
    Entertainment, sexually oriented. Any of the following activities, when performed by a sexually oriented entertainer at a sexually oriented business: dancing, singing, talking, touching, modeling (including lingerie or photographic), gymnastics, acting, other forms of performing, or individual conversations with customers. 
    Escort, sexually oriented. A person who offers to provide, for some form of remuneration, acts of sexually oriented entertainment or conduct to a client. 
    Escort business, sexually oriented. A business or person that advertises or solicits in any way to prospective clients for the provision of sexually oriented escorts that will provide sexually oriented entertainment, companionship or conduct or employs or contracts with a sexually oriented escort, or refers or provides to a client a sexually oriented escort. 
    Floor area, gross. The total area of the building accessible or visible to a person, including showrooms, theaters including stage area, service areas (but not including restrooms), behind-counter areas, areas used for storage of sexually oriented media or merchandise, and aisles, hallways, and entryways serving such areas. 
    Frequently. Two or more times per month. 
    Licensee. Anyone issued a license under this article sexually oriented business licensing. 
    Lingerie or swimwear modeling studio, sexually oriented. An establishment or business that provides the services of live models modeling lingerie, bathing suits, or similar wear to individuals, couples, or small groups. 
    Manager. Any person designated by the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to be responsible for the operation of such business at a particular location at a particular time; when the owner, proprietor, or other principal in the business is present, such person may be considered the manager. 
    Massage. The act of touching, stroking, kneading, stretching, friction, percussion, and vibration, and includes holding, positioning, causing movement of the soft tissues and applying manual touch and pressure to the body. 
    Massage business, sexually oriented. Any business in which massages are offered as one of the business's services by a person who is not licensed as a massage therapist under the F.S. tit. 3, ch. 455: Massage Therapy; or any business which provides massage for the purpose of sexual stimulation. 
    Media. Anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, film, videotape or videotape production, or pictorial representation, or any electrical or electronic reproduction of anything that is or may be used as a means of communication. Media includes but shall not necessarily be limited to books, newspapers, magazines, movies, videos, sound recordings, CD-ROMs, DVDs, other magnetic media, and undeveloped pictures. 
    Media, sexually oriented. Media which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Media store sexually oriented. A store with sexually oriented media for sale and/or rent, and to which any of the following applies: 
(1)  The sale and/or rental of sexually oriented media, whether alone or in conjunction with the sale and/or rental of sexually oriented merchandise, constitutes a principal business of the establishment, taking into consideration any of the following: 
a.  The value realized from the sale and/or rental of sexually oriented media and/or merchandise; 
b.  The floor area devoted to sexually oriented media and/or sexually oriented merchandise; or 
c.  The amount of inventory constituting sexually oriented media and/or sexually oriented merchandise. 
(2)  The business advertises or holds itself out in any forum as a "XXX," "adult" or "sexually oriented" media and/or merchandise business. 
    Merchandise, sexually oriented. This term includes any of the following categories of merchandise: lingerie presented in combination with other merchandise contained within this definition; leather goods marketed or presented in a context to suggest their use for sadomasochistic practices; condoms or sexual lubricants presented in combination with other merchandise contained within this definition; sexually oriented novelties; and sexually oriented media which is separately defined in this section. 
    Modeling/photography studio, sexually oriented. Any place where a person who appears nude or semi-nude or in a state of nudity or semi-nudity and is to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. A sexually oriented modeling/photography studio does not include educational classes in conjunction with a private or public college, junior college, or university or that of an individual artist studio established solely for conduct of the artist. 
    Motel, sexually oriented. A hotel, motel, or similar commercial lodging establishment that: 
(1)  Provides as its business accommodations to the public for any form of consideration for the purpose of viewing sexually oriented media or sexually oriented entertainment. This definition does not include lodging facilities that offer sexually oriented media via cable or satellite services on room televisions as ancillary television programming; 
(2)  Is marketed as or offered as "adult," "XXX," "couples," or "sexually oriented" lodging facility; or 
(3)  Offers a sleeping room for a period of less than ten hours or allows a tenant or occupant to rent the room for a period of time of less than ten hours or allows the tenant to have a weekly or monthly rental of the room for the purposes of providing sexually oriented entertainment. 
    Motion picture theater, sexually oriented. An establishment where, for any form of consideration, sexually oriented media are frequently shown that are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" or that is marketed as or offered as "adult," "XXX," or sexually oriented. Frequently shown media as characterized herein do not include sexually oriented speech and expressions that take place inside the context of some larger form of expression. This definition does not include any type of facility that would meet the definition of a sexually oriented video viewing kiosk, booth or arcade. 
    Municipal development director. The municipal development director of the City of Marianna, Florida, or a designated agent. 
    Novelties, sexually oriented. Instruments, devices, toys, or paraphernalia either designed as representations of human genital organs or female breasts or designed or marketed primarily for use in sexually oriented stimulation of specified anatomical areas. 
    Nudity or state of nudity. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. See, also, Semi-nude . 
    Operates. To cause to function, maintain or create or to put or keep in operation a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business. 
    Operator. See Manager. 
    Owner. The individual owner of an establishment, or if the legal owner is a corporation, partnership, or limited liability company, the term shall include all general partners, any limited partner with a financial interest of ten percent or more, all corporate officers and directors, and any shareholder or member with a financial interest of ten percent or more. Owner includes the spouse(s) of any of the above persons. 
    Person. An individual, licensee, operating owner, manager, sexually oriented entertainer, firm, partnership, joint-venture, association, independent contractor, corporation (domestic or foreign), limited liability company, trust, estate, assignee, receiver or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
    Premises. The physical location at which a business is located; as used in this section, the term shall include all parts of that physical location, both interior and exterior, which are under the control of the subject business, through ownership, lease or other arrangement. 
    Protected land use. A child care facility, educational facility or religious facility. 
    Protected zoning district. Residential Districts as shown on the City of Marianna Comprehensive Plan 2030 Future Land Use Map, Downtown Improvement Special Treatment Area, Historical Special Treatment Area, Planned Unit Developments developed for any residential uses, and Mixed Use Districts where residential is a primary use. 
    Public area. A portion of a sexually oriented business that is accessible to the customer, excluding restrooms, while the business is open for business. 
    Religious facility. A permanent facility exclusively used on a regular basis for religious assembly such as customarily occurs in a synagogue, temple, mosque, or church or convent or monastery. 
    Retail store, sexually oriented. A store with sexually oriented merchandise for sale and/or rent, and to which any of the following applies: 
(1)  The sale and/or rental of sexually oriented merchandise, whether alone or in conjunction with the sale and/or rental of sexually oriented media, constitutes a principal business of the establishment, taking into consideration any of the following: 
a.  The value realized from the sale and/or rental of sexually oriented merchandise and/or media; 
b.  The floor area devoted to sexually oriented merchandise and/or sexually oriented media; or 
c.  The amount of inventory constituting sexually oriented merchandise and/or sexually oriented media. 
(2)  The business advertises or holds itself out in any forum as a "XXX," "adult" or "sexually oriented" merchandise business and/or media business. 
    Sadomasochistic practices. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clothed or naked, or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed or naked. 
    Semi-nude or in a state of semi-nudity. The showing of the female areola or nipple with less than fully opaque covering. Showing of any other part of the anatomy defined under nude or state of nudity shall constitute being nude or in a state of nudity. 
    Simulated nudity. A state of dress in which any device or covering, exposed to view, is worn that simulates any part of the genitals, pubic region, or areola of the female breast. 
    Specified anatomical areas. Areas that include: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, or anal cleft or the human female areola or nipple; or 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities. Sex acts normal or perverted, actual or simulated, of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy. These activities include, but are not limited to the following: bestiality, erotic or sexual stimulation with objects or mechanical devices, acts of human analingus, cunnilingus, fellatio, flagellation, masturbation, sadism, sadomasochism, sexual intercourse, sodomy, necrophilia, or any excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth above with any person on the premises. This definition shall include apparent sexual stimulation of another person's genitals whether clothed or unclothed. 
    Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business. This means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of the law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
    Video, sexually oriented. This definition is used to refer to any motion pictures, movies, films, videotapes, CD-ROMs, DVDs, computer images, slides, sound recordings, other magnetic media or electrical or electronic reproductions of anything that is or may be used as a means of communication that is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Video viewing arcade, sexually oriented. A building or any portion of a building wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or for any other form of consideration, electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Video viewing kiosk or booth, sexually oriented. Any kiosk, booth, cubicle, stall, or compartment that is designed, constructed, or used to hold or seat customers and is used for presenting videos or viewing publications by any photographic, electronic, magnetic, digital, or other means or medium (including, but not limited to, film, video or magnetic tape, laser disc, CD-ROMs, books, DVDs, magazines or periodicals) to show images of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by customers therein. The term "booth," "arcade booth," "preview booth," and "video arcade booth" shall be synonymous with the term "sexually oriented video viewing kiosk or booth." 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 2, 11-5-13) 
Sec. 62-170. - License required. 
(a)  A license for a sexually oriented business shall be required for the following sexually oriented business uses, or conversion of an existing business to one which is a sexually oriented business: 
(1)  Sexually oriented media store; 
(2)  Sexually oriented retail store; 
(3)  Sexually oriented motion picture theatre; and 
(4)  Sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub. 
(b)  No other type of sexually oriented business shall be granted a license to operate within the City of Marianna. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a person to establish or operate a sexually oriented business 
(1)  Without having obtained a sexually oriented business license under the provisions of this chapter; 
(2)  During such time as a sexually oriented business license has expired or has been suspended or revoked; or 
(3)  In violation of any provision of this article. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to manage or provide entertainment within a sexually oriented business: 
(1)  Without having obtained a sexually oriented business manager or entertainer license as provided under this article; 
(2)  During such time as a sexually oriented business manager or entertainer license has expired or has been suspended or revoked; or 
(3)  In violation of any provision of this article. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any work, service or entertainment directly related to the operation of an unlicensed sexually oriented business. 
(f)  It shall be prima facie evidence that a sexually oriented business has not obtained a sexually oriented business license if such business fails to post the license in the manner required herein. 
(g)  It shall be prima facie evidence that any person who performs any business, service or entertainment in a sexually oriented business had knowledge that such business was not licensed if the sexually oriented business license is not posted in the manner required herein. 
(h)  A license issued under this article shall be issued for only one sexually oriented use or position and to only the person listed on the application. Any change in the type of sexually oriented business use or position shall invalidate the license and require the licensee to obtain a new license for the change in use or position. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 2, 11-5-13) 
Sec. 62-171. - License application fees. 
(a)  The following are the approved license application fees for licenses required under this article: 
(1)  The application fee for a new sexually oriented business license shall be $1,500.00; 
(2)  The application fee for renewal of a sexually oriented business license shall be $750.00; 
(3)  The application fee for an new manager or entertainer license shall be $150.00; and 
(4)  The application fee for renewal of a manager or entertainer license shall be $75.00. 
(b)  No application shall be processed without the required application fee paid in full at the time of application submission. 
(c)  Licenses will be renewed annually coinciding with the City of Marianna fiscal accounting year. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 2, 11-5-13) 
Sec. 62-172. - Issuance of a sexually oriented business license. 
(a)  All applications for a sexually oriented business license shall be made with the City of Marianna city clerk. 
(b)  All completed applications for a sexually oriented business license shall provide the following: 
(1)  A copy of a complete development order application required by the City of Marianna Land Development Code, to be presented to the city commission in conjunction with the sexually oriented business license application; 
(2)  A diagram of the business's interior premises configuration, noting specific use of each space, square footages, walls or partitions, and total floor area of the building, drawn to a measurable scale of one inch equals four feet with all dimensions notated; 
(3)  The name of the sexually oriented business and identification of the type of sexually oriented business proposed (sexually oriented media store, sexually oriented retail store, sexually oriented motion picture theatre, or sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub); 
(4)  If the property owner is other than the applicant, the name of the property owner and a statement signed by the property owner stating that applicant has entered into a contract to acquire, lease or otherwise control the site or structure for use as a sexually oriented business; 
(5)  The applicant's name, any aliases, mailing address for receipt of notices, home address, home and office telephone numbers, occupation, date and place of birth and social security number, and tax identification number; all information required of the applicant shall also be required of the applicant's spouse; 
(6)  If the applicant is an entity other than an individual, each individual who has a ten percent or greater interest in the entity proposing to own and/or operate the business must provide the same information as the individual applicant and sign the license application as an applicant; 
(7)  A notarized statement signed by the applicant and the applicant's spouse, if any, that the applicant and applicant's spouse have personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the information contained therein is true and correct; that the applicant and spouse grant permission to the city to perform any necessary background checks on persons or businesses listed on the application; and that the applicant and spouse have read all provisions of the Marianna Code of Ordinances regulating sexually oriented businesses; and 
(8)  A $500.00 non-refundable application fee. 
(c)  Application processing-Sexually oriented business license. 
(1)  Failure to provide information and documentation required on the application for a sexually oriented business license shall constitute an incomplete application and shall not be processed. 
(2)  Upon receipt of a complete application, the city clerk shall immediately transmit a copy of the application to the municipal development director, fire chief and chief of police. 
(3)  Not later than 30 calendar days from the date the application is determined to be complete, the police chief, the city clerk, and fire chief shall report the results of their investigation to the municipal development director for preparation of a staff report and city commission meeting agenda item. The reports shall include the following: 
a.  It shall be the duty of the city clerk to determine if any monies are owed by the applicant or by past tenants at the proposed establishment's address and to ensure that the business license application fee has been paid; 
b.  It shall be the duty of the police department to perform background checks on the applicant(s) for the sexually oriented business license to determine whether the information contained in the application is true and correct and whether or not the applicant(s) complies with the criteria for holding a sexually oriented business license; 
c.  It shall be the duty of the fire department to determine whether the structure identified in the application for the sexually oriented business meets the standards of the applicable fire code; 
d.  It shall be the duty of the municipal development department to determine whether the application meets the land use requirements of the City of Marianna, Land Development Code and this article. 
(d)  Approval or denial-Sexually oriented business license. 
(1)  The municipal development director shall present the application to the city commission for approval and issuance of the sexually oriented business license required hereunder in conjunction with application for a development order for a sexually oriented business within 90 calendar days after receipt of a complete business license application. The applicant shall be notified of the city commission's decision within 15 working days thereof, unless it is determined that one or more of the following is true, in which case the application shall be denied: 
a.  The applicant has failed to provide information required for issuance of the license or gave false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application form; 
b.  The applicant is under 18 years of age; all applicants shall provide documentation issued by a state or federal agency bearing the applicants' date of birth and photographs as proof that the applicant is not under the age of 18; 
c.  The applicant or spouse has been convicted of, or released from confinement for conviction of, or received an order for deferred adjudication of, any felony within the past five years; the fact that the applicant or spouse has appealed such action shall have no effect on the disqualification of the application; 
d.  The applicant or spouse has been convicted of an offense under this article or its predecessor within the past three years; 
e.  The applicant or spouse has had a sexually oriented business license, or comparable license, of any type revoked within the past five years or one suspended within the past three years, immediately preceding the date of application; the fact that the applicant or spouse has appealed such action shall have no effect on the disqualification of the application; 
f.  The applicant or spouse has held, within the three years immediately preceding the date of application, an ownership, operational or a managerial position, at a sexually oriented business that has demonstrated an inability to operate in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers; 
g.  The applicant or spouse owes delinquent city taxes or assessments or other financial obligations to the city and no arrangements satisfactory to the city manager have been made for the payment of such debts or obligations; 
h.  The applicant's business premises does not comply with or meet the requirements of the applicable governmental licensing, zoning, building, fire, health and property maintenance ordinances or codes, provided, that upon a showing that the premises meets said requirements and that the applicant is otherwise qualified, the application shall be eligible for reconsideration; or 
i.  The license fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(2)  Information on License. The approved sexually oriented business license shall include the license number, name of the license holder, the date of issuance and expiration, the address of the sexually oriented business, and a statement that the license is not transferrable. 
(3)  Posting. The approved sexually oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the sexually oriented business's entrance so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 2, 11-5-13) 
Sec. 62-173. - Issuance of a manager or entertainer license. 
(a)  All applications for a manager or entertainer license related to a sexually oriented business shall be made with the City of Marianna city clerk. 
(b)  No application for a manager or an entertainer license shall be accepted by the city clerk prior to licensing of the sexually oriented business for which the manager or entertainer license is applicable. 
(c)  All completed applications for a manager or entertainer license related to a sexually oriented business shall provide the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's name, any aliases, mailing address for receipt of notices, home address, home and office telephone numbers, occupation, date and place of birth and social security number, and tax identification number; 
(2)  The name and address of each sexually oriented business where the applicant intends to work and a valid copy of the current sexually oriented business license for each of the sexually oriented businesses in which the manager or entertainer proposes to work or perform; and 
(3)  A notarized statement signed by the applicant that the applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the information contained therein is true and correct; that the applicant grants permission to the city to perform any necessary background checks on the applicant; and that the applicant has read all provisions of the Marianna Code of Ordinances regulating sexually oriented businesses. 
(d)  The city clerk shall approve and issue the manager or entertainer license required hereunder to an applicant unless it is found that one or more of the following are true, in which case the application shall be denied: 
(1)  The applicant has failed to provide information required for issuance of the license or gave false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application form; 
(2)  The applicant is under 18 years of age; all applicants shall provide documentation issued by a state or federal agency bearing the applicants' date of birth and photographs as proof that the applicant is not under the age of 18; 
(3)  The applicant has been convicted of, or released from confinement for conviction of, or received an order for deferred adjudication of, any felony within the past five years; the fact that the applicant has appealed such action shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant; 
(4)  The applicant has been convicted of an offense under this article or its predecessor within the past three years; 
(5)  The applicant has had a sexually oriented manager or entertainer license, or comparable license, of any type revoked within the past five years or one suspended within the past three years, immediately preceding the date of application; the fact that the applicant has appealed such action shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant; 
(6)  The applicant has held, within the three years immediately preceding the date of application, an ownership, operational or a managerial position, at a sexually oriented business that has demonstrated an inability to operate in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers; 
(7)  The applicant owes delinquent city taxes or assessments or other financial obligations to the city and no arrangements satisfactory to the city manager have been made for the payment of such debts or obligations; or 
(8)  The license fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(e)  Application processing-Manager or entertainer license. 
(1)  Within 15 working days of receipt, the city clerk shall notify the applicant whether or not the application for the manager or entertainer license related to a sexually oriented business is determined complete. In the event the application is determined incomplete, the notification to the applicant shall include an explanation of the reason(s) why the application is incomplete. 
(2)  Failure to provide information and documentation required on the application for manager or entertainer license shall constitute an incomplete application and shall not be processed. 
(3)  Within 45 calendar days from the date the application is determined to be complete, the city clerk shall approve or disapprove the application for a manager or entertainer license. The applicant shall be notified of the city clerk's decision within a time period of five working days thereof. 
(4)  If the city clerk is unable to act on the license application within the required time period following a determination of completeness, he shall notify the applicant in writing and issue a provisional license, which shall expire following approval of the application or denial of the application and final disposition of the appeal proceedings as provided in section 62.177. The provisions of this article shall fully apply to a provisional license. 
(f)  Information on license. The approved manager and entertainer licenses shall include the license number, name of the license holder, including any stage name, licensee's photograph, the date of issuance and expiration, the address(es) of the sexually oriented business(es) where such license is applicable, and a statement that the license is not transferrable. 
(g)  Posting. A valid copy of the manager's license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business when that manager is on duty. A valid copy of the entertainer's license shall not be posted but shall be available onsite within the office of the sexually oriented business for inspection at any time. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 2, 11-5-13) 
Sec. 62-174. - License terms and renewal. 
(a)  License terms and expiration. 
(1)  All licenses issued under this article shall be issued for a period of one year and are required to be renewed annually. 
(2)  No license issued under this article shall be transferable to another person or entity. 
(3)  All licenses issued under this article shall expire on the last day of the calendar month during which the licenses were issued or renewed during the previous year. 
(b)  License renewal. 
(1)  All applications for license renewal shall be submitted to the city clerk's office no earlier than 30 calendar days prior to the date of expiration. 
(2)  A license that is expired by more than 30 calendar days shall be subject to the same license review procedures and criteria required of any applicant applying for a new license. 
(3)  If an application for renewal of a license has been submitted and accepted as complete by the police department, the licensee may operate under the existing license until issuance of a renewed license. 
(4)  The chief of police shall approve the license renewal within 30 calendar days after receipt of a complete renewal application unless the chief of police finds one or more of the following to be true (also applicable to the applicant's spouse if a renewal for a sexually oriented business license), in which case the application shall be denied: 
a.  The applicant has failed to provide information required for renewal of the license or gave false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application form; 
b.  During the term of the existing license or its renewal period, the applicant has been convicted of, or released from confinement for conviction of, or received an order for deferred adjudication of, any felony or misdemeanor violation that constitutes a specified criminal act as defined by this article; the fact that the applicant has appealed such action shall have no effect on the disqualification of the application; 
c.  During the term of the existing license or its renewal period, the applicant has been convicted of an offense under this article; 
d.  During the term of the existing license or its renewal period, the applicant had a sexually oriented business license, or comparable license, of any type revoked; the fact that the applicant has appealed such action shall have no effect on the disqualification of the application; 
e.  During the term of the existing license or its renewal period, the applicant has held an ownership, operational or a managerial position, at a sexually oriented business that has demonstrated an inability to operate in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers; 
f.  The applicant owes delinquent city taxes or assessments or other financial obligations to the city and no arrangements satisfactory to the city manager have been made for the payment of such debts or obligations; 
g.  The applicant's business premises does not comply with or meet the requirements of the applicable governmental licensing, zoning, building, fire, health and property maintenance ordinances or codes, provided, that upon a showing that the premises meets said requirements and that the applicant is otherwise qualified, the application shall be eligible for reconsideration; or 
h.  The license fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(c)  Application processing of license renewal. 
(1)  Within five working days of receipt, the city clerk shall notify the applicant whether or not the license renewal application is determined complete. In the event the application is determined incomplete, the notification to the applicant shall include an explanation of the reason(s) why the application is incomplete. 
(2)  Failure to provide information and documentation required on the application shall constitute an incomplete application and shall not be processed. 
(3)  Within 30 calendar days from the date the application is determined to be complete, the city clerk shall approve or disapprove the application for renewal of the license. The applicant shall be notified of the decision within a time period of five working days thereof. 
(4)  If the city clerk is unable to act on the license application within the required time period following a determination of completeness, he shall notify the applicant in writing and issue a provisional license, which shall expire following approval of the application or denial of the application and final disposition of the appeal proceedings as provided in section 62-81 appeal of license denial, suspension or revocation. The provisions of this article shall fully apply to a provisional license. 
(5)  Information on license. The renewed licenses shall contain the same information required to be shown on the original license. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 2, 11-5-13) 
Sec. 62-175. - License suspension. 
(a)  The chief of police or city manager shall suspend a license issued under this article for the following reasons: 
(1)  Licensee operated the sexually oriented business or performed sexually oriented entertainment in a location not approved for such activity; 
(2)  Licensee violated any requirement of the zoning ordinance related to the regulation of sexually oriented businesses; 
(3)  Licensee failed to maintain onsite a current list of all employees (contract or otherwise) along with their completed employment application and photo readily accessible for inspection within the premises; 
(4)  Licensee refused city or other governmental agency access to the premises and records; 
(5)  Licensee transferred a license issued under this article to another person or entity; 
(6)  Licensee allowed a person under the age of 18 years in or on the premises; 
(7)  Licensee allowed a person to appear in a state of semi-nudity or nudity or in a state of simulated nudity on the premises; 
(8)  Licensee reconfigured the interior of the premises without approval from the city; 
(9)  Licensee operated the business without a licensed manager on duty during the time the business was opened to the public; 
(10)  Licensee was delinquent in payment to the city for ad valorem taxes, or sales taxes related to the sexually oriented business; 
(11)  Licensee demonstrated an inability to operate or manage the business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers; or 
(12)  Licensee violated any of the "standards of conduct and operation" under section 62-83. 
(b)  The chief of police or city manager may suspend a license issued under this article for a period not to exceed 60 days. 
(c)  A licensee subject to suspension shall have the right to appeal the suspension under the procedures provided in section 62-177. Appeal of license denial, suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 2, 11-5-13) 
Sec. 62-176. - License revocation. 
(a)  The chief of police or city manager shall revoke a license issued under this article for the following reasons: 
(1)  The licensee's license has been suspended more than twice during a 12-month period; 
(2)  The licensed business was operated during a period of time when the license was suspended; 
(3)  A licensee omitted or gave false or misleading information on the license application, including, previous license revocation or suspensions, or convictions or deferred adjudication for misdemeanors and felonies constituting a specified criminal act; the fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license; 
(4)  A licensee has been convicted of, or received an order for deferred adjudication, for a felony or misdemeanor constituting a specified criminal act; 
(5)  A licensee or an employee has allowed possession, use, or sale of a controlled substance on the premises; 
(6)  A licensee or an employee has allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(7)  A licensee or an employee has allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises; or 
(8)  On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a person or persons committed specified criminal act in or on the licensee's premises; or 
(b)  The chief of police or city manager shall revoke a license issued under this article for a period of one year. 
(c)  A licensee subject to revocation shall have the right to appeal the revocation under the procedures provided in section 62-177. Appeal of license denial, suspension or revocation. 
(d)  A licensee that has had a license revoked shall be subject to the same license criteria required of any applicant applying for a new license. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 2, 11-5-13) 
Sec. 62-177. - Appeal of license denial, suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Appeal. The applicant may appeal an unfavorable decision of the chief of police or city manager by filing a written petition with the city manager's office requesting a hearing on the denial, suspension, or revocation of the license within ten calendar days of the date the applicant receives notification of the chief of police's decision. The city commission shall serve as the appeals board. 
(b)  The appeal shall be scheduled within 30 calendar days of the date the petition is received in the office of the city clerk. The city secretary shall give written notice to the applicant of the time and place for the hearing on the applicant's appeal at least ten calendar days prior to the scheduled date of hearing. 
(c)  Provisional license. During the appeal of a license denial, suspension, or revocation, the applicant shall be permitted to operate with a provisional license until the final disposition of the appeal proceedings before the city commission. The provisions of this article shall fully apply to a provisional license. 
(d)  Deferring action on proceedings. If the applicant has filed an appeal with the municipal development department to contest any decision regarding any standard governing a sexually oriented business, or a variance request by the applicant is pending, the city commission may defer action on the license application pending resolution of the appeal or variance request, but shall take up the matter at the first regular meeting of the city commission following a decision on said appeal or variance request. 
(e)  Decision. The city commission shall issue a decision with findings within ten calendar days after any hearing held in accordance with this section. The decision on appeal shall be governed by the same standards as that for the original decision-maker. The minutes of the city commission meeting shall show the action taken on the license, and if the city commission acts favorably on the appeal of the license, the city commission shall direct the chief of police to issue the license. 
(f)  Notification of decision. If the appeal of the license denial, suspension or revocation is denied, the applicant shall be immediately notified by registered or certified mail to the address provided on the application, and the letter of notification shall state the basis for such denial. 
(g)  Judicial review. Upon denial of the appeal of the license denial, suspension, or revocation by the city commission, an applicant may seek judicial review. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 2, 11-5-13) 
Sec. 62-178. - Inspection of premises. 
(a)  Inspections. Any sexually oriented business shall be deemed to have consented to periodic entry into and inspection of the business premises by appropriate city officials and inspection of only those business records necessary for the purpose of determining whether such business and persons are in compliance with the city's Code of Ordinances. This entry and inspection shall take place at any time the business is occupied or open for business. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 2, 11-5-13) 
Sec. 62-179. - Distance limitations. 
(a)  No sexually oriented business shall be located within 1,200 feet of a school, child care facility, public park, religious facility or any other sexually oriented business. 
(b)  No sexually oriented business shall be located within the downtown improvement special treatment area or the historic special treatment area. 
(c)  When determining spacing between a sexually oriented business and a school, daycare, public park, or religious assembly, distance shall be measured from the front door of the sexually oriented business to the nearest point on the property line of said school, childcare facility, public park, or religious facility. Measurements shall be taken along the shortest route of ordinary pedestrian travel along the public thoroughfare. 
(d)  The separation measurements shall be provided and certified by a licensed professional surveyor hired by the sexually oriented business. 
(e)  Exception to spacing requirement. Any sexually oriented business which is established in conformity with this section and other applicable laws and ordinances shall not be made unlawful, if a place of religious assembly, child care facility, school, or public park is created or established within the distance limitations subsequent to the filing of the application for the establishment of the sexually oriented business with the city municipal development department. 
(f)  Existing establishments. Any sexually oriented business which, on October 1, 2013 is existing, in actual operation and open to the public, and which in all other respects is in full compliance with applicable laws and ordinances of the city, but which would not otherwise be permitted under the terms of this section, shall then become a permitted nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 2, 11-5-13) 
Sec. 62-180. - Design requirements. 
    All new sexually oriented businesses shall comply with the following: 
(1)  No merchandise or pictures or advertisements of the sexually oriented or adult products, services or entertainment on or off the premises shall be displayed in building glass areas, or windows. 
(2)  No sign shall contain any photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations or other words or material depicting sexual acts or genitalia. 
(3)  Exterior fencing. No sexually oriented business shall have any fencing or other structure exceeding five feet in height that obstructs the view of the parking lot or entrance ways of the business. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 2, 11-5-13) 
Sec. 62-181. - Standards of conduct and operation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any sexually oriented business, or any owner, manager, server, entertainer or employee thereof, or any customer of any sexually oriented business, while on or about the premises of the business, to fail to adhere to the standards of conduct and operation. 
(b)  Standards applicable to all sexually oriented businesses. The following standards apply to all sexually oriented business: 
(1)  Establishment license. All sexually oriented businesses shall post the license issued under this article in a conspicuous, easily viewable location, at eye level, at the main cash register for the business and lighted in a manner for ease of inspection; 
(2)  Manager on duty. All sexually oriented businesses shall have a licensed manager on duty at all times the business is open to the public for any purpose and said manager's name shall be posted in a conspicuous, easily viewable location, at eye level, at the main cash register for the business and lighted in a manner for ease of inspection; 
(3)  Employee records. All sexually oriented businesses shall maintain a current list of all employees (contract or otherwise) along with their completed employment application and photo readily accessible for inspection within the premises; 
(4)  Licenses available for managers and entertainers. Each manager issued a license under this article shall, at all times when on the premises of the licensed business, have said license in his or her possession. The license for each entertainer shall be retained for ready inspection on the premises of the sexually oriented business; 
(5)  Age restriction. No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted on the premises of any sexually oriented business; 
(6)  Interior observation. The interior of all sexually oriented businesses shall be configured in such a manner that offers an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises excluding restrooms; 
(7)  Restrooms. No restroom may contain any video equipment; 
(8)  Security cameras. Parking areas surrounding the sexually oriented businesses shall be continually monitored and said recordings from security cameras shall be maintained for a period of at least 30 days; 
(9)  Exterior observation. The premises of all sexually oriented businesses shall be designed as to ensure that the interior of the premises is not observable from the exterior of the building; 
(10)  Exterior display. No sexually oriented business shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of sexually oriented entertainers engaged in sexually oriented entertainment or any depiction relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from any exterior source by display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening; 
(11)  Specified criminal acts and specified sexual activities prohibited. No owner, manager, employee, independent contractor, server, entertainer or a customer shall engage in any specified criminal act or any specified sexual activity on the premises of the business; 
(12)  Semi-nude or nude or simulated nudity. No person, including sexually oriented entertainers, shall be semi-nude or in a state of semi-nudity, or nude or in a state of nudity, or in a state of simulated nudity, while on the premises of a sexually oriented business licensed under this article; 
(13)  Alcohol consumption. Consumption of alcohol on the premises of a sexually oriented business is strictly prohibited; and, 
(14)  Posting of age restriction. A sign shall be posted at each entrance to a sexually oriented business stating, "It is unlawful for a person under 18 years old to enter this location." 
(c)  Standards for sexually oriented media store or retail store shall be subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  Separate room. If a business offers for sale or rent other media and/or merchandise, sexually oriented media and/or merchandise shall be kept in a separate room physically and visually separate from the remainder of the store by an opaque wall reaching at least eight feet high or to the ceiling, whichever is less; 
(2)  Age limit. No person under the age of 18 shall be permitted entry into a room containing sexually oriented media and/or sexually oriented merchandise; 
(3)  Access. If a business offers for sale or rent other media and/or merchandise, access to the room containing sexually oriented media and/or sexually oriented merchandise shall be through a solid door, accessed by an electronic control device controlled and monitored by a clerk through direct visual control and posted with a sign clearly stating that no one under the age of 18 shall enter the room; 
(4)  Location. If a business offers for sale or rent other media and/or merchandise, the entrance to the room containing the sexually oriented media and/or sexually oriented merchandise shall be located so that it is as far as reasonably practicable from media and/or merchandise likely to be of interest to children; 
(5)  Room size. Any room wherein sexually oriented media and/or merchandise is offered for sale or rent shall be in an area containing at least 600 square feet and having no walls, dividers, curtains, screens, shades or other similar devices to obscure any part of the room from being monitored by the manager, unless it is to separate the sexually oriented merchandise and/or media from non-sexually oriented merchandise or media; 
(6)  Onsite entertainment prohibited. At no time shall the store provide any type of sexually oriented onsite entertainment or show any type of sexually oriented electronic imagery on the premises; 
(7)  Displays. No displays of sexually oriented media, merchandise or images shall be visible from outside the room containing sexually oriented media and/or merchandise or from the exterior of the business; 
(8)  Lighting. Any business that offers for sale or rent sexually oriented media and/or sexually oriented merchandise shall be well lit at a lighting level of at least 30 foot candles measured three feet from the floor; and 
(9)  Monitoring. Activities in any room having sexually oriented media and/or sexually oriented merchandise shall be monitored at all times by a store clerk through a video system located at the clerk's counter. 
(d)  Standards for sexually oriented motion picture theater shall be subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  Presentation area. All screenings of motion pictures, videos or other media shall occur in a room open to all customers of the establishment and containing at least 1,000 square feet of floor area. No walls, dividers, curtains, screens, shades or other similar devices shall be used to obscure any part of the screening room; 
(2)  Lighting. The lighting level in the area occupied by customers shall be at least five foot-candles as measured at the floor; 
(3)  Seating. Seating shall consist of individual, theater-style chairs (maximum seat width 20 inches), with solid arms separating the chairs. No couches, benches, portable chairs, beds, loose cushions or mattresses, or other forms of seating shall be provided. Separate spaces for wheelchairs shall be provided in accordance with the applicable provisions of the building code and the Americans with Disabilities Act; and, 
(4)  Sexually oriented merchandise or media. No sexually oriented motion picture theatre shall sale or rent sexually oriented merchandise or media. 
(e)  Standards for a sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub shall be subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  Room. All customer-related activities and entertainment shall take place in a room of at least 600 square feet and in a room that has an unobstructed view by all persons from any part of such room; 
(2)  Stage. All sexually oriented entertainment shall take place on stage elevated at least 18 inches above the surrounding floor area, with a minimum area of 100 square feet, and with a horizontal separation of at least 60 inches between the edge of the stage and the nearest space to which customers have access. The horizontal separation shall be physically enforced by a partial wall, rail, or other physical barrier measuring a minimum of four feet in height; 
(3)  Access. The manager and/or sexually oriented entertainer shall prohibit any person other than a licensed entertainer to occupy the stage area; 
(4)  Tip. All tips for sexually oriented entertainment shall be collected in containers that are accessible to customers; 
(5)  Lighting. The lighting level in the area occupied by customers shall be at least 15 foot-candles as measured three feet from the floor; 
(6)  Seating. Seating shall consist of chairs or open booths; no couches, beds, loose cushions or mattresses, or other forms of seating shall be provided; and 
(7)  Sexually oriented merchandise or media. No sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub or motion picture theatre shall sale or rent sexually oriented merchandise or media. 
(8)  Security. At all times the business is open and for an hour after closing, there shall be onsite a licensed peace officer employed by the business owner who holds a valid and current license (in good standing) issued by the Florida Commission on Law Enforcement Officer Standards and Education. The peace officer's duty shall be to assist in maintaining order and to report criminal activity or behavior. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 2, 11-5-13) 
Sec. 62-182. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  The city may enforce this article by any methods not inconsistent with state law and city charter. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this article commits a class A misdemeanor. 
(c)  Any person operating a sexually oriented business without a license or with an expired license, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. 
(d)  Any person working as a sexually oriented entertainer or manager of a sexually oriented business without a license or with an expired license, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. 
(e)  Any person violating any other provision of this article, upon conviction is punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 2, 11-5-13) 
ARTICLE VII. - ADULT BUSINESSES 

Sec. 62-183. - Body altering and tattoo businesses. 
(a)  The following businesses are declared to be body altering businesses: 
(1)  Body piercing establishment , not including establishments that only pierce ears. 
(2)  Tattoo establishment , not including tattoos that are applied as temporary. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 2, 11-5-13) 
Sec. 62-184. - Distance limitations. 
(a)  No new body altering business shall be established within 1,200 feet of a school, child care facility, public park, religious facility or any other body altering business. 
(b)  Distances shall be measured from property line to property line, along the shortest distance between property lines, without regard to the route of normal travel. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 2, 11-5-13) 
Sec. 62-185. - Exception to spacing requirement. 
    Any body altering business which is established in conformity with this section and other applicable laws and ordinances shall not be made unlawful, if a place of religious assembly, child care facility, school, or public park is created or established within the distance limitations subsequent to the filing of the application for the establishment of the sexually oriented business with the city municipal development department. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 2, 11-5-13) 
Sec. 62-186. - Existing establishments. 
    Any body altering business which, on October 1, 2013 is existing, in actual operation and open to the public, and which in all other respects is in full compliance with applicable laws and ordinances of the city, but which would not otherwise be permitted under the terms of this section, shall then become a permitted nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 1022, § 2, 11-5-13) 
Chapter 66 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Junked, wrecked abandoned motor vehicles, § 22-71 et seq. 
State Law reference- Florida uniform traffic control law, F.S. ch. 316. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-1. - Definitions. 
    Words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in F.S. § 316.003. 
(Code 1986, § 18-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 66-2. - Authority of chief of police relative to traffic generally. 
    The chief of police of the city, except as otherwise directed by this chapter and except as otherwise directed from time to time by the city commission or the city manager, shall have the power and is hereby authorized to make all rules and regulations governing the use of the streets of the city by vehicles and pedestrians. The chief of police is given full power to designate through, stop, one-way and play streets; directions of traffic, time limits, and locations for parking, reservation of parking places; maximum and minimum speeds insofar as same shall not conflict with the laws of the state; to establish truck routes and stop crossings and to install such street signs, traffic control devices and indicators and markings as shall be necessary or advisable for the operation and enforcement of such rules and regulations. 
(Code 1986, § 18-2) 
Sec. 66-3. - Persons propelling pushcarts, riding bicycles or animals to obey traffic regulations. 
    Every person propelling any pushcarts or riding a bicycle or an animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal drawn vehicle shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Code 1986, § 18-4) 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 10. 
Sec. 66-4. - Hitchhiking. 
    No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle nor for the purpose of selling any merchandise or agricultural products. 
(Code 1986, § 18-5) 
State Law reference- Authority to prohibit hitchhiking, F.S. § 316.008(u). 
Sec. 66-5. - Parade, procession and public demonstration permits. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful to organize or hold, or to assist in organizing or holding, or to take part or participate in any parade or procession or other public demonstration on the streets or other public ways of the city unless a permit therefor has been obtained from the chief of police. 
(b)  Application; contents. In order to secure such permit, the individual, group of individuals, organization, association or sponsor shall submit to the chief of police a written application. The application shall be completed upon forms to be provided by the city and filed with the chief of police not less than 24 hours prior to the proposed date and time of holding such parade, procession or other public demonstration and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The probable number of persons, vehicles and animals which will be engaged in such parade, procession or other public demonstration; 
(2)  The purpose for which it is to be held or had; 
(3)  The date and time upon which it is to be held or had; 
(4)  A designation of the points of origin and destination, the streets or other public ways over, along or in which it is desired to have or hold such parade, procession or other public demonstration; 
(5)  Whether the having or holding of such parade, procession or other public demonstration will require the interruption of pedestrian or vehicular traffic; and 
(6)  The approximate period of time necessary to complete such parade, procession or other public demonstration. 
(c)  Investigation of applicant. Immediately upon his receipt of an application in the manner and form prescribed in this section, the chief of police shall make such inquiry and investigation as may be necessary to make a determination of whether issuing of such permit for the having or holding of such parade, procession or other public demonstration will be detrimental to the public welfare, peace, safety, health or morals of the city or its inhabitants, or will violate any laws or ordinances of the United States, the state or the city. 
(d)  Appeal of decision. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the chief of police may file an appeal with the city commission. 
(e)  Hearing. As soon as practicable after the filing of an appeal from the denial or issuance of a permit, the city commission shall meet in public session to consider the appeal. The commission shall receive, either verbally or in writing, the report and recommendations of the chief of police. The appellant or any other individual or group of individuals interested in the decision to be made by the city commission shall be entitled to be present either in person or by counsel and shall have the right to be heard. 
(f)  Grant or denial. The city commission shall grant the permit for such parade, procession or other public demonstration, prescribing the streets or other public ways which may be used therefor, unless in its judgment the public welfare, peace, safety, health or morals of the city require that it be refused. It shall be unlawful to use any streets or public ways other than those designated in the permit for such purposes. If a permit is denied, the commission shall state its findings and conclusions justifying such action, and the vote of each commissioner present shall be recorded. 
(g)  Misrepresentation grounds for denial. Any intentional and material misrepresentation contained in the application shall be grounds for denial of such application. 
(h)  Applicability of section. This section shall not apply to funeral processions. 
(Code 1986, § 18-6) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate processions, etc., F.S. § 316.008(c). 
Sec. 66-6. - Blocking streets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any railroad vehicle standing so as to block any street within the corporate limits of the city for a period of more than five minutes at any one time. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any railroad vehicle standing so as to block any street within the corporate limits of the city for any period of time unless such railroad vehicle has attached thereto in operating order a locomotive that can immediately remove the vehicle. 
(Code 1986, § 18-8) 
State Law reference- Blocking streets, F.S. §§ 335.141(4), 351.03. 
Sec. 66-7. - Quiet zone. 
    Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone for quiet, no person operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other warning device of the vehicle except in an emergency. 
(Code 1986, § 18-10) 
Secs. 66-8-66-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 

Sec. 66-30. - Parking in excess of time limit. 
    It is unlawful for any person to park in a parking space in excess of any designated time limit. 
(Code 1986, § 18-36(c)) 
Sec. 66-31. - Parking of semitractors and trailers. 
    It shall be unlawful for semitractors and/or trailers to park on or along the public streets and parking areas within the residential areas of the city for a period of time in excess of one hour, except for those semitractors and/or trailers being loaded and unloaded during daylight hours. 
(Ord. No. 823, § 1, 8-5-93) 
Sec. 66-32. - Enforcement of article. 
    A law enforcement officer or parking enforcement specialist who discovers a vehicle parked in violation of this article or any other ordinance of the city regulating traffic may: 
(1)  Issue a summons/complaint ticket in the form prescribed by the chief of police or the city manager or director of public safety; or 
(2)  If the vehicle is unattended, attach such summons/complaint ticket to the vehicle in a conspicuous place. 
(Code 1986, § 18-38) 
Sec. 66-33. - Owner responsibility for payment of parking summons/complaint ticket violations; exception. 
    The owner of a vehicle is responsible and liable for payment of any parking summons/complaint ticket violations unless the owner can furnish evidence that the vehicle was, at the time of the parking violation, in the care, custody or control of another person. In such instances, the owner of the vehicle is required, within a reasonable time after notification of the parking violation, to furnish the appropriate law enforcement authorities with the name and address of the person or company who leased, rented or otherwise had the care, custody or control of the vehicle. The owner of a vehicle is not responsible for parking summons/complaint ticket violations if the vehicle involved was, at the time, stolen or in the care, custody or control of some person who did not have permission of the owner to use the vehicle. 
(Code 1986, § 18-39) 
Sec. 66-34. - Violation procedure. 
(a)  Noncriminal violation; payment; nonpayment notice. Any person issued a parking summons/complaint ticket by a parking enforcement specialist or law enforcement officer shall be deemed to be charged with a noncriminal violation and shall comply with the directions on the ticket. If payment is not received or a response to the summons/complaint ticket is not made within ten days, the police department or its traffic violations bureau shall notify the registered owner of the vehicle which was cited, by mail to the address given on the motor vehicle registration, of the ticket. Mailing of the notice to this address shall constitute notification. 
(b)  Compliance; hearing request; determination. Upon notification, the registered owner shall comply with the directive set forth in the notification letter by paying the parking violation penalty within ten calendar days or requesting a hearing before the chief of police or his designee to present evidence and defenses to the parking violation summons/complaint ticket. The official, after a hearing, shall make a determination as to whether a parking violation has been committed. 
(c)  Modification of penalty; time extension. The chief of police or his designee may, upon good cause shown, modify the penalty or extend the time within which the penalty shall be paid. 
(d)  Hearing before county judge; waiving of right to pay civil penalty; determination of court. If the official determines a parking violation has been committed and the penalty is due and the owner is dissatisfied with the official's findings, the owner may request a hearing before the county judge to present evidence and defenses to the parking violation summons/complaint. Any person who elects to appear before the county judge to present evidence shall be deemed to have waived his right to pay the civil penalty provisions of the ticket. The court, after a hearing, shall make a determination as to whether a parking violation has been committed and may impose a civil penalty not to exceed $100.00, plus court costs. 
(e)  Failure to pay within court deadline; conviction. Any person who fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed by the court shall be deemed to have been convicted of a parking ticket violation. 
(f)  Proceedings in accord with state law and rules of court. Proceedings in the county court or the police department or its traffic violations bureau shall be in accordance with the procedures required by the general laws of the state or the appropriate rules of court. 
(Code 1986, § 18-40) 
State Law reference- Local parking violations deemed noncriminal violation, F.S. § 316.1967. 
Sec. 66-35. - Fines. 
(a)  Enumeration. Any person who shall cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of or operated by such person to be parked in violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be charged an appropriate penalty as listed in this subsection: 
(1)  Any person violating the provisions of F.S. § 316.1945(1), for each violation, shall be subject to a penalty in the amount of: 
a.  If paid within three days ..... $ 7.50 
b.  If not paid within three days ..... 15.00 
c.  If not paid within seven days ..... 25.00 
(2)  Any person parking in a space marked handicapped, for each violation, shall be subject to a penalty in the amount of: 
a.  If paid within three days ..... 25.00 
b.  If not paid within three days ..... 50.00 
(3)  Any person violating the provisions of section 66-30, for each violation, shall be subject to a penalty in the amount of: 
a.  If paid within three days .....  3.00 
b.  If not paid within three days ..... 7.50 
c.  If not paid within seven days ..... 15.00 
(b)  Nonpayment; immobilization, towing, removing or storing; lien; redemption. If the owner does not pay the parking violation penalty and or the civil penalty imposed by the court, as provided in this article, the vehicle may be immobilized or impounded by the members of the police department. The cost of immobilizing, towing, removing and storing such vehicle plus a $25.00 service fee, together with the amount of the fees assessed in this section, shall be a lien on such vehicle. The owner shall pay all of such charges and fees before the vehicle shall be released. 
(Code 1986, § 18-41) 
Sec. 66-36. - Presumption of violation. 
    If a vehicle is found upon a street or highway in violation of any provision of this article regulating the standing, parking or operation of vehicles, and the identity of the driver cannot be determined, proof that the particular vehicle described in the citation was standing, stopped, parked or operated in violation of this article, together with proof that the defendant was at the time of the violation the registered owner of the vehicle (or the lessee of the vehicle, if such vehicle be a leased vehicle) shall constitute prima facie evidence that the defendant was the person who stopped, stood, parked or operated the vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which the violation occurred. 
(Code 1986, § 18-42) 
Sec. 66-37. - Towing. 
(a)  Charges paid by owner. When any motor vehicle found in violation of this article has been towed away on the order of a police officer, it shall be the duty of the owner thereof to pay the towing charges necessary and reasonably incurred, including towing and wrecker charges and storage. 
(b)  Storage of cars; fees. Cars towed away for illegal parking shall be stored in a safe place and shall be restored to the owner or operator of such vehicle upon payment of the fee assessed for the violation of the parking provisions of this article. 
(c)  Records. When a motor vehicle is authorized to be towed away, the police department shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle towed, listing the color, year of manufacture, manufacturer's trade name, manufacturer's series name, body style, vehicle identification number, and license plate year and number displayed on the vehicle. The record shall also include the date and hour of tow, location towed from, location towed to, reason for towing and the name of the officer authorizing the tow. 
(Code 1986, § 18-44) 
Sec. 66-38. - Exemptions and exceptions. 
(a)  Any person who has a summons or subpoena to appear in court, either county court or circuit court, shall, upon proper verification, be exempt from any penalty for the issuance of an overtime parking summons/complaint ticket to him during the time he was in court if the citation was issued on any of the following streets: 
(1)  Lafayette Street from Madison to Jefferson; 
(2)  Jefferson Street from Lafayette to Jackson; 
(3)  Jackson Street from Jefferson to Madison; and 
(4)  Madison Street from Jackson to Lafayette. 
(b)  Any person who is with the working press shall have the same exemption as in subsection (a) of this section. In addition to the parking area designated in subsection (a) of this section, the working press shall also be exempt on the following streets: 
(1)  Green Street from Market to Clinton; 
(2)  Clinton Street from Green to Jefferson; and 
(3)  Jefferson Street from Clinton to Market. 
(c)  The chief of police or his designee may grant temporary exemptions from any penalty for the issuance of overtime parking summons/complaint ticket when it is determined to be in the best interest of the public welfare. 
(d)  Any person referred to in subsections (a)-(c) of this section shall notify the police department within three days after being issued a parking summons/complaint ticket. Failure to notify the police department within three days of such exemption shall make this exception null and void. 
(Code 1986, § 18-45) 
Sec. 66-39. - Misuse of parking violations ticket. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use any lawfully issued parking violations summons/complaint ticket for the purpose of misleading, deceiving or impeding a police officer in the pursuit of his official duties. 
(Code 1986, § 18-46) 
Sec. 66-40. - Defacing or removing parking evidence. 
    It shall be a second degree misdemeanor to deface or remove the marks or other parking evidence placed on a motor vehicle by the police department. 
(Code 1986, § 18-47) 
Chapter 70 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1032, § 1, adopted Feb. 3, 2015, amended ch. 70 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 70, §§ 70-1, 70-2, 70-26, 70-36-70-46, 70-56-70-66, 70-76-70-81, 70-91-70-117, 70-131-70-159, 70-181-70-195, 70-226-70-240, pertained to a similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; solid waste, ch. 54; excavation regulations, § 58-26; poles and wire installations in streets, § 58-76; public service tax on utilities, § 62-76 et seq.; utilities regarding land development regulations, pt. III, § 4-5. 
State Law reference- Public utilities, F.S. ch. 366; water and sewer systems, F.S. ch. 367; supervision by department of health and rehabilitative services, F.S. § 381.261. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - Permits for public works. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or remove any public work or materials therein, or to turn, lift, remove, raise or tamper with any cover of any manhole basin, inlet or other appurtenance of any public sewer, without a permit from the city manager. This permit must be kept on the work site to be exhibited to persons authorized to examine the same. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-2. - Water wells within city and service area. 
(a)  New wells. There shall be no more wells drilled within the city limits or the urban service area established, provided that there is municipal service available to proposed location. 
(b)  Exemption. Public institutions or water wells for the general public may have a backup system. Further this section shall not apply to any location where the city has not established water service. 
(c)  Discharge of water. There shall be case-by-case approach to the exemption of certain businesses located within the city limits when they use water and do not discharge the water into the city sewer. 
(Ord. No. 1036, § I, 7-5-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1036, § I, adopted July 5, 2016, repealed the former § 70-2 and enacted a new § 70-2 as set out herein. The former § 70-2 pertained to water wells within city and derived from Ord. No. 1032, § 1, adopted Feb. 3, 2015. 
Sec. 70-3. - Utility area establishment and findings. 
    Findings: It is hereby ascertained, determined and declared that: 
(1)  The city, in an effort to protect the environment, promote efficient government, encourage green economic growth, and for the promotion of public health, safety and welfare, wishes to establish an urban service utility service area pursuant to F.S. § 180.02. 
(2)  The city possesses and/or will contract for the technical and professional capacity to own, operate, maintain and administer the system within the proposed area and is capable of providing other services set forth in F.S. § 180.06. 
(3)  The city desires to avail itself of the provisions and benefits of F.S. ch. 180, and to create an area or areas and prescribe reasonable regulations requiring all persons or entities living or doing business within said area to connect, when available, with any water, wastewater, or re-use water system or alternative water supply system, including, but not limited to, reclaimed water; aquifer storage and recovery, and desalination systems. 
(4)  The service area created includes the property lying within the corporate boundaries of the city and areas in adjacent unincorporated areas of Jackson County within five miles from the city limits excluding the area within the city limits of Greenwood, Florida. The areas lying beyond the corporate limits of the city are described on figure "1A" and shall be generally referred to herein as "adjacent service area." This article does not amend any boundary of any utility service area, nor affect any utility service agreement. 
(5)  The service area and the city possess long-range capital improvements adequate to protect the health, safety and welfare of the persons or corporations, living or doing business therein in the following respects, among others: 
a.  The cleaning or environmental improvement of bodies of water for sanitary purposes; 
b.  The providing of a water supply for domestic, municipal or industrial uses; 
c.  The collection and disposal of sewage including wastewater reuse and other liquid wastes; 
d.  The construction of reservoirs, sewerage collection systems, trunk sewers, intercepting sewers, pumping stations, wells, siphons, intakes, pipelines, distribution systems, purification works, collection systems, treatment and disposal works incidental; 
e.  The construction of such other buildings and facilities as may be required to properly and economically operate and maintain the foregoing facilities and utility systems for the fulfillment of the purposes of F.S. ch. 180. 
(6)  There exists a need for the provision and enhancement of the services and facilities described in subsection (4) above to the residents, landowners and other persons and entities living in and conducting business within the city and in the adjacent service area. 
(7)  It is in the best interest of the citizens of the city and adjacent service area for the city to provide the above enumerated services for the orderly growth of the city and the adjacent service area in an efficient manner for their collective health, safety and welfare both now and in the future. 
FIGURE 1A 

(Ord. No. 1036, § I, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 70-4. - Declaration. 
    The city hereby declares there to exist an urban service area within which the city is engaged in certain activities authorized by F.S. § 180.06, such activities shall specifically include the duty, obligation, power and authority to acquire, obtain, construct, maintain, provide, collect, distribute, dispose of, regulate, finance and charge for the supply of potable and nonpotable water, treatment, storage, or distribution systems, facilities and associated services and wastewater collection, transmission, treatment, disposal, reuse or nonpotable water systems, facilities, and associated services to customers and land served within the service area, or any future expansion thereof. Such urban service area shall be composed of and include the area located within the city's corporate limits and the adjacent service area. By declaring the existence of this urban service area, the city proposes and intends to exert its influence and control as the general purpose local government regarding the services to be provided through the enactment of this article to the exclusion of the control of any other local government. This declaration is provided in conformance with F.S. ch. 180 and is necessary for the promotion of the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 1036, § I, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 70-5. - Amendment of the urban service area boundary. 
    The city may prescribe by subsequent ordinance or amendment hereto, adopted in accordance with F.S. ch. 180, reasonable regulations regarding all persons or entities living or doing business within the urban service area regarding their connection, when available, with any service or utility facilities constructed, provided, operated or to be constructed, provided or operated under provisions of F.S. ch. 180. 
(Ord. No. 1036, § I, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 70-6. - Reservation. 
    The city reserves the right to determine the manner, location, degree and extent of any utility service extensions within the urban service area by subsequent ordinance or resolution adopted in accordance with the procedures set forth in F.S. ch. 180. 
(Ord. No. 1036, § I, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 70-7. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of declaring an urban service area for the city and the surrounding area by this article are as follows: 
(1)  To prepare for the city's proposed acquisition of grant funding to construction of the collection system in the Blue Springs basin area and to provide for long-range capital improvements for the betterment of the health, safety and welfare of the public as a part of the city's long-range planning activities within the city and adjacent service area. 
(2)  To clearly identify an area for long range capital improvements relating to water and wastewater utility facilities and services. 
(3)  To provide for the efficient extension of municipal or urban services to the adjacent service area. 
(4)  To work with Jackson County as the adjacent service provider and clearly identify that, upon acquisition of the acquiring of the grant funding and construction of the project, the city will provide water and wastewater related services and facilities within the urban service area defined herein and avoid the duplication of such services. 
(Ord. No. 1036, § I, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 70-8. - Mortgage revenue certificates or debentures. 
    The city currently has the 2012 series bonds revenue bonds outstanding pledging the revenue of its water and sewer system. It is not anticipated that the expansion into the proposed service area will be grant funded and not impose any additional bonded indebtness on the city or its residents. 
(Ord. No. 1036, § I, 7-5-2016) 
Sec. 70-9. - Application of Code of Ordinances to utility area. 
    The provisions of chapter 70-2 of this code shall be applicable to the customers located within the utility service area as described on figure 1A annexed hereto and incorporated herein. 
(Ord. No. 1036, § I, 7-5-2016) 
Secs. 70-10-70-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 70-26. - Obstruction of sewer. 
    No person shall do any act or thing which may impair or obstruct the flow of any public sewer or clog up any appurtenance of any public sewer, or place therein any substance, solid or liquid, other than the waste products for which such sewer is provided. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Secs. 70-27-70-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 70-36. - Waterworks system. 
(a)  Where the municipal waterworks system shall be available, the owner of every lot or parcel of land within the city may connect, or cause the plumbing of any building thereon to be connected, with the municipal waterworks system of the city, and use the facilities of such system. All such connections shall be made in accordance with the rules and regulations which shall be adopted from time to time by the city commission, which rules and regulations shall provide for a charge for making any connection in such reasonable amount as the commission may fix and determine. 
(b)  To the full extent permitted by law, all buildings and structures at which the facilities of the municipal water supply and distribution system are reasonably available, shall connect therewith and use such facilities for the supply of water service. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-37. - Permit for sewer connection. 
(a)  Required. No person shall make any connection to, or shall connect with the sewage system or any sewer of the city unless he shall have first obtained from the city clerk a permit therefore. Such permit shall not be issued by the city clerk until the applicant therefore shall have filed with the city clerk an application for such permit setting forth the kind and character of connection to be made and specifying therein the place where such connection is proposed to be made, and until such applicant has paid to the city clerk the fees as set by the city commission. Further no person or entity shall alter its existing connection, or the collection system on its property leading to city's connection without first obtaining a permit from the city. 
(b)  Application forms. All forms for applications for permits and of permits required by subsection (a) of this section shall be prescribed by the city commission or by the city clerk and shall be furnished by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-38. - Approval by the city before making connection required. 
    Upon receiving a permit for connection the person receiving the permit shall, before beginning any work towards making such connection, display such permit to the city and shall give to the city all necessary information requested by the city relative to such connection, and shall have written or stamped thereon the approval or O.K. of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-39. - Separate connections for each separate unit. 
    Each residential unit, whether occupying one or more lots or whether occupying any lot or parcel jointly with any other residential unit, shall be considered a separate unit for the payment of the water fees and the sewage disposal fees, and separate connections and meters will be required for each of such units. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-40. - Article not to entitle trespass of private property. 
    This article shall not be construed to require or entitle any person to cross the private property of another to make any such sewer or water connection. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-41. - Connections made by city; recovery of costs; lien. 
    If any owner of any lot or parcel of land within the city shall fail and refuse to connect with and use the facilities of the sewer system of the city after notification by the city clerk, as provided in this article, then the city shall be authorized to make such connections, entering on or upon any such lot or parcel of land for the purpose of making such connection. The city shall thereupon be entitled to recover the cost of making such connection, together with reasonable penalties and interest and attorney's fees, by suit in any court of competent jurisdiction. In addition and as an alternative means of collecting such costs of making such connections, the city shall have a lien on such lot or parcel of land for such cost, which lien shall be of equal dignity with the lien of state and county and municipal taxes. Such lien may be foreclosed by the city in the same manner provided by the laws of the state for the foreclosure of mortgages upon real estate. Billing for sewer shall start 30 days after notification by the city clerk. If no water meter is available to determine usage, then the city clerk will estimate usage. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-42. - Prohibited connection; penalty for violation of section. 
    No person or entity shall be allowed alter its existing sewer connection or the connection system on its property or to connect into any water line or sewer line owned by the city without the written consent of the city, and then the connection with such line shall be made only under the direction and supervision of the city. Any property owner or plumber who shall make any connection without such consent of the city shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties provided in section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-43. - Connecting old plumbing; penalty for violation of section. 
    Whenever it is desirable to connect old plumbing with the city sewer main or water line, the owner or plumber contemplating doing such work shall notify the owner or plumber what alterations will be necessary to place such old plumbing in an acceptable condition for such connection. Any owner or plumber who shall make any connection without the approval of the plumbing inspector shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties provided in section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-44. - Maintenance of plumbing system-Generally. 
    The owner of the property shall be responsible for maintaining and keeping clean the water and sewer pipes leading and connecting from the plumbing system to the city distribution lines and main sewers. Such effluent shall be free of debris such as rags, clothing, and linen. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-45. - Same-Failure; penalty for violation of section. 
    Failure to keep the sewer pipe, i.e. the pipe leading from the plumbing system to the city main, clean and maintained in a proper manner will give the city the right to cut off the water connection, which shall not be reconnected until the sewer pipe is cleaned and maintained properly. In those instances where the owner has his own private water supply, the city shall have the right to cut off such water supply to the plumbing system, and the owner shall have no right to reconnect his own private water supply until the sewer pipe leading from the plumbing system to the city main has been maintained and cleaned and in proper condition. Any violation of this section by the owner by reconnecting his private water supply or the connection from the city water line, until such sewer pipes are cleaned and maintained properly, shall be considered a violation of this article and subject to the penalties provided in section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-46. - Connection requirements. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or engage another to connect any additional plumbing fixture to the water or sanitary sewer system of the city or to any private water or unsanitary sewer system which is already connected to the water or sanitary sewer system of the city, without first paying to the city the connection charge determined as hereafter stated. 
(b)  The connection charge to customers of the city sewer system shall be in the amount as prescribed in this article for all customers for whom sewer service is available. For all sewer customers of the city for which sewer service is not available, the connection charge shall be the charge as prescribed by ordinances of the city on the date the sewer service first becomes available for such customers. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Secs. 70-47-70-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DEPOSITS, FEES, RATES, AND BILLING PROCEDURES 

Sec. 70-56. - Deposits and fees. 
    The following deposits and fees shall be charged to all users of the city's utility services: 
Deposits: Water Gas Homeowner (Inside) $60.00 $50.00 Homeowner (Outside) $75.00 $62.50 Rental $125.00 $125.00 Business See Below  
Business: Shall be the amount of a yearly average bill for a similar usage customer, or a minimum of $100.00 for water and $100.00 for gas. The city reserves the right to set deposits for any customer to an amount equal to two month's bills as estimated by the city clerk if in his/her opinion, the minimum deposit is judged to be insufficient. When service to a customer is discontinued permanently, all deposits less any amount still due the city shall be refunded without interest. If a customer has three or more disconnections, the city reserves the right to require double the amount of the deposit with the city. 
Service Fees: Inside City Outside City Cut-On fee $15.00 $18.75 Transfer fee $20.00 $25.00 Light pilots $25.00 $31.25 Return trip $15.00 $18.75 Re-read fee $15.00 $18.75 Administrative fee $25.00 $25.00 After hours call out $50.00 $50.00 Reset fee $50.00 $62.50 Relocation of gas meter: Commercial-base charge $50.00 $62.50 Commercial-additional charge $12.50/foot $15.60/foot Residential No charge  
Special pick up: 
$15.00 for first five minutes; $5.00 for every five minutes thereafter. Any tire pickup there is an additional charge of $3.00 per tire. 
Returned check charge (Face value of check) Up to $50.00 $25.00 $50.00-$300.00 $30.00 Over $300.00 $40.00  
TAP FEES: 
* Taps larger than 2? will be at cost. 
Water Tap Inside City Outside City 5/8 ? × 3/4? meter $600.00 $750.00 1? meter $760.00 $950.00 11/2? meter $935.00 $1,168.75 2? meter $1,200.00 $1,500.00 Greater than 2? meter at cost at cost + 25 percent Sewer Tap 6' depth $1,300.00 $1,625.00 6' or greater depth at cost at cost + 25 percent Gas Tap Commercial/Residential $50.00 + $12.50 per foot $62.50 + $15.60 per foot  
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-57. - Charges established by resolution. 
    To the extent not prohibited by law or bonding requirements, connection fees, fees charged for other miscellaneous services charges for herein may be established and/or amended by appropriate resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-58. - Rates. 
(a)  Water user rates. A rate schedule has been adopted by the city providing for the following water user rates: 
Monthly Base Charge: 5/8 ? × 3/4? or 3/4? meter $9.00 1? meter $20.00 11/2? meter $36.25 2? meter $58.05 3? meter $108.70 4? meter $181.15 6? meter $362.25 8? meter $579.65 Per unit (for multi-family master metered customers) $9.00 Volumetric charge: Per 1,000 gallons (All Usage) $2.00  
(b)  Sewer user rates. A rate schedule has been adopted by the city providing for the following sewer user rates: 
Monthly Base Charge: 5/8 ? × 3/4? or 3/4? meter $20.15 1? meter $50.30 11/2? meter $100.60 2? meter $160.95 3? meter $301.70 4? meter $502.85 6? meter $1,005.70 8? meter $1,609.05 Per unit (for multi-family master metered customers) $20.15 Volumetric charge: Per 1,000 gallons (all usage) $3.83  
(c)  Users of water and sewer service. The city reserves the right to enter into contracts with large users of water and/or sewer service for the purpose of setting and determining a monthly charge or rate for the use of such services, which monthly rate or charge may be computed upon a different basis than set forth in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. Such contracts shall be entered into by means of resolution duly adopted by the city commission. 
(d)  Connection charge defined. The term "connection charge" shall include within its meaning, or be interchangeable with, the term "tap-on fee," without distinction. 
(e)  To the extent not prohibited by law or bonding requirements, the rates established herein may be established and/or amended by appropriate resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Secs. 70-59-70-61. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1036, § I, adopted July 5, 2016, repealed § 70-61, which pertained to monthly surcharge on utility bills for fire equipment and derived from Ord. No. 1032, § 1, adopted Feb. 3, 2015. 
Sec. 70-62. - Deposits required for land not connected to water system. 
    The owner, tenant or occupant of each lot or parcel of land within the city who is obligated to pay sewer service charges, and who is not connected to the water system within 30 days after such sewer service charges shall become effective or within 30 days after the construction on such lot or parcel of a building for residential, commercial or industrial use, shall make a deposit with the city clerk of an amount not less than the amount which the city manager shall estimate as the total sewer service charges to be paid by such owner, tenant or occupant in the next ensuing three months, to ensure the payment of such sewer service charges as the same become due and payable. Such deposit shall be subject to be applied by the city clerk to the payment of such sewer service charges, if and when delinquent. If such deposit shall not be made, the city manager shall disconnect such premises from the sewer system, and the city shall proceed to recover the amount of such sewer service charges as may have accrued in such lawful manner as it may deem advisable. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-63. - Payment of fees and bills required. 
(a)  Bills for the monthly charges and fees enumerated in this division shall be submitted and shall be payable on the first day of each month. If such monthly bill shall remain unpaid on and after the 15 th day of such month for such service, penalties in the following amounts will be added to the bill: 
Inside city: $10.00, or ten percent if greater than $100.00; 
Outside city: $12.50, or ten percent if greater than $100.00. 
    After the 20 th of the month services to the consumer shall be subject to discontinuance, and shall not be reconnected after discontinuance until all past due amounts are fully paid, including a $25.00 administrative fee. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-64. - Collection of sewer fees where owner has private water supply. 
    Where sewage disposal fees are not paid in accordance with provisions outlined in this division, in those instances where the owner has his own private water supply, the city shall have a right to cut off such water supply to the plumbing system, and the owner shall have no right to reconnect his own private water supply until the sewage disposal fees shall have been paid in full. Any violation by the owner of this section by reconnecting his private water supply, until such sewage disposal fees are paid in full, shall be considered a violation of this section and subject to the penalties provided in section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-65. - Free service. 
    No water or sewage disposal service shall be furnished or rendered free of charge to any person whatsoever, and the city and each and every agency, department or instrumentality which uses either or both such services shall pay therefore at the rates fixed by this division. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-66. - Failure or refusal to pay charges and rates. 
    Any failure or refusal to pay the charges or rates provided in this division shall be construed to be a violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Secs. 70-67-70-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BACKFLOW AND CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL 

Sec. 70-76. - Purpose of division; cross connection program adopted. 
(a)  The city commission hereby adopts and establishes this division for the control of backflow and cross connection within the city to protect the city water supply from pollution. 
(b)  The city commission hereby approves and adopts as part of this division the city cross connection program dated May 3, 1988, and any amendments hereafter approved by the city commission. The cross connection program may be amended by the city commission, from time to time, to protect the health and welfare of the residents, and any amendments shall automatically become part of this division and be enforced in accordance with the enforcement provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-77. - Responsibility of director. 
    The director, department of public works, or his designated agent, shall inspect the plumbing in every building or premises in this city as frequently as in his judgment may be necessary to ensure that such plumbing has been installed in such a manner as to prevent the possibility of pollution of the water supply of the city by the plumbing. The director shall notify or cause to be notified in writing the owner or authorized agent of the owner of any such building or premises, to correct, within a reasonable time set by the director, any plumbing installed or existing contrary to or in violation of this division and which, in his judgment, may, therefore, permit the pollution of the city water supply, or otherwise adversely affect the public health. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-78. - Inspection. 
    The director, or his designated agent, shall have the right of entry into any building, during reasonable hours, for the purpose of making inspection of the plumbing systems installed in such building or premises, provided that with respect to the inspection of any single-family dwelling, consent to such inspection shall first be obtained from a person of suitable age and discretion therein or in control thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-79. - Maintenance requirements. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be the responsibility of building and premises owners to maintain all backflow preventers and vacuum breakers within the building or on the premises in good working order and to make no piping or other arrangements for the purpose of bypassing backflow devices. 
(b)  Backflow preventers. Periodic testing and inspection schedules shall be established by the director for all backflow preventers and the interval between such testing and inspections and overhauls of each device shall be established in accordance with the age and condition of the device. Inspection intervals should not exceed one year, and overhaul intervals should not exceed five years. These devices should be inspected frequently after the initial installation to ensure that they have been installed properly and that debris resulting from the installation has not interfered with the functioning of the device. The testing procedures shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, when approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-80. - Appeals board. 
(a)  Members of board; chairman. The city commission shall be designated as the backflow and cross connection program appeals board to decide appeals from any decision, ruling or determination of the inspection by the director of public works or his designated agent. The mayor shall serve as chairman of the appeals board. 
(b)  Appeals procedure. Any person seeking a variance from the provisions of this division or any person taking exception to and who is uniquely affected by any decision, ruling, requirement, rule, regulation or order of the inspection agency may appeal to the board as established by this section. Such appeals shall be made within 15 days after receiving notice of such decision, ruling, requirement, rule, regulation, or order by filing a written notice of appeal directly to the appeals board specifying the ground thereof and the relief requested. Such an appeal shall act as a stay of the decision, ruling, requirement, rule, regulation or order in question until the appeals board has taken final action on the appeal, except when the inspection agency has deemed that a high hazard risk is involved. The appeals board, not less than 30 days after the date of filing an appeal, shall set a date for the hearing and shall give notice of the hearing by mail to the interested parties. 
(c)  Hearings. Hearings before the appeals board shall be conducted in the following manner: 
(1)  The chairman of the appeals board shall act as the hearing examiner to conduct such hearings. 
(2)  Any person making an appeal who is uniquely affected by the action of the inspection agency may appear in person or by agent or attorney and present evidence both written or oral pertinent to the questions and issues involved and may examine and cross examine witnesses. 
(3)  All testimony shall be under oath and recorded. The appeals board is authorized to have all the testimony transcribed, and a transcript of such testimony, if transcribed, shall be made available to the respondents or any party to the hearing upon payment of the normal fee, which shall not exceed the cost of transcribing such testimony. 
(4)  After due consideration of the written and oral statements, the testimony and arguments submitted at the hearing upon such complaint or upon default in appearance of the respondent on the return date specified in the formal notice of complaint, the appeals board shall issue and enter such final order or make such final determination as it shall deem appropriate, and shall immediately notify the respondent thereof, in writing, by certified mail. Such order or determination shall be approved by at least a majority of members of the appeals board. The chairman shall vote only in cases of ties. 
(5)  Upon failure of the appeals board to enter a final order or determination within 60 days after the final argument of any such hearing, the respondent shall be entitled to treat for all purposes such failure to act as a finding favorable to the respondent. 
(6)  Any person aggrieved by any final order or determination of the appeals board under this division may seek judicial review thereof by common law writ of certiorari. No judicial review shall be available until and after all administrative remedies have been exhausted. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-81. - Penalty for violation of division; notice; fine. 
(a)  Notification of violation. The director shall notify the owner or authorized agent of the owner of the building or premises in which there is found a violation of this division of such violation. The director shall set a reasonable time for the owner to have the violation removed or corrected. Upon failure of the owner to have the defect corrected by the end of the specified time interval, the director may, if in his judgment an imminent health hazard exists, cause the water service to the building or premises to be terminated, and/or recommend such additional fines or penalties to be invoked as may be provided in this section. 
(b)  Fines. The owner or authorized agent of the owner responsible for the maintenance of the plumbing systems in the building who knowingly permits a violation to remain uncorrected after the expiration of time set by the director shall, upon conviction thereof by the court, be required to pay a fine of not more than $100.00 for each violation. Each day of failure to comply with the requirements of this division, after the specified time provided, shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Secs. 70-82-70-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SEWER USE 

Sec. 70-91. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (or 1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions and grams per liter of solution. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (or 1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Slug means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    Storm drain or storm sewer means a sewer which carries stormwater and surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water. 
    Suspended solids means solids that are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-92. - Penalty for violation of division. 
(a)  Notice; time limit for abatement. Any person found to be violating the provisions of this division shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Fine. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall, upon conviction, be fined in the amount set out in section 1-14. 
(c)  Liability for expenses, losses or damages. Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-93. - Connections with sewer. 
(a)  Required. The owner of each lot or parcel of land within the city upon which lot or parcel of land any building or trailer used as a dwelling is now situated or shall hereafter be situated, for either residential, commercial or industrial use, shall connect or cause such building or trailer to be connected with the public sewer facilities of the municipal sewer system of the city and use such facilities within six months following notification to do so by the city. All such connections shall be made in accordance with rules and regulations which shall be adopted from time to time by the city commission, which rules and regulations shall provide for a charge for making any such connections in such reasonable amount as such council may fix and determine. No connection or connections shall be required where the sewer system or line is more than 200 feet from such lot or parcel of land. 
(b)  Failure or refusal; violation. Any failure or refusal by the owner to connect to the city sewer system after notification to do so shall be construed to be a violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-94. - Unlawful construction. 
    No person shall build or remodel or cause to be built or remodeled any structure used for human habitation of occupancy within the city which is within 200 feet of a public sanitary sewer line, unless it is provided with water-carried sewerage facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-95. - Sanitary requirements. 
    Every residence and building in which human beings reside, are employed or congregate shall be required to have a sanitary method of disposing of human excrement, namely either a sanitary water closet that is connected with the city sewer or an approved type of septic tank. A septic tank will be used only if the property is more than 200 feet from the sewer line. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-96. - Disposal requirements. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning or leasing any premises in the city to permit the disposal of any human excrement on any property, leased or rented by any such person or the agent of any such person except in a sanitary waste closet where sewage lines are available. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-97. - Septic tank. 
    No septic tank other than those approved by the state department of pollution control shall be constructed within the corporate limits of the city. No septic tank shall be constructed within 200 feet of the sewer line. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-98. - Private sewage disposal. 
    The disposal of sewage by means other than the use of the available sanitary sewage system shall be in accordance with local, county and state law. The disposal of sewage by private disposal systems shall be permissible only in those instances where service from the available sanitary sewage system is not available and such system is approved by the county health department. 
State Law reference- On-site sewage disposal systems, F.S. § 381.272. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-99. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  Permit required. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the public works director. 
(b)  Expenses. All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-100. - Separate connections required; exception. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. The city shall bear no expense or liability for the easement or access for private sewer. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-101. - Materials and methods to conform to codes. 
    The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-102. - Elevation of building sewer. 
    The building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer sanitary, sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged from the building. All new construction shall be constructed with a floor elevation six inches above street or manhole cover. Building with floor elevation, less than six inches above the street or manhole cover shall install and maintain on their sanitary sewer line a pump or device that will prevent backflow from occurring. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-103. - Surface runoff and groundwater excluded from building sewers. 
    No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. Any existing connections shall be removed at the owner's expense within 60 days after notification by city. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-104. - Connection specifications. 
    The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the State of Florida Building Code. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the public works director before installation. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-105. - Inspection of connection. 
    The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the appropriate building/city official when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the building/city official or his representative. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-106. - Excavations; protection; restoration. 
    All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city at owner's expense. In addition, owners are required to properly notify local utilities prior to excavating by contacting Sunshine State One-Call of Florida in order for lines to be located and marked. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-107. - Unpolluted waters. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the county health department, state water management district and state department of environmental protection. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the state department of environmental protection to a storm sewer, or natural outlet. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-108. - Prohibited discharges. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having the pH lower than 5.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or the interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-109. - Public works director or his/her designee to determine acceptability of certain wastes. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the substances, materials, water or wastes listed in subsection (c) of this section if it appears likely, in the opinion of the public works director, that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, having an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. 
(b)  In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the public works director will give consideration of such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. 
(c)  The substances prohibited are: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit or 65 degrees Celsius. 
(2)  Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit or zero and 65 degrees Celsius. 
(3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the public works director. 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not. 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, cyanide and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the public works director or the state department of environmental regulation for such materials. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the public works director, as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving water. 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the public works director in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(8)  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5. 
(9)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues or of dissolved solids such as, but not limited to sodium chloride and sodium sulfate; 
b.  Excessive discoloration such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions; and 
c.  Unusual BOD (above 200 milligrams per liter), chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works. 
(10)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(11)  Waters or wastes containing suspended solids in excess of 300 milligrams per liter. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-110. - Unacceptable wastes; action by public works director or his/her designee. 
(a)  If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 70-109, and which in the judgment of the public works director or the state department of environmental protection, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the public works director may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of section 70-115. 
(b)  If the public works director permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the public works director, city engineer and state department of environmental protection and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-111. - Interceptors. 
    Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the public works director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable waste, sand, or other harmful ingredients. Such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the public works director and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-112. - Owner to maintain preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities. 
    Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-113. - Control manholes, meters and appurtenances for observation, sampling and measurement. 
(a)  When required by the public works director, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial waste shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. 
(b)  The manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the public works director or city engineer. The manhole equipment shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-114. - Standards for measurements, tests and analyses. 
    All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this division shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards of life, limb and property. The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether grab samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, biochemical oxygen demand and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH's are determined from periodic grab samples. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-115. - Special arrangements for industrial concerns. 
    No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefore, by the industrial concern. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-116. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
(a)  The public works director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this division. The public works director or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(b)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (a) of this section, the public works director or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company. The company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city's employees, and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in section 70-113. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-117. - Easements. 
    The public works director and other duly authorized employees of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on such easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Secs. 70-118-70-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - INDUSTRIAL WASTE 

Sec. 70-131. - Purpose, objectives and policy of division. 
(a)  This division sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403). 
(b)  The objectives of this division are to: 
(1)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; 
(2)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will pass through the system inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)  Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the system; and 
(4)  Provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal wastewater system. 
(c)  This division provides for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the municipal wastewater system through the issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user reporting, assumes that existing customer's capacity will not be preempted and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established in this division. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-132. - Scope of division. 
    This division shall apply to the city and to persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city publicly owned treatment works. This division is a supplement to division 5 of this article. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the public works director of sewage works or of wastewater division of the city shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-133. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act or the act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
    Approval authority means the director of the state department of environmental protection. 
    Authorized representative of industrial user means: 
(1)  A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president, if the industrial user is a corporation; 
(2)  A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; and 
(3)  A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure five days at 20 degrees Celsius expressed in terms of weight and concentration pounds per day and milligrams per liter, respectively. 
    Building sewer means a sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the publicly owned treatment works. 
    Categorical standards means national categorical pretreatment standards or pretreatment standard. 
    Control authority means the approved authority or the public works director if the city has an approved pretreatment program under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.11. 
    Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
    Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state. 
    Environmental Protection Agency or EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of such agency. 
    Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time. 
    Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels' chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
    Indirect discharge means the discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under section 307(b) or (c) of the act (33 USC 1317), into the publicly owned treatment works including holding tank waste discharged into the system. 
    Industrial user means a source of indirect discharge which does not constitute a discharge of pollutants under regulations issued pursuant to section 402 of the act (33 USC 1342). 
    Interference means inhibition or disruption of the publicly owned treatment works treatment processes or operations which contributes to a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the publicly owned treatment works in accordance with section 405 of the act (33 USC 1345) or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or more stringent state criteria, including those contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA, applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the publicly owned treatment works. 
    National categorical pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the environmental protection agency in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the act (33 USC 1347) which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System or NPDES permit means a permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the act (33 USC 1342). 
    National Prohibitive Discharge Standard or Prohibitive Discharge Standards means any regulation developed under the authority of section 307(b) of the act and 40 CFR 403.5. 
    New source means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the publication of proposed regulations prescribing a section 307(c) (33 USC 1317) categorical pretreatment standard which will be applicable to such source, if such standard is thereafter promulgated within 120 days of proposal in the Federal Register. Where the standard is promulgated later than 120 days after the proposal, a new source means any source, the construction of which is commenced after the date of promulgation of the standard. 
    pH means the negative logarithm (base 10) of the effective hydrogen ion concentration or hydrogen-ion activity expressed in gram equivalents per liter of solution. 
    Pollutant means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt or industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water. 
    Pollution means the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological or radiological integrity of water. 
    Pretreatment or treatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a publicly owned treatment works. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes, or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
    Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works as defined by section 212 of the act (33 USC 1292) which is owned in this instance by the city. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this division, POTW shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's POTW. 
    POTW treatment plant means that portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater. 
    Significant industrial user means any industrial user of the city's wastewater disposal system who: 
(1)  Has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average work day; 
(2)  Has a flow greater than five percent of the hydraulic or organic design capacity of the receiving wastewater treatment facility; 
(3)  Has in his wastes toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to section 307 of the act of state statutes and rules; or 
(4)  Is found by the city, state department of environmental protection or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality or air emissions generated by the system. 
    Standard industrial classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972. 
    State indirect discharge permit means a permit issued pursuant to the act or the state. 
    Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
    Suspended solids means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of CWA 307(a) or other acts. 
    User means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the city's POTW. 
    Wastewater means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW. 
    Waters of the state means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoir, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the state or any portion of the state. 
    Wastewater contribution permit means as set forth in section 70-149. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 70-134. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
BOD -Biochemical oxygen demand 
CFR -Code of Federal Regulations 
COD -Chemical oxygen demand 
EPA -Environmental Protection Agency 
l -Liter 
mg -Milligrams 
mg/l -Milligrams per liter 
NPDES -National pollutant discharge elimination system 
POTW -Publicly owned treatment works 
SIC -Standard industrial classification 
SWDA -Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. 6901, et seq. 
USC -United States Code 
TN -Total nitrogen 
TP -Total phosphorus 
NH3-N -Ammonia as nitrogen 
TSS -Total suspended solids 
FDEP -Florida Department of Environmental Protection 
SID -State indirect discharge permit 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-135. - Civil penalties for violation of division. 
    Any user who is found to have violated an order of the city or who willfully or negligently failed to comply with any provision of this division, and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued under this division, shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for each offense. Each day a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided in this section, the city may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this division or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued under this division. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-136. - Falsifying information; penalty for violation of section. 
    Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this division, or wastewater contribution permit, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this division, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a first degree misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for not more than one year, or by both. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-137. - General discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all such users of a POTW whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. A user may not contribute the following to any POTW: 
(1)  Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system, or at any point in the system, be more than five percent nor any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides and any other substances which the city, the state or EPA has notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to the system. 
(2)  Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to, grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of flue or lubricating oil, and mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes. 
(3)  Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or greater than 8.5, unless the POTW is specifically designed to accommodate such wastewater, or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structure, equipment, or personnel of the POTW. 
(4)  Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, or to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to section 307(a) of the act. 
(5)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(6)  Any substances which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case, shall a substance discharge to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under section 405 of the act; or any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(7)  Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES or state disposal system permit or the receiving water quality standards. 
(8)  Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(9)  Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the POTW which exceeds 40 degrees Celsius (104 degrees Fahrenheit) unless the POTW treatment plant is designed to accommodate such treatment. 
(10)  Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released at a flow rate or pollutant concentration which a user knows or has reason to know will cause interference to the POTW. In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain concentration or qualities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration, quantities or flow during normal operation. 
(11)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the public works director in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(12)  Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance. 
(b)  No user shall contribute to the POTW any wastewater containing in excess of the following limits: 
BOD-1,000 mg/l 
TSS-1,000 mg/l 
NH4-150 mg/l 
TKN-190 mg/l 
TN-225 mg/l 
TP-45 mg/l 
(c)  When the public works director determines that a user is contributing to the POTW, any of the substances enumerated in this section in such amounts as to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or in excess of the limits set forth in this section, the public works director shall: 
(1)  Advise the user of the impact of the contribution on the POTW; and 
(2)  Develop effluent limitations for such user to correct the interference with the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-138. - Federal categorical pretreatment standards-Generally. 
    Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this division for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this division. The public works director shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-139. - Same-Modification. 
(a)  Where the city's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards, the city may apply to the approval authority for modification of specific limits in the federal pretreatment standards. 
(b)  The term "consistent removal" shall mean reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent which is achieved by the system in 95 percent of samples taken when measured according to the procedures set forth in 40 CFR 403.7(c), "General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution," promulgated pursuant to the act. 
(c)  The city may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the federal pretreatment standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR 403.7 are fulfilled and prior approval from the approval authority is obtained. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-140. - Pollutant limitations; permit required. 
    No user shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following limits without first obtaining an industrial permit: 
200 mg/l BOD 
30 mg/l NH3-N 
9.0 mg/l TP 
1.5 mg/l aluminum 
0.20 mg/l antimony 
100 mg/l bromate 
0.02 mg/l cadmium 
No greater than 40 mg/l chlorine demand 
200 mg/l TSS 
45 mg/l TN 
1.0 mg/l zinc 
0.10 mg/l cyanide 
2.0 mg/l iron 
0.05 mg/l mercury 
0.05 mg/l arsenic 
1.10 mg/l beryllium 
0.10 mg/l free bromine 
1.0 mg/l copper 
Chromium: 
Total-1.0 mg/l 
Hexavalent-0.5 mg/l 
0.80 mg/l nickel 
0.003 ug/l aldrin plus dieldrin 
0.001 ug/l DDT 
0.001 ug/l endosufan 
0.010 ug/l guthion 
5.0 mg/l fluorides 
0.05 mg/l lead 
0.08 mg/l phenol 
0.004 ug/l chlordane 
0.100 ug/l demeton 
0.004 ug/l endrin 
0.001 ug/l hepachlon 
0.004 ug/l lindane 
0.03 ug/l methoxychlon 
0.04 ug/l parathion 
8.5 maximum pH 
60 mg/l oil and grease 
0.001 ug/l polychlorinated-biphenylis 
0.04 ug/l silver 
0.100 ug/l malathion 
0.001 ug/l myrex 
0.005 ug/l toxaphene 
6.0 minimum pH 
3.0 ug/l phthalate esters 
0.10 mg/l selenium 
40 degrees Celsius (104 degrees Fahrenheit) temperature, maximum 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-141. - State requirements. 
    State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this division. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-142. - City's right of revision. 
    The city reserves the right to establish by ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in section 70-131. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-143. - Excessive discharge. 
    No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the federal categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the city or state. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-144. - Accidental discharges-Generally. 
(a)  Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this division. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be approved by the city before construction of the facility. 
(b)  All existing users shall complete such a plan within 90 days after effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived. No user who commences contribution to the POTW after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the city. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this division. 
(c)  In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume and corrective actions. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-145. - Same-Written notice. 
    Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the public works director a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills or any other damage to person or property, nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this division or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-146. - Same-Notice to employees. 
    A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-147. - Fees. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery costs from users of the city's wastewater disposal system for the implementation of the program established in this division. The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in the city's schedule of charges and fees. 
(b)  Charges and fees. The city may adopt charges and fees which may include: 
(1)  Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program; 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures; 
(3)  Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(4)  Fees for permit application; 
(5)  Fees for filing appeals; 
(6)  Fees for consistent removal, by the city, of pollutants otherwise subject to federal pretreatment standards; and 
(7)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained in this section. 
(c)  Separate from other fees. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this division and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-148. - Wastewater discharges. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge without a city permit to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, or to the POTW any wastewater except as authorized by the public works director in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-149. - Wastewater contribution permits. 
(a)  General permits. All significant users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting to or contributing to the POTW. 
(b)  Application. Users required to obtain a wastewater contribution permit shall complete and file with the city an application in the form prescribed by the city and accompanied by a fee of $500.00. New users shall apply at least 90 days prior to connecting to or contributing to the POTW. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and location, if different from address. 
(2)  SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended. 
(3)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to, those mentioned in sections 70-137 through 70-146 as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the act and contained in 40 CFR 136, as amended. 
(4)  Time and duration of contribution. 
(5)  Average daily and 15-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variation, if any. 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation. 
(7)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all materials which are or could be discharged. 
(8)  Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any city, state, or federal pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards. 
(9)  If additional pretreatment or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule: 
a.  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.). 
b.  No increment referred to in subsection (b)(9)a of this section shall exceed nine months. 
c.  Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the public works director including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay and the steps being taken by the owner to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the public works director. 
(10)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production. 
(11)  Type and amount of raw materials processed, average and maximum, per day. 
(12)  Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system. 
(13)  Any other information as may be deemed by the city to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
(c)  Review and issuance. The city will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the city may issue a wastewater contribution permit subject to terms and conditions provided in this section. 
(d)  Modification. Within nine months of the promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard, the wastewater contribution permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater contribution permit as required by subsection (b) of this section, the user shall apply for a wastewater contribution permit within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard. In addition, the user with an existing wastewater contribution permit shall submit to the public works director within 180 days after the promulgation of an applicable federal categorical pretreatment standard the information required by subsections (b)(8) and (b)(9) of this section. If there has been an increase or change in an industrial user's contribution to the system, the discharger is required to reapply for a permit to cover those changes. 
(e)  Conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this division and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. Permits may contain the following: 
(1)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer; 
(2)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
(4)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection sampling facilities; 
(5)  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule; 
(6)  Compliance schedules; 
(7)  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports (see section 70-150); 
(8)  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge, as specified by the city, and affording city access thereto; 
(9)  Requirements for notification of the city or any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater treatment system; 
(10)  Requirements for notification of slug discharges as per section 70-157; and 
(11)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this division. 
(f)  Duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the city during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in sections 70-137 through 70-146 are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(g)  Transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises or a new or changed operation without the approval of the city. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-150. - Reporting requirements for permittee. 
(a)  Compliance date report. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the public works director a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards and requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standard or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance and pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user, and certified to by a qualified professional. 
(b)  Periodic compliance reports. Periodic compliance reports shall be submitted as follows: 
(1)  Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit to the public works director during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the public works director, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily flows which during the reporting period exceeded the average daily flow reported in section 70-149. At the discretion of the public works director and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the public works director may agree to alter the months during which such reports are to be submitted. 
(2)  The public works director may impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the report required by subsection (b)(1) of this section shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production and mass where requested by the public works director, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standard. All analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the administrator pursuant to section 304(g) of the act and contained in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the administrator. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the administrator. (Comment: Where 40 CFR 136 does not include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the EPA publication, Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents for Prior Pollutants, April, 1977, and amendments thereto, or with any other sampling and analytical procedures approved by the administrator.) 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-151. - Monitoring the facilities. 
(a)  The city shall require to be provided and operated at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the building sewer or internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. 
(b)  There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. 
(c)  Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following written notification by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-152. - Inspection and sampling. 
    The city shall inspect the facility of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this division is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the city or their representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination or in the performance of any of their duties. The city, approval authority, where the NPDES state is the approval authority, and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city, approval authority and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-153. - Pretreatment. 
(a)  Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this division and shall achieve compliance with all federal categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations, as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this division. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
(b)  The city shall annually publish in a city newspaper a list of the users which were not in compliance with any pretreatment requirements or standards at least once during the 12 previous months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the user during the same 12 months. 
(c)  All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the EPA or approval authority upon request. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-154. - Confidential information. 
(a)  Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. 
(b)  When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this division, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, state disposal system permit or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(c)  Information accepted by the city as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the city until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the user. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-155. - Harmful contributions-Generally. 
(a)  The city may suspend the wastewater treatment service or a wastewater contribution permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the city, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the environment, causes interference to the POTW or causes the city to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. 
(b)  Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and the wastewater contribution permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall take such steps as deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The city shall reinstate the wastewater contribution permit or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city within 15 days of the date of occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-156. - Same-Revocation of permit. 
    A wastewater contribution permit may be revoked upon: 
(1)  Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge; 
(2)  Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or 
(4)  Violation of conditions of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-157. - Same-Notification of violation. 
    Whenever the city finds that any user has violated or is violating this division, wastewater contribution permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained in this division, the city may serve upon such user a written notice stating the nature of the violation and requiring the user to resample and submit both sets of results within 15 days of known violation and further within 30 days of the date of the notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-158. - Same-Show cause hearing. 
(a)  The city may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to enter the POTW to show cause before the city why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the city regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before the city commission why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation. 
(b)  The city may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate any of its members or any officer or employee of the assigned department to: 
(1)  Issue in the name of the city notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings; 
(2)  Take the evidence; and 
(3)  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the city for action thereon. 
(c)  At any hearing held pursuant to this division, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded. The recording will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof. 
(d)  After the city has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been installed on and existing treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-159. - Same-Legal action. 
    If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the city's wastewater disposal system, contrary to the provisions of this division, federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the city, the city attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal or equitable relief in the circuit court of this county. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Secs. 70-160-70-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GAS SYSTEM 

Sec. 70-181. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means any person applying for gas service from the city at one location. 
    Atmospheric pressure means 14.65 pounds to the square inch, irrespective of actual elevation or location of the point of measurement above sea level or variations in atmospheric pressure from time to time. 
    BTU or British thermal unit means the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of one pound of water one degree Fahrenheit at 60 degrees Fahrenheit. 
    CCF means 100 cubic feet of gas. 
    Cubic foot , for the purpose of measurement, means: 
(1)  When gas is metered at the standard delivery pressure, a cubic foot of gas shall be defined as the volume of gas which, at the temperature and pressure existing in the meter, occupies one cubic foot. 
(2)  When gas is metered at other than the standard delivery pressure, a cubic foot shall be defined as the volume of gas which, at a flowing temperature of 60 degrees Fahrenheit and at an absolute pressure of 14.73 pounds per square inch, occupies one cubic foot, and meter readings will be adjusted to such temperature and pressure base. 
(3)  When measurement is by means of orifice meters, volumes shall be computed in accordance with the joint Bureau of Standards, A.G.A., A.S.M.E. specifications published May 6, 1935, as Gas Measurement Committee Report No. 2 of the American Gas Association, and any modifications and amendments thereof. 
    Customer means any person purchasing gas service from the city under this article. 
    Day means a period of 24 consecutive hours beginning and ending at 8:00 a.m. Central Standard Time, or at such other hour as city and customer may agree upon. 
    Flowing temperature means the arithmetical average of the temperature of the gas flowing through the meters as recorded by a recording thermometer installed at the point of measurement. Where such installation is not provided, the flowing temperature of the gas shall be assumed to be 60 degrees Fahrenheit. 
    House piping means all piping and fittings installed within the house or building up to and including the last fitting of the meter or regulator setting. 
    MCF means 1,000 cubic feet of gas. 
    Meter or regulator setting means all piping and fittings between the service line and the first valve or fitting of the house piping. Meters shall not extend more than ten inches from the wall. In those instances where meters are on sidewalks and not less than 61/2 feet above the surface of sidewalks. 
    Month means the period between any two regular readings of company's meters at approximately 30-day intervals. 
    Service classification means: 
(1)  Residential service means service to customer supplied for residential purposes in a single-family dwelling or building or in an individual flat or apartment in a multiple family dwelling or building or portion thereof occupied as the home, residence or sleeping place of one or more persons. 
(2)  Commercial service means service to customers engaged in selling, warehousing or distributing a commodity, in some business activity or in a profession, or in some form of economic or social activity (offices, stores, clubs, hotels, etc.) and for purposes that do not come directly under another classification of service. 
    Service line means all piping between the main tap up to and including the first valve or fitting of the meter or regulator setting. 
    Standard delivery pressure , as measured at the outlet of meter on customer's premises, means four ounces. 
    Therm means 100,000 British thermal units. 
    Total heating value means the number of British thermal units produced by combustion in a recording calorimeter at constant pressure of the amount of gas which would occupy a volume of one cubic foot at a temperature of 60 degrees Fahrenheit, if saturated with water vapor, and under a pressure equal to that of 30 inches of mercury at 32 degrees Fahrenheit and under standard gravitational force (acceleration 980.665 centimeters per second) with air of the same temperature and pressure as the gas, when the products of combustion are cooled to the initial temperature of the gas and air and when the water formed by combustion is condensed to the liquid state. For the purposes of measurement, the city may at its option utilize the total heating value of the natural gas as reported delivered by city's supplier. 
    Year means a period of 365 consecutive days, except that in a year having a date of February 29, such year shall consist of 366 consecutive days. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 70-182. - Service furnished under rate schedule; term of agreement. 
(a)  A service charge in the following amounts shall be charged monthly. This charge will be billed to every meter location regardless of usage: 
Residential customer charge $4.00 Commercial customer charge $16.00 Or as governed by individual contract between city and customer  
(b)  The base price for natural gas shall be the actual cost of the city of each therm of gas purchased plus maintenance and distribution charge of the following: 
Residential maintenance and distribution charge $0.42 per therm Commercial maintenance and distribution charge $0.35 per therm Or as governed by individual contract between city and customer  
(c)  The city reserves the right to enter into contracts with large users of natural gas service for the purpose of setting and determining a monthly charge or rate for the use of such services, which monthly rate or charge may be computed upon a different basis than set forth in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. Such contracts shall be entered into and adopted by the city commission. 
(d)  The maintenance and distribution charge as provided hereinabove shall increase on October 1 of each year, beginning with the year 2010, by three percent or the consumer price index (CPI), whichever is less. 
(e)  To the extent not prohibited by law or any bond requirement, the city may amend the charges set forth herein by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-183. - Rate contracts with applicants for unusual loads. 
(a)  Rates are available for certain classes of customers. These rates and the conditions under which they are applicable are set forth in the rate schedules of the city. 
(b)  The city will require a written contract with special guarantee from applicants whose unusual characteristics of load would require excessive investment in facilities or whose requirements for service are of a special nature. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-184. - Application for service. 
    An application for service will be required of each applicant by the city. Such application shall contain the information necessary to determine the type of service desired and the conditions under which service will be rendered. If necessary, the application or contract for service shall be in writing. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-185. - Deposits 
    Refer to Division 3. Deposits, Fees, Rates, and Billing Procedures. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-186. - Customer's installation. 
(a)  The customer shall make or procure satisfactory conveyance to the city of all necessary easements and rights-of-way, including right of convenient access to city's property, for furnishing adequate and continuous service or the removal of city's property upon termination of service. 
(b)  All house piping and equipment beyond the city's meter and accessories thereto, necessary to utilize service furnished by city, shall be installed by and belong to the customer and be maintained at his expense. The customer shall bring his piping to a point for connection to city's meter or meters at a location satisfactory to the city. 
(c)  The city reserves the right to inspect and approve the installation, which shall be installed in accordance with current Florida building codes, of all pipe and equipment to utilize the city's gas; but such inspection or failure to make inspection or the fact that the city may connect to such installation shall not make the city liable for any loss or damage which may be occasioned by the use of such installation or equipment used therefrom or of the city's service. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-187. - Service connections. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to designate the locations and specifications for the main line taps, service lines, curb cocks, meters and regulators or governors and to determine the amount of space which must be left unobstructed for the installation and maintenance thereof. 
(b)  The applicant may request an alteration of such a designation, but, if consented to by city, the excess cost of such revised designation over and above the cost of the original city design shall be borne by the applicant. 
(c)  The service lines, curb cocks, meters and regulators or governors will be installed and maintained by city and shall remain the property of city. 
(d)  The city may waive or modify tap fees for certain locations when it is considered by the city manager or city commission to be in the best interest of the city. This especially applies to areas where new distribution lines are laid and the city is seeking to gain new customers. 
(e)  The city shall run all gas lines from the main to the meter hanger. The connection fees listed in the subsection include up to 100 feet of piping for residential, and up to 200 feet of piping for non-residential, for pipe less than two inches in diameter. Installations requiring greater piping distances shall be charged the cost of all piping that exceeds 100 feet residential and 200 feet non-residential allowances. Pipe two inches in diameter or larger shall be charged on a cost basis including labor and materials, unless waived by the city manager or city commission. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-188. - Metering. 
(a)  The city will provide each customer with a meter for each applicable rate schedule. 
(b)  The customer, acting jointly with the city, may install, maintain and operate at his expense such check measuring equipment as desired, provided that such equipment shall be so installed as not to interfere with operation of the city's equipment and that no gas shall be remetered or submetered for resale to others. 
(c)  The city may furnish and install such regulating and flow control equipment and devices as it deems to be in the best interest of the customer served or of the gas system as a whole. 
(d)  Before installation and thereafter at the option of the city, each meter shall be tested and shall be considered commercially accurate if it measures within two percent of accuracy. After each test each meter shall be sealed, and this seal shall not be broken by any person not expressly authorized by the city to do so. 
(e)  In the event of stoppage or failure of any meter to register, the customer will be billed for such period on an estimated consumption based upon his use of gas in a similar period of like use, or on the basis of check meter readings, if available and accurate. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-189. - Billing and collecting. 
(a)  Each customer's meter will be read at regular intervals and bills will be rendered on a monthly basis or periodically in accordance with the terms of the applicable rate schedule. Bills will be rendered as soon as practical after determination of their amount and shall be due and payable at the office of the city clerk no later than the 15th of the month. Failure to receive a bill will not entitle the customer to any discount or to the omission of any charge for nonpayment within the time specified. 
(b)  A separate bill will be rendered for each meter used by the customer. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-190. - Customer's liabilities. 
(a)  The city shall have the right to enter the premises of the customer at all reasonable hours for the purpose of making such inspection of the customer's installation as may be necessary for the proper application of the city's rate schedules and rules and regulations; for installing, removing, testing or replacing its apparatus or property; for reading meters; and for the entire removal of city's property in the event of termination of service to the customer for any reason. 
(b)  All property of the city installed in or upon the customer's premises used and useful in supplying service is placed there under the customer's protection. All reasonable care shall be exercised to prevent loss of or damage to such property, ordinary wear and tear excepted. The customer will be held liable for any such loss of property or damage thereto and shall pay to the city the cost of necessary repairs or replacements. 
(c)  The customer will be held responsible for breaking the seals, tampering or interfering with city meters or other equipment of the city installed on the customer's premises, and no one except employees of the city will be allowed to make any repairs or adjustments to any meter or other piece of apparatus belonging to the city except in case of emergency. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-191. - City's liabilities. 
(a)  The city may interrupt its service under this article for the purpose of making necessary alterations and repairs, but only for such time as may be reasonable or unavoidable, and the city shall give to the customer, except in case of emergency, reasonable notice of its intention so to do, and shall endeavor to arrange such interruption so as to inconvenience the customer as little as possible. 
(b)  Whenever the city deems an emergency warrants interruption or limitation in the service being rendered, such interruption or limitation shall not constitute a breach of contract and shall not render the city liable for damages suffered thereby or excuse the customer from further fulfillment of the contract. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-192. - Force majeure. 
    Except for making payments due, neither the city nor the customer shall be liable in damage to the other for any act, omission or circumstances occasioned by or in consequence of any acts of God, strikes, lockouts, acts of the public enemy, wars, blockades, insurrections, riots, epidemics, landslides, lightning, earthquakes, fires, storms, floods, unforeseeable or unusual weather conditions, washouts, arrest and restraint of rulers and people, civil disturbances, explosions, breakage or accident to machinery or lines of pipe, line freezeups, temporary failure of gas supply, the binding orders of any court or governmental authority which have been resisted in good faith by all reasonable legal means and any other cause, whether of the kind enumerated in this section, or otherwise, and whether caused or occasioned by or happening on account of the act or omission of the city or the customer, or any other person or concern not reasonably within the control of the party claiming suspension and which by the exercise of due diligence such party is unable to prevent or overcome. A failure to settle or prevent any strike or other controversy with employees or with anyone purporting or seeking to represent employees shall not be considered to be a matter within the control of the party claiming suspension. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-193. - Discontinuance of service. 
    The city reserves the right, but assumes no liability for failure to do so, to discontinue service to any customer for cause as follows: 
(1)  Without notice: 
a.  If a dangerous condition exists on customer's premises in piping or gas consuming devices; 
b.  Because of a fraudulent use of the service or tampering with city's equipment; 
c.  Upon request by customer, subject to any existing agreement between customer and city as to unexpired term of service; or 
d.  For non-payment of utility bills with notice as provided in section 70-63. 
(2)  After three days notice in writing: 
a.  When city has reasonable evidence that the customer has been previously disconnected for nonpayment at his present or other location and is receiving service for his own use under a different name in order to avoid past due payment to city; 
b.  For refusal or failure to make a deposit or increase a deposit, when requested, to assure payment of bills; or 
c.  For a violation of these rules and regulations which the customer refuses or neglects to correct. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-194. - Reconnection of service. 
    When service shall have been discontinued for any of the reasons set forth in this article, city shall not be required to restore service until the following conditions have been met by the customer: 
(1)  Where service was discontinued without notice: 
a.  The dangerous condition shall be removed and, if the customer had been warned of the condition a reasonable time before the discontinuance and had failed to remove the dangerous condition, a reasonable reconnection fee shall be paid. 
b.  All bills for service due city by reason of fraudulent use or tampering shall be paid, a deposit to guarantee the payment of future bills shall be made, and a reconnection charge as determined by the city commission shall be paid. 
(2)  Where service was discontinued with notice: 
a.  Satisfactory arrangements for the payment of all bills for service then due shall be made and a reconnection fee shall be paid. 
b.  A satisfactory arrangement for the payment of all bills then due under a different name shall be made, and a reconnection fee shall be paid. 
c.  A satisfactory guarantee of payment for all future bills shall be furnished, and a reconnection fee shall be paid. 
d.  The violation of these rules and regulations shall be corrected, and a reconnection fee shall be paid. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-195. - Termination of service. 
    Subject to any existing agreement between the customer and the city, if the customer wishes the gas service to be terminated, he shall give notice at the office of the city clerk at least three days prior to the time that such termination shall become effective. The customer will be held liable both for any gas that may pass through the meter and safe custody of the city's property until three days after such notice shall have been given, provided that the meter or other movable equipment shall not have been removed within that time by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Secs. 70-196-70-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - UTILITY IMPROVEMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 70-216-70-225. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COST RECOVERY 

Sec. 70-226. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Allowable recovery means actual construction costs of those services within the public right-of-way or within easements which are both dedicated and accepted by the city. 
    Developer means any company, partnership, individual, or government entity other than the city who constructs and puts in place improvements to real property requiring the installation of new water and sewer lines from the city. 
    Equivalent residential unit means the amount of water and/or sewer used by an average resident, fixed by the state department of environmental protection. 
    Nonrecoverable costs means any portion of the construction project which is paid for by city funds or grant funds. Additionally, any funds retained by the developer from the contractor or subcontractor, i.e., liquidated damages, are not includable in the actual construction costs under allowable recovery costs. Onsite construction costs are not recoverable. 
    Total project cost means all actual documented expenditures for the proposed project including: 
(1)  The actual costs of construction of the project. 
(2)  Engineering, surveying and other fees directly related to the design and/or construction of the project. 
(3)  Any fees for permitting. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 70-227. - For construction of sewer, gas and/or water and gas lines. 
    There shall hereinafter be a provision for developers to recover their costs in the association of construction of sewer, gas, and/or water and gas lines both within and outside the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-228. - Developer requirements prior to eligibility. 
(a)  Prior to being eligible for costs recovery, the developer shall have plans, a bid schedule and cost estimates prepared by a registered engineer for the proposed sewer and/or water system. The plans, bid schedule and cost estimates shall be approved by the city and, where applicable, the state department of environmental protection prior to construction being initiated. It is the responsibility of the developer's engineer to secure these approvals along with any applicable road permits. 
(b)  The developer will assume the responsibility for construction and funding of all sewer, gas and/or water lines including laterals up to the right-of-way. 
(c)  Fourty eight hours prior to any construction being initiated, the developer/utility contractor shall notify the city of his intent to proceed in order that the city inspection personnel can be scheduled to handle the project. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-229. - Additional developer requirements upon completion of construction. 
(a)  Upon completion of construction and prior to acceptance by the city, the developer/contractor/engineer will be required to: 
(1)  Furnish certified as-built drawings signed by a professional surveyor/engineer on the sewer and/or water system. 
(2)  Bring all existing and proposed manholes, valve boxes, etc., to the finished grades. 
(3)  Supply all easements deemed necessary to operate and maintain the sewer and/or water system. 
(4)  Provide the completed and notarized: 
a.  Certification of the developer; 
b.  Certification of the contractor; and 
c.  Certification of the developer's engineer. 
(5)  One-year warranty bond. 
(b)  Water and/or sewer mains and services are the responsibility of the developer until such time as they are formally accepted by the city. 
(c)  Prior to acceptance, the developer will be responsible for providing all field utility locations in accordance with utility locations standards as established by the American Public Works Association and the city. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-230. - Responsibility for damages caused by installation. 
    The developer will be responsible for any damages to the sewer, gas and/or water system caused by the installation of other utilities. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-231. - Changes to approved development plans; effects. 
    Any changes to the approved development plans after construction has started which will result in the newly constructed facilities being out of the public right-of-way and/or an acceptable city utility easement and/or being no longer sized and/or located for the city's needs will: 
(1)  Prevent the city from accepting the utilities for operation and maintenance; 
(2)  Delay the issuance of building permits and/or certificates of occupancy; and/or 
(3)  Result in the forfeiture of refunding by the city for the effected utilities. 
    Modified development plans may be submitted for approval at any time; however, facilities already constructed may no longer be eligible for refunding by the city as described in this section. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-232. - Preconstruction conference. 
    Prior to initiating any development activity affecting existing or proposed utility installations, the developer is responsible for holding a preconstruction conference with his contractor and city personnel. A minimum of 72 hours (three working days) notification should be provided to the participants to allow for scheduling. In addition, approved water, gas, and/or sewer drawings must be submitted to the city prior to the scheduling of the preconstruction conference. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-233. - Furnishing of easements; disclaimer documents; applicable permits; expectation fee by developer. 
(a)  The developer will be required to furnish all easements necessary to operate and maintain the utility systems, including easements over all existing city-owned utilities which are to remain in service. If any relocations or abandonments of existing utilities are required, revised easement and disclaimer documents must be reviewed and processed prior to construction plan approval. 
(b)  The developer will be required to obtain all applicable permits prior to construction. These would include, but are not limited to, trees, right-of-way, utility, department of environmental protection, department of transportation, and county permits. 
(c)  The developer will pay an expectation fee of one-half percent of total recovery cost requested prior to acceptance of water, gas and sewer facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-234. - Qualifications of developer. 
    In order to qualify for cost recovery identified in this division, the developer will be required to obtain no less than three sealed bids with unit prices (units to be predetermined by the project engineer and approved by the city from bona fide, prequalified utility contractors). 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-235. - Total allowed recoverable cost (sewer projects). 
(a)  The total recoverable capacity shall be divided by 260 gallons, which is determined to be an equivalent residential unit. The recoverable cost shall then be divided by the number of recoverable equivalent residential units to determine a cost per equivalent residential unit. 
(b)  Each new customer who taps into the system shall provide to the city the estimated amount of equivalent residential units requested by the connecting customer. Such estimate shall be done by a qualified engineer or architect or be determined by other means approved by the city. The developer then shall be entitled to recover the cost of each new connection based upon that connection's total anticipated equivalent residential unit, multiplied by the cost per equivalent residential unit, as determined by the formula in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-236. - Water system cost recovery. 
(a)  The cost recovery for the water system shall be done on a flat-fee basis. The developer shall be entitled to recover $600.00 for each connection which is anticipated to use 400 gallons or less per day. For an anticipated use greater than 400 gallons per day, the developer shall be entitled to recover a cost of $1,200.00 for each 1,000 gallons above the initial 400 gallons per day estimate. Each potential new connection shall submit an estimate prepared by a qualified engineer or architect or by other means approved by the city to determine the amount of anticipated usage per day. 
(b)  The low bid will be the basis for determining the amount of cost recovery. Failure to submit these completed certifications with the required information will delay the acceptance of the utilities by the city and may result in the forfeiture of all rights to utility cost recovery for the project. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-237. - Advertisement. 
    Once plans, permits and bid schedules are approved by the city, an advertisement must appear in a local widely read newspaper (e.g. Jackson County Floridan) which invites sealed bids for the type and amount of work to be performed. Bids will be open to the public and read aloud at a time and place prearranged by the project engineer and approved and attended by the public works director of public works or his representative. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-238. - Completion of project. 
    Upon completion of the project, the developer will submit to the city the attached and completed: 
(1)  Certification of the developer; 
(2)  Certification of the developer's engineer; and 
(3)  Certification of the contractor, containing all the required information. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-239. - Recapture period. 
    The developers shall be entitled to recover those allowable sums, provided the new connections are made within the following time periods: 
(1)  For projects which the total project costs do not exceed $10,000.00 and five years. 
(2)  For projects which the total project costs is greater than $10,000.00 or less than $100,000.00 and ten years. 
(3)  For projects which the total project costs exceeds $100,000.00 and 20 years. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Sec. 70-240. - Setoff. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other terms of this agreement, the city shall have the right to set off, against any cost recovery amounts or other payment which may become due under this division to the developers, their successors, or assigns, the amount of any indebtedness to the city may now or hereafter have, regardless of the nature of that indebtedness. 
(b)  In addition to the provisions of this division relating to the installations of utilities, roadways, etc., it is further understood that the individual corporate officer executing the agreement on behalf of the developer is legally authorized to do so and should any cost recovery amounts occur as a result of the development, the individual, company, participating corporation named in the agreement shall have the property legal entity to receive such amounts. The developer will not be permitted to assign his interest in any cost recovery amounts or other payments which may become due under this division from the city until such project has been fully completed and accepted by the city. Any attempt to set aside the developer's interest shall be of no effect. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 2-3-15) 
Chapter 74 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buffer and landscaping standards, pt. III, § 4-3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 74-1-74-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Park trees means woody plants that at maturity attain a height in excess of ten feet, located in public parks and all areas owned by the city, or to which the public has free access as a park. 
    Street trees means woody plants that at maturity attain a height in excess of ten feet, located on land lying within rights-of-way on either side of all streets, avenues or ways within the city. 
(Ord. No. 835, § 1, 2-7-95) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 74-27. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating the provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished pursuant to section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 835, § 19, 2-7-95) 
Secs. 74-28-74-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TREE BOARD 

Sec. 74-41. - Creation and establishment. 
    There is hereby created and established a city tree board which shall consist of five members who shall be appointed by the city commission. In addition to the voting members, the tree board shall consist of technical advisors who shall be nonvoting members. These technical advisors shall consist of, but not be limited to, representatives from state division of forestry, local electric utilities, state department of transportation, city department of public works, Main Street, and the city garden club. 
(Ord. No. 835, § 2, 2-7-95) 
Sec. 74-42. - Terms. 
    The term of the five persons appointed to the city tree board shall be three years, except that the term of two of these members appointed to the first tree board shall be for only one year, and the term of two members of the first tree board shall be for two years. If a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, their successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of that term. 
(Ord. No. 835, § 3, 2-7-95) 
Sec. 74-43. - Compensation. 
    Members of the tree board shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 835, § 4, 2-7-95) 
Sec. 74-44. - Duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the tree board to study, investigate, counsel, and assist annually on the updated plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal, or disposition of trees in parks, along streets, and in all other public areas. Such plan will be presented annually to the city commission during the budget process and, upon the acceptance and approval, shall constitute the official comprehensive tree plan for the city. 
(b)  The tree board, when requested by the city commission, shall assist the city staff with an investigation, make findings of fact and reports, and make recommendations upon any special matter or question coming within the purview of its duties. 
(c)  The tree board shall consider variances to sections 74-66, 74-67, 74-68, and 74-69, and recommend such to the city commission on a case-by-case basis, when it is in the best interest of the citizens of the city to do so. 
(Ord. No. 835, § 5, 2-7-95) 
Sec. 74-45. - Officers; rules; journal; quorum. 
    The tree board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations, and keep a journal of its actions. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. No. 835, § 6, 2-7-95) 
Sec. 74-46. - Review by the city commission. 
    The city tree board shall serve as an advisory board to the city commission. All of the reports and recommendations of the tree board are subject to the approval of the city commission. Any person may appeal any recommendation from the city tree board, but the city commission's decision is final. 
(Ord. No. 835, § 17, 2-7-95) 
Secs. 74-47-74-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ARBORIST 

Sec. 74-56. - License and liability insurance required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business or occupation of pruning, treating, or removing street or park trees within the city without first applying for and procuring a license from the city. No license shall be required of any public service or utility company or city employee doing such work in the pursuit of their public service endeavors. Before any license shall be issued, each applicant shall first file evidence of possession of liability insurance, holding the city harmless. 
(Ord. No. 835, § 16, 2-7-95) 
Secs. 74-57-74-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 74-66. - Street trees. 
(a)  Recommended species. The following list constitutes the official recommended street tree species for the city. Persons wishing to plant trees not found on this recommended list should consult with the tree board to establish spacing and setback criteria and species feasibility. 
Small Trees 
Carolina Laurelcherry 
Sago Palm 
Dahoon Holly 
Waxmyrtle 
Fringe Tree 
Eastern Hophornbeam 
Star Magnolia 
Crape Myrtle 
East Palatka Holly 
Pindo Palm 
Camellia 
Medium Trees 
Dogwood 
Crape Myrtle 
American Holly 
Redbud 
Bigleaf Magnolia 
Drake Elm 
Red Maple 
Florida Maple 
Bradford Pear 
Cabbage Palm 
Red Cedar 
Large Trees 
White Oak 
Shumard Oak 
Live Oak 
Ash species 
Native Southern Pines 
Southern Red Oak 
American Elm 
Southern Magnolia 
Yellow Poplar 
(b)  Prohibited species. The following list constitutes noxious tree species that shall be prohibited from being planted on city property: 
Chinese Tallow 
Mimosa 
Chinaberry 
Weeping Willow 
Ligustrum species 
Chinese Parasol Trees 
Wisteria species 
Cottonwood 
Lombardy Poplar 
Other noxious species 
(Ord. No. 835, § 7, 2-7-95) 
Sec. 74-67. - Spacing. 
    The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the three species classes listed in section 74-66(a), and no trees planted closer together than the following: Small trees, 25 feet; medium trees, 35 feet; large trees, 50 feet, except in special plantings designed or approved by a landscape architect. 
(Ord. No. 835, § 8, 2-7-95) 
Sec. 74-68. - Distance from curb or sidewalk. 
    The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks will be in accordance with the three species classes listed in section 74-66(a), and no trees may be planted closer to the curb or sidewalk than the following: Small trees, two feet; medium trees, three feet; and large trees, four feet. 
(Ord. No. 835, § 9, 2-7-95) 
Sec. 74-69. - Distance from street corners and fire hydrants. 
    No street tree shall be planted closer than 20 feet of any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No street tree shall be planted closer than ten feet of any fire hydrant. 
(Ord. No. 835, § 10, 2-7-95) 
Sec. 74-70. - Electric utility restriction. 
    In cases where a city right-of-way has overhead electric utility lines, only trees from the small and medium species classes listed in section 74-66(a) shall be planted. 
(Ord. No. 835, § 11, 2-7-95) 
Sec. 74-71. - Public tree care. 
    The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants, and shrubs within the rights-of-way of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, drainage ditches, and public grounds as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. The city tree board may recommend removal of any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition, or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric lines, gas lines, water lines or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of such street trees by adjacent property owners, providing that the selection and location of such trees is in accordance with sections 74-66 through 74-70. 
(Ord. No. 835, § 12, 2-7-95) 
Sec. 74-72. - Pruning-Practices and procedures. 
    The tree board shall prepare rules governing tree pruning practices and procedures. Such rules shall be used in the pruning of any street or park tree in the city. 
(Ord. No. 835, § 13, 2-7-95) 
Sec. 74-73. - Same-Corner clearance. 
(a)  Every owner of any tree overhanging any street rights-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any streetlamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection, and to that end there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the sidewalk, walkway, or street surface. Such owners shall remove all dead, diseased, or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a hazard to public safety. 
(b)  The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a streetlight, or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign. 
(Ord. No. 835, § 14, 2-7-95) 
Sec. 74-74. - Dead or diseased tree removals. 
    The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the city, when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects and diseases which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the city. The city will notify in writing the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by the owners at their own expense within 60 days after the date of the service of notice. In the event of a failure by the owners to comply with this section, the city shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal on the owner's property tax notice. In the event of an epidemic insect or disease outbreak, the recommendations of the state forester or his designee shall be followed in preparing a plan. 
(Ord. No. 835, § 15, 2-7-95) 
Sec. 74-75. - Exceptions. 
(a)  If any tree shall be determined to be in a hazardous or dangerous condition so as to endanger the health or safety of the city and require immediate removal, the city tree board shall recommend to the city staff, through the city manager's office, the removal of such trees without unnecessary delay. 
(b)  During the period of emergencies such as hurricane, windstorm, flood, freeze, fire, or other disasters, the requirements of this division may be waived by the city. Such waivers must be for a defined period of time, as set by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 835, § 18, 2-7-95) 
PART III - LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the land development regulation code, as adopted by Ordinance No. 815 on December 1, 1991, and amended by Ordinance No. 1021, adopted November 5, 2013. Amendments to the original ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. 
Cross reference- Planning, ch. 50. 

Article I - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Title. 
    This document shall be entitled the "City of Marianna, Florida Land Development Regulation Code" and may be hereinafter referred to as the "Code." 
Sec. 1-2. - Authority. 
    This Code is enacted pursuant to F.S. §§ 163.3161-163.3215 (Community Planning Act), Ordinance No. 776, and the general powers granted under F.S. ch. 166. 
Sec. 1-3. - Repeal of prior provisions. 
    All resolutions, Codes or other ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this Code are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 1-4. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this Code, all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the City; and (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other power granted to the City. 
    The language of this Code shall be interpreted according to the following rules unless that interpretation would be inconsistent with manifest intent of the City Commission. 
1.  Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; if the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. 
2.  Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or some other City officer or employee to do some act or perform some duty, it is to be construed to authorize delegation to professional-level subordinates to perform the required act or duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
3.  Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall be construed to include the feminine and neuter. 
4.  Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. The use of the plural number shall be deemed to include any single person or thing. 
5.  Shall, may. The word "shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
6.  Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past or present. 
7.  Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year, unless otherwise indicated. 
8.  Boundaries. Interpretations regarding boundaries of zoning districts shall be made in accordance with the following: 
a.  Boundaries shown as following or approximately following any platted lot line or other property line shall be construed as following such line. 
b.  Boundaries shown as following or approximately following section lines, half-section lines, or quarter-section lines shall be construed as following such lines. 
Sec. 1-5. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall be used for administration of this Code. 
    Abandon. To cease or discontinue a use or activity without intent to resume. Indicators of abandonment shall be prolonged vacancy of a use or activity with disconnection of public utilities and no obvious maintenance. Uses or activities which are vacant but are being offered for sale or lease shall not be considered abandoned. 
    Abutting or adjacent. Having a common border with, or being separated from such a common border by an alley or easement. 
    Accessory structure. A subordinate or ancillary structure detached from the principal structure and customarily used in connection with the occupation of the principal use or structure on the same lot, parcel or property. At a minimum, accessory structures shall include storage buildings and other structures used for storage, shops, garages, carports, utility buildings, greenhouses, swimming pools, decks, patios, fences and satellite dishes. 
    Accessory use. A subordinate or ancillary use of land, or structure or improvements thereon, customarily used in connection with the occupation of the principal use or structure upon the same lot, parcel or property. 
    Adjacent. See Abutting. 
    Assisted Living Facility. A type of residential care facility as defined in F.S. ch. 400, pt. II. 
    Affordable housing. Housing units, as defined in F.S. § 420.602. 
1.  A housing unit to be occupied by very-low-income persons, that monthly rents, or monthly mortgage payments including property taxes and insurance, do not exceed 30 percent of that amount which represents 50 percent of the median adjusted gross annual income for the households within the county in which the housing unit is located, divided by 12. 
2.  A housing unit to be occupied by low-income persons, that monthly rents, or monthly mortgage payments including taxes and insurance, do not exceed 30 percent of that amount which represents 80 percent of the median adjusted gross annual income for the households within the county in which the housing unit is located, divided by 12. 
3.  A housing unit to be occupied by moderate-income persons, that monthly rents, or monthly mortgage payments including taxes and insurance, do not exceed 30 percent of that amount which represents 120 percent of the median adjusted gross annual income for the households within the county in which the housing unit is located, divided by 12. 
    Alley. A roadway dedicated to public use affording only a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    Antenna support structure. Any building or other structure, other than a tower, which can be used for the location of telecommunication facilities. 
    Apartment. Any building or portion thereof used as a multiple-resident dwelling for the purpose of providing three or more separate dwelling units which may share means of egress and other essential facilities. 
    Area or area of jurisdiction. The total area of jurisdiction for the City as established by its municipal charter and any subsequent annexations. 
    Arterial road. A roadway providing service which is relatively continuous and of relatively high traffic volume, long trip length, and high operating speed, as classified by the Florida Department of Transportation. 
    Bicycle and pedestrian ways. Any road, path or way which is open to bicycle travel and traffic afoot and from which motor vehicles are excluded. 
    Block. Land usually bounded on all sides by roadways or other physical boundaries such as water or public space, and not traversed by a through roadway (not including alleys). 
    Boardinghouse. An establishment with lodging for five or more persons where meals are regularly prepared and served for compensation, and where food is placed upon a table for consumption without the ordering of portions from a menu. 
    Buffer. A specified land area, together with any planting, landscaping, fencing or any physical structure erected on the land used to visibly separate one use from another or to shield or block views, noise, lights, or other incompatibilities between land uses. 
    Building. Any structure that encloses a space used for sheltering any occupancy. Each portion of a building separated from other portions by a firewall shall be considered as a separate building. 
    Building official. The chief building official or building inspector for Jackson County. 
    Building permit. An official document or certificate issued by the building official authorizing performance of building or construction activity. 
    Child care facility. Any establishment which provides child care for more than five children unrelated to the operator and which receives a payment, fee, or grant for any of the children receiving care, whenever operated, and whether or not operated for profit. 
    Child care, family day care home. An occupied residence in which child care is regularly provided for no more than five children, and which receives a payment, fee or grant for any of the children receiving care, whether or not operated for profit. 
    City. The City of Marianna, Florida, a municipal corporation. 
    City Clerk. The duly appointed clerk of the City. 
    City Commission. The elected legislative body of the City. 
    City Manager. The duly appointed City Manager of the City. 
    Clinic. A structure where patients who are not lodged overnight are admitted for examination and treatment by any health care provider. 
    Clubs, neighborhood recreation or social. Buildings or facilities owned and operated by a corporation or association for neighborhood social or recreational purposes but not operated primarily for profit or the rendering of services which are customarily carried on as a business and not limited to special interests. 
    CMRS. Commercial Mobile Radio Services, as defined in section 704 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, which includes cellular, personal communications, specialized mobile radio, enhanced specialized mobile radio and similar services that currently exist or that may in the future be developed. 
    Code enforcement officer. Any duly authorized Code enforcement official of the City. 
    Collector road. A roadway providing service which is of relatively moderate traffic volume, moderate trip length, and moderate operating speed, as classified by the Florida Department of Transportation. 
    Collocation or collocate, telecommunication facility. The use of one communication tower by two (2) or more CMRS license holders or by one (1) license holder for more than one (1) type of communication technology. 
    Commercial uses. Activities within land areas which are predominately connected with the sale, rental and distribution of products, or performance of services for pecuniary gain. 
    Communication antenna. Any system of electrical conductors designed to transmit and/or receive electromagnetic waves. 
    Communication tower. A structure which does not exceed two hundred fifty (250) feet in height (including antenna) measured from grade on which transmitting anchor receiving antennas are located. This term "communication tower" shall not include towers utilized by amateur radio operators licensed by the Federal Communication Commission (FCC). Communication towers are generally described as either monopole, lattice, or guyed. 
    Community park. A park located near major roadways, and designed to serve the needs of more than one neighborhood. 
    Community residential home. A dwelling which provides a living environment for seven to 14 unrelated clients including disabled or handicapped persons, developmentally disabled or handicapped persons, or nondangerous mentally ill persons or children. As defined by F.S. ch. 419, a dwelling unit licensed to serve residents who are clients of the Department of Elderly Affairs, the Agency for Persons with Disabilities, the Department of Juvenile Justice, or the Department of Children and Family Services or licensed by the Agency for Health Care Administration which provides for a living environment for 7 to 14 unrelated residents who operate as the functional equivalent of a family, including such supervision and care by supportive staff may be necessary to meet the physical, emotional, and social needs of the residents. 
    Comprehensive Plan. The adopted Comprehensive Plan for the City. 
    Concurrency. Necessary public facilities and services to maintain adopted level of service standards are available when the impacts of development occur. 
    Condominium. That form of ownership of real property which is comprised of units that may be owned by one or more persons, and in which there is, appurtenant to each unit, an undivided share in common elements. 
    Conservation uses. Activities within land areas designated for the purpose of conserving or protecting natural resources or environmental quality and includes areas designated for such purposes as flood control, protection of quality of quantity of groundwater or surface water, floodplain management, fisheries management, or protection of vegetative communities or wildlife habitats. 
    Contiguous. Next to, abutting, or having a common boundary. 
    County. Jackson County, Florida. 
    Density, gross. The total number of dwelling units divided by the total site area, less public right-of-way. 
    Developer. Any person, including a governmental agency undertaking any development. 
    Development. The word "development" shall have the same meaning as set forth in F.S. § 380.04, as may be amended or superseded. 
    Development order. Any order issued by the City which has the effect of approving, or approving with conditions, any development; a "development order" allows a developer to proceed with obtaining a building permit. 
    Director. The Director of the Municipal Development Department. 
    Dock. A fixed or floating structure, including moorings, used for berthing buoyant vessels. 
    Drainage basin. The area defined by topographic boundaries which contributes stormwater to a drainage system, estuarine waters, or oceanic waters, including all areas artificially added to the basin. 
    Drainage detention structure. A structure which collects and temporarily stores stormwater for the purpose of treatment through physical, chemical, or biological processes with subsequent gradual release of the stormwater. 
    Drainage facilities. A system of manmade structures designed to collect, convey, hold, divert or discharge stormwater, and includes stormwater sewers, canals, detention structures, and retention structures. 
    Drainage retention structure. A structure designed to collect and prevent the release of a given volume of stormwater by complete on-site storage. 
    Dripline. The outermost perimeter of the crown of a tree as projected vertically to the ground. 
    Duplex. A residential building containing two separate dwelling units joined by a common wall. 
    Dwelling or dwelling unit. A single housing unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one housekeeping unit. 
    Dwelling, detached single-family. A building containing one dwelling unit not attached to any other dwelling unit. 
    Dwelling, multifamily. A residential building containing two or more separate dwelling units, including duplexes, triplexes, and quadraplexes. 
    Easement. An implied grant of way of necessity or a statutory way of necessity exclusive of common-law right as defined in F.S. § 704.01. 
    Educational uses. Any land or structure used for public or private primary or secondary schools, vocational and technical schools, and colleges and universities licensed by the Florida Department of Education, including the areas of buildings, campus open space, dormitories, recreational facilities or parking. 
    Family. Two or more persons living together in one structure, domicile, house, apartment or dwelling unit, usually possessing a head, who has a right, at least in a limited way, to direct and control those gathered in the household and who is legally or morally obligated to support himself and any other members and, if applicable, other persons who are at least partially dependent on the head of the family for support. 
    Fence. A manmade barrier erected to prevent escape or intrusion, mark a boundary or border, or provide a buffer between properties, land uses, or zoning districts. 
    Filling (service) station. Any building, structure, or land used for the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale at retail any motor fuels, oils, or accessories, and which may offer in conjunction therewith a minor motor vehicle repair service as distinguished from general motor vehicle repairs. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The official map of the City, on which the federal insurance administrator has delineated both the special areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the City. 
    Floodplains or flood zone. Areas subject to flooding as identified on flood insurance rate maps or flood hazard boundary maps. 
    Foster care facility. A structure which houses foster residents and provides a family living environment for the residents, including such supervision and care as may be necessary to meet the physical, emotional and social needs of the residents and serving either children or adult foster residents. 
    Garage apartment. An accessory building with storage capacity for not less than two motor vehicles, the second floor of which is designed as a residence for not more than one family. 
    Group home. See Community residential home. 
    Hard surface. Compacted shell, limestone, asphalt, concrete, or other similar substances. 
    Hazardous waste. Solid waste, or a combination of solid waste, which, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, may cause, or significantly contribute to, an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness or may pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly transported, disposed of, stored, treated or otherwise managed. 
    Height. The vertical distance from the highest point on a structure, except any chimney, antenna, steeple, or similar fixture on a building, to the average ground level where the walls or other structural elements intersect the ground. 
    Historic resources. All areas, districts or sites containing properties listed on the Florida Master Site File, the National Register of Historic Places, or designated by the City as historically, architecturally, or archaeologically significant. 
    Home occupation. Any occupation, profession or service conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on solely by the resident thereof, the conduct of which is clearly incidental to the use of the structure for residential purposes. A "home occupation" does not include retail sales on the premises. 
    Home office of convenience. A quasi-office use where the occupant conducts no business other than by phone or mail, where no persons are employed by the resident, where an office is needed for the purpose of sending and receiving mail and telephone calls, maintaining records, and other similar functions, and where no parcel delivery is conducted. 
    Hotel. Any building, or group of buildings within a single complex of buildings, which is kept, used, maintained, or advertised as, or held out to the public to be, a place where sleeping or housekeeping accommodations are supplied for pay to transient or permanent guests. 
    Impervious surface. Any surface or material which prevents absorption of water into the land. 
    Impervious surface ratio. The ratio of the total impervious surface area to the gross area of a lot or parcel. 
    Industrial uses. Any activity within land areas predominantly connected with manufacturing, assembly, processing, or storage of products. 
    Infrastructure. Manmade structures which serve the common needs of the City, such as: sewage disposal systems; potable water systems; potable water wells serving a system; solid waste disposal sites or retention areas; stormwater systems; utilities; piers; docks; wharves; breakwaters; bulkheads; seawalls; bulwarks; revetments; causeways; marinas; navigation channels; bridges; and roadways. 
    Intensity. The degree to which land is used, developed or occupied. 
    Junkyard. An open area where waste and used or secondhand materials are salvaged, recycled, bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including but not limited to scrap iron and other metals, cloths, paper, rags, plumbing fixtures, rubber tires and bottles, but excluding motor vehicle wrecking yards. 
    Kennel. An establishment which houses and provides care for household pets and where grooming, breeding, boarding, training or selling of animals is conducted for profit. 
    Kennel, private. An accessory structure used for purposes of providing shelter, or restraining, six or less household pets. 
    Land. The earth, water, and air, above, below, or on the surface, and includes any improvements or structures customarily regarded as land. 
    Land use. The development, activity, or use that has occurred on or is proposed for the land. 
    Landscaping. The improvement of appearance or beautification of an area by the planting of trees, grass, shrubs, or other plant materials, or by the alteration of ground contours. 
    Laundry, self-service (laundromat). A business renting to the individual customers equipment for the washing, drying and otherwise processing laundry, and where the equipment is serviced and its use and operation supervised by the management. 
    Level of service. An indicator of the extent or degree of service provided by, or proposed to be provided by, a facility based on and related to the operational characteristics of the facility. Level of service shall indicate the capacity per unit of demand for each public facility as defined in the Comprehensive Plan. 
    Local planning agency. The Planning and Zoning Board of the City. 
    Local road. A roadway providing service which is of relatively low traffic volume, short average trip length or minimal through traffic movements, and high volume land access for abutting property. 
    Lot. A parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat, subdivision, deed, or other instrument of conveyance. 
    Lot, corner. A lot abutting two or more intersecting streets. 
    Lot coverage. The area of a lot or parcel covered by buildings, structures, pavement, or other impervious surface. 
    Lot depth. The depth of lot is the distance measured from the midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the opposite rear lot line. 
    Lot line, front. The property line which separates the lot from the roadway right-of-way providing principal access; principal access being that from which mail delivered by the U.S. Postal Service is normally received. 
    Lot of record. A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the official records of the county. 
    Lot split. Division of land into two lots where no drainage, roadway or other improvement except installation of water and sewer connections is required. 
    Lot, substandard. Any lot that does not conform in area or width to established minimum requirements. 
    Lot width. The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the depth. 
    Low-income persons. One or more natural persons or a family, not including students, as defined in F.S. § 420.004, with a total annual household income that does not exceed 80 percent of the median annual adjusted gross income for households within the county in which the person or family resides. (See also Moderate-income persons) 
    Major thoroughfare. Any principal arterial, minor arterial or collector roadway as classified by the Florida Department of Transportation. 
    Manufactured building. As defined by F.S. ch. 553, pt. I, a manufactured building is defined as a closed structure, building assembly, or system of subassemblies, which may include structural, electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating, or other service systems manufactured in manufacturing facilities for installation or erection as a finished building or as part of a finished building which shall include, but not limited to, residential, commercial, institutional, storage, and industrial structures. The term includes buildings not intended for human habitation such as lawn storage buildings and storage buildings manufactured and assembled offsite by a manufacturer certified in conformance with F.S. ch. 553, pt. I. This definition does not apply to mobile homes. 
    Manufactured home park. A use of land in which lots or spaces are offered for rent or lease for the placement of manufactured homes and in which the primary use of the park is residential. 
    Manufactured home subdivision. A subdivision occupied by manufactured homes where the individual lots are owned by owners, and where a portion of the subdivision or the amenities exclusively serving the subdivision are retained by the subdivision developer. 
    Manufactured housing. As defined by Title 24 CFR, Part 3280, a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width and forty (40) body feet or more in length; and when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet in living area; and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. The term includes any structure that meets all of the requirements of this definition except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification pursuant to § 3282.13 and complies with the standards set forth in part 3280. Such term shall not include any self-propelled vehicle such as a Recreational Vehicle. 
    Mixed use. Areas intended to provide a functional, integrated mix of land uses. 
    Mobile home. A structure fabricated prior to June 15, 1976 and transportable in one or more sections, which is eight body feet or more in width and which is built on an integral chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. 
    Moderate-income persons. One or more natural persons or a family, as defined in F.S. § 420.004, with a total annual adjusted gross household income of which is less than 120 percent of the median annual adjusted gross income for households within the county in which the person or family resides. 
    Motel, tourist court, motor lodge. A group of attached or detached buildings containing individual sleeping units, with automobile storage or parking space provided in connection therewith, and designed for use primarily by automobile transients. 
    Motor vehicle. The word "motor vehicle" shall have the meaning set forth in F.S. ch. 320. 
    Multiple-resident dwelling. A structure designed or used for residential occupancy by more than two related or unrelated residential groups, with or without separate kitchen or dining facilities, including apartment houses, apartment hotels, roominghouses, boardinghouses, fraternities, sororities, dormitories, and similar housing types. 
    Natural drainageway. A natural route or course along which water moves or may move to drain an area. 
    Neighborhood park. A park which serves the population of a neighborhood and is generally accessible by bicycle or pedestrian ways. 
    Newspaper of general circulation. A newspaper published at least on a weekly basis and printed in the language most commonly spoken in the area within which it circulates, but does not include a newspaper intended primarily for members of a particular professional or occupational group, a newspaper whose primary function is to carry legal notices, or a newspaper that is given away primarily to distribute advertising. 
    Nonconforming use. A lawful land use existing at the time of passage of this Code or amendments thereto, which does not conform to the provisions of this Code. 
    Nursing home facility. As defined in F.S. § 400.021, any facility which provides nursing services as defined in F.S. ch. 464, pt. I, and which is licensed according to that part. 
    Open space. Land in its natural state or essentially unencumbered by either buildings, structures, or impervious surfaces, except for drainage control structures or retention ponds. 
    Open space ratio. The amount of open space area remaining on a lot or parcel as compared to the impervious surface area of the same lot or parcel. 
    Parcel of land. A quantity of land capable of being described with such definiteness that its locations and boundaries may be established, which is designated by its owner or developer as land to be used, or developed as, a unit or which has been used or developed as a unit. 
    Park. A neighborhood, community, or regional park. 
    Parking lot. An area or parcel of land used for temporary, off-street parking of vehicles. 
    Person. An individual, corporation, governmental agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, two or more persons having a joint or common interest, or any other legal entity. 
    Personal service. Business providing services which are primarily nonretail and conducted entirely inside a building including: professional and business offices, clinics, laboratories, educational services, and beauty salons. 
    Planned Unit Development (PUD). A tract of land which is developed as a unit under single ownership or control and which is planned and developed in a single operation or within a proposed period of time by a series of scheduled development phases according to an officially approved final PUD development plan, which does not necessarily correspond to the property development and use regulations of the conventional zoning districts; but which allows for innovative design by permitting flexibility in building siting and mixtures of housing types and land uses, and encouraging the utilization of usable open space and the maintenance of significant natural features. 
    Playground. A recreation area with play apparatus. 
    Pollution. The presence in the outdoor atmosphere, ground or water of any substances, contaminants, noise, or manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, or radiological integrity of air or water, in quantities or at levels which are or may be potentially harmful or injurious to human health or welfare, animal or plant life, or property, or unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property. 
    Potable water facilities. A system of structures designed to collect, treat, or distribute potable water, and includes water wells, treatment plants, reservoirs, and distribution mains. 
    Premises. A lot or parcel of land together with all structures, buildings, grounds or other appurtenances located thereon. 
    Principal structure. The main or primary structure located on a lot or parcel. 
    Public access. The ability of the public to physically reach, enter or use recreation sites and other public facilities. 
    Public facilities. Transportation systems or facilities, sewer systems or facilities, solid waste systems or facilities, drainage systems or facilities, potable water systems or facilities, educational systems or facilities, parks and recreation systems or facilities and public health systems or facilities. 
    Public/institutional uses. Structures or lands that are owned, leased, or operated by a government, quasipublic, or nonprofit entity, such as civic and community centers, churches, hospitals, libraries, police stations, fire stations, and government administration buildings, education and military facilities. 
    Quadraplex. A residential building with four separate dwelling units. 
    Recreational uses. Sites, facilities and land where recreation activities occur. 
    Recreational vehicle-type units. Motor vehicles or trailers as defined in F.S. § 320.01. 
    Residential care facilities. Residential care facilities are those facilities providing both a residence (for varying periods of time) and a care component. Among such facilities are assisted living facilities, group care homes, recovery homes, residential treatment facilities, emergency shelters, and nursing homes, as any of the preceding may be defined in F.S. ch. 400. 
    Residential uses. Activities within land areas used predominantly for housing. 
    Restaurant, fast food. An establishment whose principal business is the sale of a wide range of food and/or beverages in a ready-to-consume state for consumption: (1) within the restaurant building; (2) within a motor vehicle parked on the premises; or (3) off the premises as carryout orders, and whose principal method of operation includes the following characteristics: Food and/or beverages are usually served in disposable containers; this includes all drive-in restaurants. 
    Restrictive covenant. A contract between two or more persons which involves mutual promises or reciprocal benefits and burdens among the contracting parties (usually involves additional land restrictions beyond the City requirements). 
    Right-of-way. Land in which the state, a county, or a municipality owns the fee simple title or has an easement dedicated or required for a transportation or utility use. 
    Roadway functional classification. The assignment of roads into categories according to the character of service they provide in relation to the total road network. Basic functional categories include limited access facilities, arterial roads, and collector roads, which may be subcategorized into principal, major or minor levels. Those levels may be further grouped into urban and rural categories. 
    Salvage yard. A land use on which waste material, inoperative appliances, inoperative motor vehicles, or other products or machinery is collected, dismantled, salvaged or stored for the purpose of resale either as used parts or reusable materials. 
    Sanitary sewer facilities. Structures or systems designed for the collection, transmission, treatment, or disposal of sewage and includes truck mains, interceptors, treatment plants and disposal systems. 
    Services. The programs and employees determined necessary by local government to provide adequate operation and maintenance of public facilities and infrastructure as well as those educational, health care, social and other programs necessary to support the programs, public facilities, and infrastructure set out in the Comprehensive Plan or required by local, state, or federal law. 
    Setback. The distance between the lot line or other specified point and the total area of a structure, including roof overhang or eaves, or any other attached structure or fixture. 
    Shoreline. The interface of land and water as determined by the ordinary high-water line or mean high-tide line. 
    Sign. Any device, structure, fixture or placard using graphics, symbols, and/or written copy designed for the purpose of advertising or identifying any establishment, product, goods, or services. 
    Site plan. The development plan for one or more lot(s) or parcel(s) which depicts existing and proposed conditions of the lot(s) or parcel(s) including all the requirements set forth in this Code. 
    Solid waste. Sludge from a waste treatment works, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility or garbage, rubbish, refuse, or other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from domestic, industrial, commercial, mining, agricultural, or governmental operations. 
    Stormwater. The flow of water which results from a rainfall event. 
    Street or roadway. A public or private thoroughfare used, or intended to be used, for passage or travel by motor vehicles. 
    Street line. The boundary line or right-of-way line of a street. 
    Structural alterations. Any change, except for repairs or replacement, in the supporting members of a building, such as loadbearing walls, columns, beams, girders, floor joists, or roofjoists or any extension of them. 
    Structure. Anything constructed, installed, or portable, the use of which requires a location on a lot or parcel of land, including a moveable structure while it is located on land and which can be used for housing, business, commercial, recreational, or office purposes either temporarily or permanently. "Structure" also includes fences, billboards, swimming pools, poles, pipelines, advertising signs, etc. 
    Subdivision. The division of a parcel of land, whether improved or unimproved, into three or more contiguous lots of parcels of land, designated by reference to the number or symbol of the lot or parcel contained in the plat of such subdivision, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, or transfer of ownership or, if the establishment of a new street is involved, any division of such parcel; provided, however, that the division of land into parcels of more than five acres not involving any change in street lines or public easements of whatsoever kind is not to be deemed a subdivision. 
    Telecommunication facilities. Any cable, wires, lines, wave guides, antennas and any other equipment or facilities associated with the transmission or reception of communications which a person seeks to locate or has installed upon or near a tower or antenna support structure. However, the term "telecommunications facilities" shall not include: 
  Any satellite earth station antenna two (2) meters in diameter or less which is located in an area zoned for industrial or commercial use. 
  Any satellite earth station antenna one (1) meter or less in diameter, regardless of zoning category. 
    Telecommunication tower. A self-supporting lattice, guyed or monopole structure constructed from grade which supports telecommunications facilities. 
    Townhouse. A single-family dwelling unit constructed as part of a group of not less than two dwelling units with individual entrances, all of which are contiguous, customarily owner-occupied, and share a common wall. 
    Tree. Any living, self-supporting, woody perennial plant which has a trunk diameter of no less than three inches and normally grows to an overall height of no less than 15 feet. 
    Triplex. A residential building with three separate dwelling units joined by common walls. 
    Used car lot. A parcel of land used only for the storage, display, and sales of used automobiles, excluding junkyards and storage of wrecked autos. 
    Variance. An administrative action granted to aggrieved or adversely affected property owners as a method of alleviating hardship by allowing a reasonable use of the land, building, structure, or property, which, because of unusual or unique circumstances, is restricted by the provisions of this Code. 
    Vegetation (natural). Species of indigenous, naturally occurring plants normally found in the absence of development or landscaping. 
    Violation. Any conduct, act, or activity which is in conflict or contrary to the provisions and requirements of this Code. 
    Water-dependent uses. Activities which can be carried out only on, in or adjacent to water areas because the use requires access to the water body for: waterborne transportation including ports or marinas; recreation; electrical generating facilities; or water supply. 
    Wetlands. Transitional areas between terrestrial and aquatic systems that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated or hydric soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
    Yard. An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except by trees or shrubbery or other improvements permitted herein. 
    Yard, front. A yard across the full width of the lot, extending from the front line of the building or any projections thereof, to the front lot line (see Lot line, front). 
    Yard, rear. A yard extending across the full width of the lot and between the rear lot and rear line of the building, or any projections thereof. 
    Yard, side. An open unoccupied space on the same lot with the main building, situated between the side line of a building, or any projections thereof, and the side lot line. 
    Zero lot line house. An attached single-family housing unit with one or more common walls designed for owner occupancy. Zero lot line houses include patio houses, garden homes, townhouses, row houses, duplexes, and the like. 
    Zoning district. A categorization or grouping of activities (land uses) according to common characteristics. 
Sec. 1-6. - Purpose and intent. 
    1-6.1. Generally. The purpose of this Code is to utilize and strengthen the existing role, processes and power of the City in the establishment and implementation of Comprehensive Planning programs and land development regulations in order to maintain present advantages as well as guide and control future development. 
    It is the intent of this Code that its adoption is necessary so that the City can preserve and enhance present advantages; encourage the most appropriate use of land, water and resources, consistent with the public interest; overcome present handicaps; and deal effectively with future problems that may result from the use and development of land within its area of jurisdiction. Through the process of Comprehensive Planning and land development regulation, it is intended that the City can preserve, promote, protect, and improve the public health, safety, comfort, good order, appearance, convenience, law enforcement and fire prevention, and general welfare; prevent the overcrowding of land and avoid undue concentration of population; facilitate the adequate and efficient provision of transportation, water, sewerage, parks, recreational facilities, housing, and other requirements and services; and conserve, develop, utilize, and protect natural resources within the City's area of jurisdiction. 
    The provisions of this Code in their interpretation and application are declared to be the minimum requirements necessary to protect human, environmental, social, and economic resources, and to maintain, through orderly growth and development, the character and stability of present and future land use and development within the City. 
    1-6.2. Comprehensive Plan. This Code is further intended to provide detailed and specific provisions necessary or desirable to implement the Comprehensive Plan including but not limited to: 
1.  Regulating the subdivision of land; 
2.  Regulating the use of land and water for those land use categories included in the future land use element of the Comprehensive Plan and ensure the compatibility of adjacent uses and provide for open space; 
3.  Regulating areas subject to seasonal or periodic flooding and provide for drainage and stormwater management; 
4.  Ensuring the protection of environmentally sensitive lands designated in the Comprehensive Plan; 
5.  Regulating signage; 
6.  Providing that public facilities and services meet or exceed the standards established for public facilities in the Comprehensive Plan, and such public facilities and services are available when necessary to serve proposed development or when development permits are conditioned upon the availability of such public facilities and services in an enforceable development agreement; 
7.  Ensuring safe and convenient on-site traffic flow considering needed vehicle parking. 
Sec. 1-7. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this Code shall govern all development undertaken in the City. 
    1-7.1. Exceptions. 
1.  Existing development activity. The provisions of this Code or any amendments thereto shall not affect the validity of any lawfully issued and effective permit if: 
(a)  The development activity authorized by the permit has been commenced prior to the effective date of this Code or any amendment thereto; and 
(b)  The development activity continues without interruption (except by reason of war, natural disaster, or act of God) until the development is complete. If the permit expires, any further development on that site shall occur only in conformance with the requirements of this Code, or any amendments thereto. 
2.  Previously approved permits. Projects with permits that have not expired at the time this Code or an amendment thereto is adopted, and on which development activity has commenced or does commence and proceeds according to the time limits in the ordinance(s) under which the development was originally approved, must meet only the requirements of the ordinance in effect when the development plan was approved. If the permit expires or is otherwise invalidated, any further development on that site shall occur only in conformance with the requirements of this Code, or any amendments thereto. 
3.  Consistency with Comprehensive Plan. Nothing in this Code shall be construed to authorize development which is inconsistent with the Comprehensive Plan. 
Sec. 1-8. - Abrogation. 
    This Code is not intended to repeal, abrogate or interfere with the conditions or limitations of any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions duly recorded in the public records of the county. 
Sec. 1-9. - Relationship to other laws. 
    If any subject of this Code is controlled by any other law, statute, ordinance or regulation, then that which imposes the more stringent standard or requirement shall govern. 
Sec. 1-10. - Severability. 
    If any section, paragraph, sentence, or clause hereof or any provision of this Code is declared to be invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining provisions of this Code shall be unaffected thereby and shall remain in full force and effect. 
Sec. 1-11. - Enforcement and penalties. 
    In the event of a violation of this Code, the City may pursue any or all of the following actions. The rights and remedies of the City hereunder are cumulative and not exclusive of any other rights or remedies contained in this Code, or other applicable ordinance, rule or law. No delays on the part of the City in exercising any right, power or privilege hereunder shall operate as a waiver thereof nor shall any or [sic] partial exercise of any right, power or privilege hereunder preclude the City from exercising such right, power or privilege at a later date. 
    1-11.1. Enforcement responsibilities. 
    The provisions of this section shall be administered by the City Manager, or his designated representative. In addition to other remedies provided by this Code and other applicable laws, regulations or ordinances, the City Manager shall take the following actions when a violation has been determined to exist: 
1.  No subsequent development approval or order shall be issued until the violation has been corrected; 
2.  The violator shall be informed that no further work or construction under an existing development approval or order may proceed until the violation is corrected. Such stop work order shall be issued by the City Manager and shall become effective at the time of delivery to the violator; 
3.  Any building, structure, accessory structure, land clearing or other form of development which is constructed, erected, placed or otherwise located in the City without a duly authorized development order or not in conformance with conditions of such order, or not in conformance with the provisions of this Code, may be declared a public nuisance, and be subject to the provisions of Articles II, III, and IV of Chapter 22, Code of the City of Marianna, Florida. 
    1-11.2. Enforcement procedures. 
1.  It shall be the duty of the City Manager to initiate proceedings against violators of this Code. No member of any appointed board or body shall have any authority to initiate such enforcement proceedings. 
2.  Except as provided in paragraph 3, when a violation of this Code has been determined to exist the City Manager shall issue a written warning in the form of a "Notice of Intent" to find a violation. The notice of intent shall be delivered to the violator and shall include the specific provisions of this Code to which the violations(s) apply. The violator shall have ten working days to correct or remedy the violation(s) specified in the notice of intent, or to enter into a written agreement with the City which specifies what actions will be taken to correct or remedy the violation by a date certain. If, after the applicable period, the violation has not been corrected or remedied, the City Manager shall issue a "Notice of Violation" to the violator. Such notice of violation shall constitute a formal citation and shall subject the violator to the penalties prescribed in subsection 1-11.4. 
3.  If the City Manager has reason to believe that any violation of this Code presents an imminent threat to the public health, safety and welfare, a notice of violation shall be issued immediately without any notice of intent. 
4.  Extensions of the ten-day period to correct or remedy violations may be approved by the City Manager upon demonstration of extenuating circumstances by the violator. 
5.  Any notice of intent or notice of violation shall be served personally by a duly authorized code enforcement or law enforcement officer or, in the alternative, it shall be sent to such parties by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of record of the real property occupants or to the violator, whichever applies. If the name of any such party or his place of residence or his post office address cannot be ascertained after diligent search, or in the event a show cause notice which is sent by either registered or certified mail shall be returned undelivered, constructive service will be perfected by publishing a copy thereof, once a week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within the City. A copy of such show cause notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in City hall. 
    1-11.3. Appeals. 
1.  An appeal of any notice of violation may be initiated by any person charged with a violation of this Code. Appeals proceedings shall be as specified in subsection 2-6.6. 
2.  Initiation of an appeal as specified herein shall stay the imposition of penalties provided in subsection 1-11.4 until such time as a final order is issued by the City Commission. 
    1-11.4. Penalties or remedies. 
1.  Criminal penalties. Any person failing to comply with the provisions of this Code shall be charged with a misdemeanor of the second degree and shall, upon conviction, be subject to fine and imprisonment as provided by law. Each day of a continued violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
2.  Civil remedies. If any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, or maintained, or any building, structure, land, or water is used in any violation of this Code, the City may institute appropriate civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, correct, or abate the violation, including, but not limited to, the City seeking injunctive relief to prevent the continued violation of this Code. 
3.  Expenses, lien. If, after enforcement action has been initiated pursuant to this section, a violation continues to exist the City may cause the violation to be remedied at the expense of the property owner. 
Sec. 1-12. - Effective date. 
    This Code shall take effect on November 5, 2013, in accordance with City Ordinance No. 1021. 
Article II - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 2-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article is to describe and set forth responsibilities and procedures for the administration of this Code and for approval of development undertaken within the City. 
Sec. 2-2. - Approval required. 
    No development activity may be undertaken within the area of jurisdiction by any person unless such activity has been reviewed and approved by the City in accordance with the provisions of this Code, or such activity has been exempted from the provisions of this Code. "Development activity" shall be synonymous with the word "development" as defined in this Code and shall include, but not be limited to: land clearing for purposes of construction; construction of principal or accessory structures; construction of necessary or required appurtenances; substantial rehabilitation or redevelopment of existing structures or buildings; and, any other action which will materially change the use or appearance of land as set forth in F.S. § 380.04. 
Sec. 2-3. - Exemptions. 
    Development activities shall not be required to undergo development review nor shall additional approval be required by the City pursuant to this Code when: 
1.  The development has been duly authorized by the City and a valid building permit has been issued by Jackson County prior to the adoption of this Code, provided that development has commenced and continued based on substantial reliance upon the issued permit; or 
2.  The development activity is part of a larger plan of development for which a valid permit has been issued for the entire plan of development including all principal and accessory structures, utilities, parking, or any other appurtenant structures. 
Sec. 2-4. - Development review. 
    2-4.1. Applicability. Unless otherwise exempted, all proposed development and redevelopment activities shall be subject to review by the City. Such review shall be in conformance with the provisions of this Code and shall constitute the basis for approval, conditional approval or denial of development applications. 
    2-4.2. Development review process. The following process shall be adhered to during the course of development review. 
1.  Developers wishing to engage in development activities shall first obtain from the City an application for development approval. Such application shall be in the form prescribed by the City Manager and shall be completed by the developer or an agent authorized to act on behalf of the developer. 
2.  Development reviews shall be conducted using only those forms or materials established and approved by the City, including the site plan requirements specified herein or any other information considered necessary for purposes of development review. 
3.  Development review shall be undertaken at one of the following two levels of detail as follows. 
a.  Minor development. The term "minor development" shall include but not be limited to the following, and shall be allowable uses in each zoning district as described in section 4-1 
i.  Construction, renovation, placement or substantial rehabilitation of an individual single-family detached, duplex, triplex, or quadraplex residential dwelling on one lot or parcel; 
ii.  Placement or location of a single manufactured home on one lot or parcel, whether temporary or permanent; 
iii.  Construction or placement of accessory structures which are not intended for human occupancy or habitation including fences, garages/carports, storage sheds, swimming pools, decks, etc. (see section 4-2); 
iv.  Any remodeling, renovation, expansion or other similar activity involving alterations or additions to an existing residential or nonresidential structure provided such activity does not increase the total lot coverage by more than 25 percent over the existing lot coverage consistent with the maximum allowed in section 4-1 of this Code; 
v.  Construction, location or placement of public utilities such as water and sewer lines, streets, lift stations, and construction staging areas, or other similar structures. 
In addition to any other required information an applicant for approval of a minor development must submit a site plan, drawn to an acceptable scale, which shows the following: 
i.  Boundaries, property lines, and configuration of the property upon which the proposed development will take place. 
ii.  Location of the proposed development on the property along with the location of existing structures. 
iii.  Existing land use and zoning districts for all adjacent properties. 
iv.  Location of all driveways or parking areas, if applicable. 
v.  Location and names of adjacent streets and location of driveway access or connection(s) onto adjacent streets, if applicable. 
vi.  Location of alleys, easements, or other public ways, if applicable. 
vii.  Location of environmental features such as conservation zones, flood zones, wetlands, streams, creeks, protected trees, vegetated buffers or other similar resources, if applicable. 
viii.  Reserved. 
ix.  For habitable structures, location of nearest available water and sewer lines and proposed connection points. 
x.  Drainage and stormwater management facilities as specified in subsection 4-5.1, paragraph 4. 
xi.  Accompanying the site plan, proof of ownership in the form of a deed; and a letter of authorization or signed contract if applicant is different than the owner. 
After review of the required information, a development order may be granted by the Director pursuant to section 2-5 of this Code or, at the discretion of the Director, referred to the Planning and Zoning Board for further review. 
b.  Major development. The term "major development" means any development activity which is not a minor development. 
In addition to any other required information, applicants for approval of major development activities must submit detailed site plan drawings which show the following: 
i.  A vicinity sketch showing the relationship of the site in relation to surrounding roadways, zoning districts, land use districts, and flood zones with base flood elevations, if applicable. 
ii.  A description of the land; the name, address, and telephone number of the owner, developer, and designer or architect; and the date of site plan preparation. 
iii.  The boundary lines and dimensions of the area or lots included in the site plan including angles, dimensions and references; a north directional arrow and map scale; and the proposed use of the land by areas. 
iv.  The existing and proposed grades, the drainage plan, erosion control plan, and the proposed structures with appropriate topographic contour intervals or spot elevations. 
v.  The shape, size and location of all structures, including the floor area and elevations thereof; the floor area and ground coverage ratios and the relative finished ground and basement floor grades. 
vi.  Natural features such as wetlands, shorelines, lakes or ponds, and protected trees, and manmade features such as existing roads, sidewalks, walls, fences or other structures, indicating which are to be retained, removed or altered and the adjacent properties, their existing uses and zoning designations. 
vii.  Proposed street, driveways, sidewalks, and parking facilities; vehicular turnarounds, curb cutouts, and loading areas; the location of solid waste receptacles; the inside radii of all curves; the width of streets, driveways and sidewalks and the total number of available parking spaces specifying the type of construction and critical dimensions, and the ownership of the various facilities. 
viii.  The size and location of all existing and proposed public and private utilities and easements; water and sewer tap locations; sewer cleanouts and turns; and water meter types, sizes and locations. 
ix.  All proposed landscaping and the dimensions and location of all proposed signs (see Article 5). 
x.  All applicable requirements as specified in Article 4 of this Code. 
xi.  Verification that the concurrency requirements of Article 3 have been met. 
xii.  Accompanying the site plan, proof of ownership in the form of a deed; or a letter of authorization or signed contract if applicant is different than the owner. 
xiii.  Other information as may be deemed necessary by the City. 
Applicants for approval of major development activities must submit all information and site plan drawings as specified in this subsection. In addition, the City may require the developer to provide a detailed development impact analysis which includes, but may not be limited to, the following parameters: 
i.  Adequacy of public facilities and services available to serve the proposed development; 
ii.  Suitability of site conditions including topography and soils, and the extent to which site modifications will be necessary to accommodate the proposed development; 
iii.  Ingress and egress to roadways; 
iv.  Drainage or stormwater management; 
v.  Vehicular traffic, including on-site parking; 
vi.  Required permits from other governmental agencies; 
vii.  Noise; 
viii.  Lighting; 
ix.  Public safety and/or potential to create a public nuisance; and 
x.  Impacts on natural resources. 
After review of the required information, a development order(s) for major development activities may be granted by the City Commission after review by the Planning and Zoning Board as specified in section 2-5 of this Code. 
    2-4.3. Review period. All applications for development approval shall be submitted to the Director. Required reviews and subsequent final action shall be completed by the City after the application is deemed complete by the Director as follows: minor development, 30-day review period; major development, 90-day review period. Submittal of incomplete applications will not start any review period. 
    2-4.4. Fast Track approval. Applications within the Downtown Improvement Special Treatment Area, Industrial Special Treatment Area, Distribution Park Special Treatment Area, and Mixed Use Special Treatment Area or for school facilities are eligible for the Fast Track Approval Process. Once the application is deemed complete by the Director or designee, the required review and subsequent final action may be completed within a 45-day period. 
    2-4.5. Withdrawal of applications. An application for development approval may be withdrawn at any time prior to issuance of final development order by the Director, Planning and Zoning Board, or City Commission as appropriate; however, any fees or charges required for development review shall be forfeited by the person paying such fees. 
    2-4.6. Fees and charges. The City Manager may establish and periodically adjust a schedule of fees or charges for development review, subject to approval by the City Commission. 
    2-4.7. Certifications. Site plan drawings submitted by applicants for major development activities must be certified by a professional engineer or architect, as applicable, registered with the state of Florida. Such certifications shall be completed and affixed before the application for development approval will be accepted for final action by the City. 
Sec. 2-5. - Development approval. 
    Upon review of an application for development approval as set forth in section 2-4, the City may approve, approve with conditions, table, or deny such application. Action taken by the City shall be based upon considerations and standards as set forth in this Code and shall constitute either a preliminary or final development order, as may be applicable. 
    2-5.1. Construction permits. No permits relating to building construction, electrical, plumbing, gas, or water/sewer connections may be issued within the City until such time as development approval has been obtained by the developer pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
    2-5.2. Other required permits or approvals. In addition to obtaining a development order from the City, the developer must also obtain all other applicable permits or exemptions as may be required by law, except those associated with building construction. In the event a development order from the City is prerequisite to obtaining other required permits, the City may issue a development order which states that the proposed development is in compliance with this Code, and that such development order is conditioned upon the developer obtaining all other required permits. The developer must provide proof to the City that all required permits or exemptions have been granted prior to starting development. Failure to provide such proof will result in the developer not being able to obtain a certificate of occupancy until such time as all permits or exemptions have been obtained. 
    2-5.3. Development approval standards. The decision by any authorized person or board to issue a development order shall be based upon general standards, including but not limited to: 
1.  The proposed development must not be contrary to the public interest; 
2.  Unless otherwise exempted, the proposed development must be in conformance with the Comprehensive Plan and all applicable provisions of this Code; 
3.  The proposed development must not have the potential to cause significant financial liability or hardship for the City; 
4.  The proposed development must not create an unreasonable hazard or nuisance to adjacent property owners, or otherwise constitute a threat to the general health, safety and welfare of the public at large; 
5.  The degree to which the proposed development promotes other important community objectives such as redevelopment of underutilized or blighted areas, affordable housing, or economic development; 
6.  The extent to which the developer is willing to provide improvements or facilities to either compensate for or mitigate any adverse impacts caused by the proposed development; 
7.  The availability of public facilities and services needed to accommodate the proposed development; 
8.  The proposed development must be in conformance with all other applicable laws, statutes, ordinances, regulations or Codes; and 
9.  Other standards as may be considered necessary by the City. 
    2-5.4. Responsibility for development approval. Responsibility for final development order(s) shall be as follows. 
1.  Minor development: Director of Municipal Development Department or his designee. 
2.  Major development: City Commission, after review and approval by the Planning and Zoning Board. 
    2-5.5. Validity. Unless otherwise specified in the development order, development orders shall remain valid as follows: 
1.  Major development order(s) shall remain valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance. 
2.  Minor development order(s) shall remain valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance. 
    All construction and development activity must be completed within the allotted time period. Extensions may be granted by the City Commission in the event that performance by the developer is prevented due to inability to obtain other applicable permits pursuant to subsection 2-5.2, or other extenuating circumstances to be determined by the Director of the Municipal Development Department or designee. 
    2-5.6. Development agreement. In order to provide flexibility and additional certainty to be [the] Comprehensive Planning and land development regulation process the City may enter into a development agreement with a developer. Development agreements shall be governed by the provisions of F.S. §§ 163.3220-163.3243. 
Sec. 2-6. - Protection of landowner's rights. 
    It is the specific purpose and intent of the City Commission to ensure that each and every landowner has beneficial use of his property in accordance with the U.S. Constitution and the Florida constitution, and to provide conditions and procedures whereby landowners who believe they are deprived of all beneficial use of their property may secure relief through nonjudicial procedures. 
    2-6.1. Development as of right. Development as of right is that which is allowable in a zoning district provided such development is considered to be in conformity with this Code and all other applicable laws, statutes, ordinances, Codes or regulations. 
    2-6.2. Vested rights. A property owner's right of development prior to adoption of this Code shall be vested, even if such development is not in conformance with this Code, subject to the following circumstances. 
1.  Final development approval has been granted to the developer by the City and a valid, unexpired building permit has been issued to the developer by the building official and development has commenced and continued in good faith prior to adoption of this plan. 
2.  Within six months after adoption of this plan the property owner has requested and received approval of vested rights status from the City Commission. 
3.  All vested development shall be undertaken in strict conformance with the design plans and specifications approved by the City and the building official. Any modifications, additions or alterations to the approved plans and specifications shall not be considered vested development. 
4.  Where a lot or parcel was duly recorded prior to adoption of this Code (December 1, 1991) and has less area, width or depth than required to meet the zoning district requirements, said lot may be used for an allowable use provided all lot coverage and setback requirements are met. 
    2-6.3. Nonconforming development. Nonconforming development is considered to be those land uses or structures which are in existence on the effective date of this Code and which by use, design or construction do not comply with the provisions of this Code. 
    Subject to the following restrictions nonconforming development may, if lawfully in existence on the effective date of this Code, remain in its nonconforming state. 
1.  Public hazard or nuisance. The development must not constitute a threat or nuisance to the general health, safety and welfare of the public, or adjacent property owners. 
2.  Ordinary repair and maintenance. Normal maintenance and repair to permit continuation of nonconforming development may be performed. 
3.  Expansions or extensions. Nonconforming uses shall not be extended onto adjacent properties or expanded by more than ten percent of the floor area or lot coverage, whichever is less, of the existing nonconforming use. 
4.  Abandonment or discontinuance. Where nonconforming development is abandoned or the use is discontinued for a period of six months such use shall not be continued or resumed, and shall be subject to compliance with the provisions of this Code. 
5.  Damage or destruction. Where nonconforming development is substantially damaged or destroyed, reconstruction of such development shall be in compliance with the provisions of this Code. A structure is considered to be substantially damaged or destroyed if the cost of reconstruction is 50 percent or more of the fair market value of the structure at the time of the damage or destruction. For nonconforming development comprised of multiple structures, the cost of reconstruction shall be compared to the combined fair market value of all of the structures. 
6.  Change of ownership. Change of ownership or other transfer of an interest in real property on which a nonconforming use is located shall not, in and of itself, terminate the nonconforming status unless the purchaser expands or extends the use of the property as specified in paragraph 3 of this subsection. 
    2-6.4. Request for change of zoning. 
1.  Applicability. Any property owner may request a change in the designated zoning shown on the official zoning map for properties under his ownership or administration provided the change does not require an amendment to the Comprehensive Plan (for example, change from R-1 to R-2 but within the overall residential category shown on the future land use map; conversely, a change from any residential category to a commercial category would require a plan amendment and would not be allowable under this subsection). 
2.  Procedure. Requests for change of zoning shall be submitted to the Director on forms to be provided by the City. Such requests shall be adopted by ordinance after review and approval by the Planning and Zoning Board. 
Approval shall be based upon general standards, including but not limited to: 
a.  The proposed change will not degrade level of service standards established in the Comprehensive Plan, and meet minimum concurrency requirements; 
b.  The proposed change is in harmony with the general intent of the Comprehensive Plan and this Code; 
c.  The proposed change will not cause development which will substantially increase traffic congestion, fire hazard, or other hazard to the public health, welfare and safety; 
d.  Changes in zoning must be compatible with adjacent land uses and zoning districts, and not create a potential for nuisances; 
e.  Changes in zoning designations must be the same zoning designation as that for which the change is being requested on at least one abutting boundary, or the land parcel must be of sufficient size to justify the designated zoning. 
    Changes in zoning districts must be adopted by ordinance pursuant to F.S. § 166.041. 
    2-6.5. Amendments to the Comprehensive Plan. 
1.  Any changes or alterations involving the type, designation, density, or intensity of land uses, or the allowable development within such land uses, as described in the Comprehensive Plan shall be considered plan amendments. 
2.  Requests for plan amendments involving both small-scale and large-scale development activities shall be submitted to the Director on forms to be provided by the City. Such requests shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Board which will submit recommendations to the City Commission for final action. 
Requests for plan amendments involving major development activities will be considered by the Planning and Zoning Board after due public notice. Final action shall be taken by the City Commission after public notice and public hearings as specified in Subsection 2-6.7. 
Requests for plan amendments involving small-scale development activities may be considered by the Planning and Zoning Board at any regularly scheduled meeting after due public notice. Final action shall be taken by the City Commission upon recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Board. 
3.  All plan amendments, whether for small or large-scale development activities, must be submitted to the State Land Planning Agency for consistency review pursuant to F.S. § 163.3184. 
i.  Small-scale development amendments require two (2) public hearings before the City Commission, one of which shall be an adoption hearing. 
ii.  The procedure for amendment of the Comprehensive Plan shall be as for the original adoption of the Comprehensive Plan or element as set forth in F.S. § 163.3184. 
4.  The Planning and Zoning Board shall not recommend approval of a plan amendment unless it makes a positive finding, based on competent evidence, on each of the following: 
i.  The proposed plan amendment will not degrade level of service standards established in the Comprehensive Plan or the Land Development Code and meet minimum concurrency requirements; 
ii.  The proposed plan amendment is in harmony with the general intent of the Comprehensive Plan and the Land Development Code; 
iii.  The proposed plan amendment will not cause development which will substantially increase traffic congestion, fire hazard, or other hazard to the public health, welfare and safety; 
iv.  Changes in land use designations must be compatible with adjacent land uses, and not create a potential for nuisances. 
v.  Changes in land use designations must be the same land use designation as that for which the change is being requested on at least one (1) abutting boundary, or the land parcel must be of sufficient size to justify the designated land use. 
    2-6.6. Variances; appeals. 
1.  Variances. Variances to the provisions of this Code may be granted by the City Commission, after review by the Planning and Zoning Board, for developments which do not require an amendment to the Comprehensive Plan. Variances allowed under this subsection shall not supersede or abrogate the variance conditions associated with flood damage prevention and/or the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program. 
Any person desiring to undertake a development activity not in conformance with this Code may apply to the Director for a variance in conjunction with the application for development approval. The variance shall be granted or denied by the City Commission, after review by the Planning and Zoning Board. 
The Planning and Zoning Board shall first determine whether the need for the proposed variance arises out of the physical surroundings, shape, topographical condition, or other physical or environmental conditions that are unique to the specific property involved. If so, the Planning and Zoning Board shall make the following required findings based on the granting of the variance for that site alone. If, however, the condition is common to numerous sites so that requests for similar variances are likely to be received, the Planning and Zoning Board shall make the required findings based on the cumulative effect of granting the variance to all who may apply. 
The Planning and Zoning Board shall not vary the requirements of any provision of this Code unless it makes a positive finding, based on substantial competent evidence, on each of the following: 
a.  There are extreme practical or economic difficulties in carrying out the strict letter of this Code; 
b.  Conditions for which the variance is being applied are unique or unusual to the site or structure in question; 
c.  The variance request is not based exclusively upon a desire to reduce the cost of developing the site; 
d.  The proposed variance will not substantially increase congestion on surrounding public streets, the danger of fire, or other hazard to the public; 
e.  The proposed variance will not substantially diminish property values in, nor alter the essential character of, the area surrounding the site; 
f.  The proposed variance will not decrease level of service standards as established in the Comprehensive Plan; and 
g.  The effect of the proposed variance is in harmony with the general intent of this Code and the specific intent of the relevant subject area(s) therein. 
In approving a variance, the Planning and Zoning Board or the City Commission may recommend such conditions and restrictions as may be necessary to allow a positive finding to be made on any of the foregoing factors, or to minimize the injurious effect of the variance. 
2.  Appeals. Any aggrieved or adversely affected party as defined in F.S. § 163.3215 (including property owners and adjacent property owners) or person(s) charged with violations of this Code has the right to appeal to the City Commission action taken on any final administrative order or citation issued by the Director or the City Manager. 
Appeal action must be undertaken by the adversely affected party or violator within ten days after the final order or citation is issued. The institution of the appeal shall be on forms provided by the Director which shall: identify the adversely affected party(ies) or violator(s); identify the nature of the final order or violation being appealed; and, setting forth the grounds or basis for the appeal. Within ten days after the filing of notice of appeal, the Director shall schedule a date for the hearing thereof and give notice of the date for the hearing to the interested parties, in a manner as would afford them not less than ten days' notice. Under no circumstances shall the City establish a hearing date beyond 60 days from the filing of the notice of appeal. 
All appeal proceedings shall be public. The finding(s) of the City Commission shall be the final administrative remedy available to the party(ies), and shall be encompassed in a written decision. 
An adversely affected party or violator, having exhausted his administrative remedies before the City Commission, may appeal to the circuit court in which venue applies. Such an appeal shall not be a hearing de novo, but shall be limited to appellate review of the record created by the City. An appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the rendition of the decision by the City Commission. 
    2-6.7. Public notice; due process. It is the intent of the City Commission that landowners and the public participate in the Comprehensive Planning and land development regulation process to the fullest extent possible. Toward that end, the City will undertake procedures designed to promote due process and to provide landowners with notice of all official actions which will regulate or change the official status of their property. 
1.  Applicability. The public notice provisions of this subsection shall apply to all actions or forums, as may be applicable, for which an administrative issue may be decided, including: development orders, variances, requests for change of land use, and appeals. No formal action may be taken by the Planning and Zoning Board or City Commission until the public notice requirements of this subsection are met. 
2.  Public notice requirements. 
a.  Development orders. 
i.  Minor development. Public notice shall not be required for minor development activities provided the development is "as of right" (see subsection 2-6.1) and does not require any further administrative action such as a plan amendment, variance or change of zoning. 
ii.  Major development. Development orders for major development activities may be considered at any scheduled meeting of the Planning and Zoning Board, after development review as specified in section 2-4 of this Code. Any meeting of the Planning and Zoning Board at which an application for major development is to be considered shall be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation for the area of jurisdiction. 
The advertisement shall not be placed in the legal or classified section. Headline for the advertisement shall not be less than 18 point. The advertisement shall contain a brief description and location of the proposed development as well as the time, date, and place the meeting will occur. At the advertised Planning and Zoning Board meeting the presiding official will announce the date, time and place final action will be taken by the City Commission. 
b.  Variances. Public notice requirements for variances shall be the same as those required for major development. 
c.  Appeals. Public notice requirements for meetings at which appeals will be heard by the City Commission shall be the same as those required for major development. 
d.  Change of zoning. Any request for change of zoning which does not involve a plan amendment must be advertised as set forth in F.S. § 166.041. 
e.  Comprehensive plan amendment. Any requested change of future land use designation must be advertised as set forth in F.S. § 163.3184 or § 163.3187. 
3.  Public participation. At each advertised meeting of the Planning and Zoning Board or City Commission the presiding body shall provide opportunities for oral or written statements from the public. Any statements received shall become a matter of record and may be introduced at administrative or judicial appellate proceedings. 
4.  On-site public notice. For actions involving applications for major development, variances, or requests for change of zoning, the City shall provide additional public notice by requiring the placement of a temporary sign on the property to be affected by official action. Such sign shall be of sufficient size and placed so as to be in clear view of the public, and shall describe the type of action to be considered and the date, time and place of the meeting at which official action will be taken. The sign will be installed and kept in place for a period of not less than seven days before the scheduled meeting at which action will be taken. 
Article III - CONCURRENCY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 3-1. - Purpose. 
    It is the intent of the City Commission that public facilities and services needed to support development shall be available concurrent with the impacts of such development. The purpose of this Article is to provide guidelines and procedures necessary to fulfill this intent and to meet the concurrency requirements of state law. 
Sec. 3-2. - Applicability. 
    Development orders shall not be issued unless public facilities and services, which meet or exceed the adopted level of service standards are available concurrent with the impacts of the development. Unless public facilities and services, which meet or exceed such standards are available at the time the development order is issued, development orders shall be specifically conditioned upon availability of the public facilities and services necessary to serve the proposed development. Public facility and service availability shall be deemed sufficient if the public facilities and services for a development are phased, or the development is phased, so that the public facilities and those related services which are deemed necessary by the City to operate the facilities necessitated by that development are available and meet the adopted level of service standards concurrent with the impacts of the development. Phased facilities and services to be provided by the City shall be included in and consistent with the capital improvements element of the Comprehensive Plan. Public facilities and services to be provided by the developer shall be guaranteed in an enforceable development agreement, including development agreements pursuant to subsection 2-5.6 of this Code. Development orders will not be issued that result in a reduction of the level of services for the affected public facilities below the level of services provided in the Comprehensive Plan. 
    3-2.1. Minimum requirements for concurrency. For the purpose of determining if concurrency requirements are being met the City shall use the minimum requirements set forth in Section 5 10. Concurrency Management of the Comprehensive Plan, as a general guideline. 
Sec. 3-3. - Level of service standards. 
    3-3.1. Public purpose. Level of service standards shall be established and maintained for ensuring that adequate facility capacity will be provided for future development and for purposes of issuing development orders, pursuant to F.S. § 163.3202(2)(g). The City shall establish and maintain a level of service standard for each public facility located within the area for which the City has authority to issue development orders. Such level of service standards shall be set for each individual facility or facility type and not on a system wide basis. 
    3-3.2. Public facilities and services. Public facilities and services are those associated with: (1) transportation systems or facilities; (2) sewer systems or facilities; (3) solid waste systems or facilities; (4) drainage systems or facilities; (5) potable water systems or facilities; (6) parks and recreation systems or facilities; and (7) school system or facilities. 
    3-3.3. Level of service standards. The following level of service standards shall be used to evaluate available facility capacity and as a basis for issuance of development orders. 
1.  Transportation systems or facilities. Levels of service for transportation systems or facilities shall be based upon the functional classifications of roadways, and volume/capacity standards used by the Florida Department of Transportation. 
Functional Classification Urban Peak Hour Level of Service Expressway C Urban Principal Arterial D Urban Minor Arterial D Urban Collector D County Roads D Local Street D  
2.  Sewer systems or facilities. 
a.  The City shall use sewage flows specified in table II, "Estimated Domestic Sewage Flows," found in section 64E-6.008, F.A.C., for purposes of estimating sewage generated by development activities. These estimates shall be used to make certain that available facility capacity exists to serve the proposed development concurrent with the impacts of such development, and to maintain a cumulative allocation of facility capacity dedicated for approved developments. 
b.  The City shall use 80% of permitted sewage treatment capacity or 2.4 million gallons per day, based on sustained average monthly flows, as the threshold for denying development permits for compliance with concurrency requirements. 
c.  For areas which are not served by central sewer, the level of service shall be presumed adequate when the developer receives an on-site sewage treatment permit pursuant to Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. 
3.  Solid waste systems or facilities. The City shall use 5.06 pounds of solid waste per person per day to evaluate potential impacts of proposed development and as a basis for issuing development permits. 
4.  Drainage systems or facilities. The City shall use the following standards for purposes of evaluating impacts from proposed development and for issuing development permits. 
The level of service standards for water quantity and water quality for the 25-year, 24 hour storm event are as follows: 
a.  Water quantity. Post-development runoff from the site shall not exceed peak predevelopment runoff rates. 
b.  Water quality. Stormwater treatment shall be provided for a volume equivalent to 2 inches of depth over the entire site or the runoff from the first one inch of rainfall on the entire site in accordance with Chapter 62-25, F.A.C., in order to meet receiving water quality standards in Chapter 62-302, section 62-302.500, F.A.C. 
These water quality and quantity standards shall apply to all new development and redevelopment, regardless of project size. 
5.  Potable water systems or facilities. The City shall use 175 gallons per person per day delivered at a pressure of 40 pounds per square inch to evaluate potential impacts of proposed development and for issuing development permits. 
For areas using private wells, the level of service shall be presumed adequate when the provisions of Chapter 40A-3, F.A.C., or 17-532, F.A.C., as applicable, are met. 
6.  Parks and recreation systems or facilities. The City shall use the following standards for evaluating potential impacts from proposed development and for issuing development permits. 
2 acres per 1,000 population 
7.  School systems or facilities. The City shall use the following standards for evaluating potential impacts from proposed development and for issuing development permits. 
Type of School Level of Service Elementary 107% of DOE Permanent FISH Capacity Middle 100% of DOE Permanent FISH Capacity High 90% of DOE Total Satisfactory Student Stations Magnet/Special Education 100% of DOE Permanent FISH Capacity  
    3-3.4. Levels of service to be maintained. 
1.  All applications for development approval shall demonstrate that the proposed development does not degrade adopted level of service standards. 
2.  Development orders may be issued for proposed development which exceeds adopted levels of service only when the terms and conditions of such exceedances are consistent with Section 10. Concurrency Management of the Comprehensive Plan. 
3.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, levels of service may be temporarily degraded during actual construction of new facilities, if upon completion of construction the prescribed levels of service will be met. 
4.  The City Commission may temporarily waive the foregoing requirements as they relate to levels of service for parks and recreation systems or facilities if the sites and facilities needed to maintain levels of service are included in the capital improvements element of the Comprehensive Plan, and conform to the provisions of paragraph 2 of this subsection. 
    3-3.5. Revisions or adjustments. The levels of service specified in the Comprehensive Plan and in subsection 3-3.3 may be revised or adjusted to accommodate changing conditions and circumstances. Revisions or adjustments to levels of service shall be based upon accurate and reliable data or information, and shall be considered a plan amendment subject to the amendment procedures specified in the Comprehensive Plan. 
Sec. 3-4. - Adequate capacity of public facilities. 
    For purposes of issuing development orders the available capacity of public facilities and services shall be determined as prescribed in this section. 
    3-4.1. Presumption of adequate capacity. Adequate capacity shall be presumed to be available for the approval of development orders until such time as conditions and circumstances indicate otherwise. Determination of such conditions and circumstances shall be triggered by certain thresholds which demonstrate that public facilities and services are nearing available capacity. Development orders shall not be denied on the basis of concurrency until such time as capacity thresholds are reached and maintained. Presumption of adequate capacity as a basis of meeting concurrency requirements shall not relieve the responsibility of the developer from compliance with other provisions of this Code, or the responsibility of the City for maintaining records which indicate the cumulative impacts of development orders. 
    3-4.2. Capacity thresholds. The City shall establish, and revise as necessary, capacity threshold standards to be used for presumptions of adequate capacity. Thresholds shall be indicated for transportation systems or facilities, sewer systems or facilities, solid waste systems or facilities, drainage systems or facilities, potable water systems or facilities, and parks and recreation systems or facilities. The list of capacity threshold standards shall be as specified in subsection 3-4.3 of this Code. 
    3-4.3. Capacity threshold standards. Adequate capacity shall be presumed to be available until such time as the following standards are met or exceeded. 
1.  Roadways. Capacity thresholds will be based on FDOT's generalized Level of Service tables or other City approved methods. 
2.  Sewer. Monthly sewage flows, based on a three-month average, reach 90 percent of permitted capacity as specified in subsection 3-3.3, paragraph 2. 
3.  Solid waste. Average daily tons of solid waste collected in the City reach 10 percent of the disposal capacity of Jackson County solid waste disposal facilities. 
4.  Drainage. Proposed development is in compliance with subsection 3-3.3, paragraph 4 of this Code. 
5.  Potable water. Average daily consumption (million gallons per day) of potable water in the City reaches 90 percent of available capacity, or delivery pressure (pounds per square inch, psi) falls below 30 psi on a Citywide basis. 
6.  Recreation. Population demand for recreation sites and facilities, based on annual population estimates, reaches 95 percent of availability for such sites and facilities. 
7.  School. Elementary schools are 107% of DOE permanent FISH capacity; middle schools are 100% of DOE permanent FISH capacity; high schools are 90% of DOE total satisfactory student stations; and/or Magnet/Special Education schools are 100% of DOE permanent FISH capacity. 
8.  Population. All capacity thresholds will be immediately reevaluated in the event population growth exceeds ten percent during any one year. Determination of population growth shall be based upon annual estimates of population published by the Bureau of Economics and Business Research (BEBR), University of Florida. 
    3-4.4. Termination of presumption of adequate capacity. Presumption of adequate capacity for purposes of issuing development orders shall be terminated when it has been determined by the City that the capacity thresholds have been met or exceeded. At that time, the City Manager shall issue a statement to the City Clerk, the Planning Board, and the City Commission which indicates that all applications for development approval will be denied until such time as adequate capacity becomes available, or conditioned upon meeting the concurrency management requirements set forth in this Article and the Comprehensive Plan. 
Sec. 3-5. - Concurrency management system. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of section 3-4, the City shall evaluate impacts upon public facilities and services caused by proposed development for each application for development approval. Impacts caused by proposed development for which adequate capacity is presumed subject to subsection 3-4.1 shall be recorded by the City and added to a cumulative total of allotted capacity for purposes of determining when capacity thresholds have been met. 
    The system for determination of potential impacts on public facilities caused by proposed development for purposes of recording a cumulative total of allocated capacity, and for meeting concurrency requirements when capacity thresholds have been met, shall be as described in subsection 3-5.1. 
    3-5.1. Determination of available capacity. Available capacity shall be determined for public facilities and services as follows. 
1.  Roadways. The Director shall follow the steps for roadway capacity analysis outlined in section 3-6 of this article, which establishes the methodology, procedures and requirements for submitting a transportation concurrency analysis in the City of Marianna and outlines steps for review and determination of available capacity, and impact on the adopted level of service standards for concurrency roadway facilities. 
2.  Sewer. 
a.  The City shall maintain an estimate of average daily sewage flow which shall be updated each month. Sewage flow estimates will be derived from an average of monthly sewage flows for the three-month period immediately preceding the month for which the estimate is being made. Average sewage flows shall be determined from self-monitoring operational reports required by Chapter 62-601, F.A.C., as specified in section 62-600.740, F.A.C., or equivalent. 
b.  Estimated average daily flows derived from the average monthly sewage flows shall be used as the basis to determine if capacity thresholds or level of service standards will be met or exceeded. Average daily sewage flow will be estimated for all proposed development using the level of service specified in subsection 3-3.3, paragraph 2. Additional sewage flow caused by proposed development shall be added to the estimated monthly sewage flow to determine if adequate capacity is available. 
c.  The City shall maintain a cumulative total of permitted sewage flows and shall reduce the City's allocated capacity accordingly on a monthly basis. 
3.  Solid waste. 
a.  On an annual basis, the City shall identify available solid waste disposal capability which can be provided by Jackson County. This volume shall provide the basis to determine if capacity thresholds or level of service standards will be met or exceeded. 
b.  The City shall apply the level of service standard found in subsection 3-3.3, paragraph 3, to estimate volumes of solid waste generated by proposed developments. 
4.  Drainage. 
a.  The City shall require all developers submitting an application for development approval to provide as part of the overall development site plan a drainage and stormwater management plan and erosion and sediment control plan as specified in subsection 4-5.1, paragraph 4; unless exempted by 62-346.051, Florida Administrative Code. At a minimum, such drainage and grading plan shall include: 1) finished topographic contours; 2) impervious surfaces; 3) existing drainage structures; 4) proposed drainage structures; and, 5) proposed stormwater treatment facilities. 
b.  Design standards for drainage shall be as specified in subsection 4-5.1, paragraph 4. In addition, no development order shall be issued by the City until the developer has obtained a stormwater permit pursuant to Chapter 62-346, Florida Administrative Code, if applicable, and the developer has a stormwater and erosion control plan approved by the City. 
c.  Drainage facilities for the proposed development of a single-family detached or duplex dwelling unit on an individual lot or parcel shall be presumed adequate when: (1) the lot coverage requirements of section 4-1 are met and the site is adequately grassed or landscaped; (2) the proposed development is part of a larger, common plan of development which has had a drainage plan approved by the City; and (3) site modifications do not involve the obstruction or alteration of any drainageway. 
d.  Drainage facilities for any development shall be presumed adequate if stormwater runoff from such development is discharged into a permitted stormwater management system. 
5.  Potable water. 
a.  The City shall maintain an estimate of average daily consumption, which shall be updated each month. 
b.  Estimated average daily consumption derived from the average monthly estimates shall be used as the basis to determine if capacity thresholds or level of service standards will be met or exceeded. Average daily consumption will be estimated for all proposed development. Additional consumption caused by proposed development shall be added to the estimated monthly sewage flow to determine if adequate capacity is available. 
c.  The City shall apply the level of service standard found in subsection 3-3.3, paragraph 5, to estimate potable water consumption for all proposed development. 
6.  Recreation. 
a.  On an annual basis, the City shall identify public and private recreation sites and facilities available for use by the general public. These sites and facilities shall provide the basis to determine whether capacity thresholds or level of service standards have been met or exceeded. 
b.  The City shall apply the level of service standards found in subsection 3-3.3, paragraph 6, to estimate demand for recreation sites and facilities caused by proposed development. 
7.  School. 
a.  Calculate total school facility capacity by adding the capacity (LOS) provided by an existing school facility to the capacity of any planned school facilities programmed to provide relief to that school facility, listed in the first three (3) years of the District Facilities Work Program. 
b.  Calculate available school facility capacity by subtracting from the total school facility capacity the sum of: 
i.  Current student enrollment (school facility capacity consumed by preexisting development); 
ii.  The portion of reserved capacity having a valid unexpired certificate of school concurrency from the School Board; and 
iii.  The portion of previously approved development (vested from concurrency) projected to be developed within three (3) years. 
c.  Calculate the proposed development's demand for school facility capacity by: 
i.  Applying the student generation multiplier to the proposed development to determine its total demand; and 
ii.  Subtracting a credit for the total district-wide enrollment of magnet school facilities as a percentage of the total district enrollment. 
d.  Subtract the proposed development's demand for school facility capacity from the available school permanent facility capacity to determine if there is a deficit. If so, repeat the process to determine if school facility permanent capacity is available in any contiguous CSA as indicated on the adopted CSA map. 
e.  If the projected student growth from a residential development causes the adopted LOS to be exceeded in the CSA, an adjacent CSA which is contiguous with and touches the boundary of, the concurrency service areas within which the proposed development is located shall be evaluated for available capacity. However, CSAs shall not be considered contiguous when the CSA is separated by a natural or man-made barrier, such as a river or Interstate roadway, requiring indirect transport through a third CSA or when transport time exceeds the adopted transportation time standard. 
i.  Consistent with Rule 6A-3.0171, Florida Administrative Code, the shift of impact to an adjacent CSA resulting in a total morning or afternoon transportation time of either elementary or secondary students shall not exceed one (1) hour unless a specific finding is made by the School Board that there is no other viable option. The transportation time shall be determined by the School Board transportation routing system and measured from the school to the center of the subject parcel/plat in the amendment application, along the most direct improved public roadway free from major hazards. 
f.  Residential Uses Exempt from the Requirements of School Concurrency. The following residential uses shall be exempt from the requirements of school concurrency: 
i.  All single family lots of record at the time the Public School Facilities Element (PSFE) amendment became effective. 
ii.  Residential site plans that do not create a measurable impact (one whole student or more) are exempt from the requirements of School Concurrency. 
iii.  Any new residential development that has a preliminary plat approval, final subdivision or site plan approval, or the functional equivalent for a site specific development order prior to the adoption date of the Public School Facilities Element amendment; 
iv.  Any amendment to a previously approved residential development which does not increase the number of dwelling units or change the type of dwelling units. 
v.  Any age restricted community with no permanent residents under the age of eighteen (18), (a restrictive covenant limiting the age of residents to eighteen (18) and older for at least thirty (30) years shall be required to be recorded in a form approved by the local government with County Clerk of Court). Removal of the restrictive amendment shall be subject to approval of the City and subject to school concurrency review. 
vi.  Any single family residential unit developed under a family homestead allowed by the City's Comprehensive Plan pursuant to F.S. § 163.3179; to the extent it does not create a measurable impact. 
vii.  Any adult group housing facility that does not generate students such as homeless shelters, halfway homes, prisons and nursing homes exclusive of employee housing. 
g.  In compliance with the availability standards of F.S. § 163.3180(6), the City shall not deny development approval due to failure to achieve the adopted LOS for public school facilities when the following occurs: 
i.  Adequate school facilities are planned and will be in place or under construction within three (3) years of the development approval. 
ii.  The developer executes a legally binding commitment to provide mitigation proportionate to the demand for public school facilities consistent with the methodology in the Interlocal Agreement for Public School Facility Planning and School Concurrency. Relocatable or portable structures are not acceptable for mitigation. 
iii.  The needed capacity is found available in one or more contiguous school concurrency service areas by the School Board. 
h.  Available Capacity Determination. In the event there is available school capacity to support a development, the School Board shall issue a Final School Capacity Availability Determination (FSCAD) so stating. In the event there is not available school capacity to support a development, the School Board will issue a Preliminary School Capacity Evaluation (PSCAD) and may entertain proportionate share mitigation options. If a mitigation option is acceptable, the School Board and participating parties shall enter into an enforceable and binding agreement with the developer to mitigate the impact from the development through the creation of additional school capacity. Upon execution of the agreement, the School Board will issue a FSCAD. 
    3-5.2. Action upon failure to show available capacity. 
1.  The project owner or developer may provide the necessary improvements to maintain level of service standards. In such case the application for development approval shall include appropriate plans for improvements, documentation that such improvements are designed to provide the capacity necessary to achieve or maintain the level of service, and a development agreement guaranteeing the construction, consistent with calculations of capacity above. 
2.  The proposed project may be altered such that projected level of service is no less than the adopted level of service. 
3.  Proportionate Share Mitigation for Schools. When the anticipated student impacts from a proposed development cause the adopted LOS to be exceeded, the developer's proportionate share will be based on the number of additional student stations necessary to achieve the established LOS. The methodology for calculating the amount to be paid will be consistent with F.S. § 163.3180(6). 
a.  The methodology used to calculate a developer's proportionate share mitigation shall be as follows: 
Number of New Student Stations Required for Mitigation (By School Type) = Number of Dwelling Units Generated By Development Proposal x Student Generation Multiplier (By School Type) - Number of Available Student Stations 
Cost of Proportionate Share Mitigation = Number of New Student Stations Required for Mitigation (By School Type) x Cost per Student Station as defined in the interlocal agreement (by School Type). 
b.  Following a determination of insufficient capacity, the School Board or School Board's designee will provide the Developer and the City with a written Preliminary School Capacity Evaluation (PSCAD) notice. The notice to applicant shall advise of a one hundred twenty day (120) day period starting from the issue date of the PSCAD notice to negotiate with the School Board in an effort to mitigate the impact from the development through the creation of additional capacity. Developer may by written notice to the School Board terminate the negotiation period earlier. Provision of portable/relocatables is not an acceptable mitigation option. Upon identification and acceptance of a proposed mitigation option deemed financially feasible by the School Board, the developer shall enter into a binding and enforceable development agreement with the School Board and the City. Upon execution of the agreement the School Board will issue a Final School Capacity Availability Determination (FSCAD). 
i.  A mitigation contribution provided by a developer to offset the impact of a residential development must be directed by the School Board toward a school capacity project identified (or approved for inclusion) in the School Board's Five-Year District Facilities Work Plan. Capacity enhancing projects identified within the first three (3) years of the Five-Year District Facilities Work Plan shall be considered as total school facility capacity. 
ii.  If capacity projects are planned in years four (4) or five (5) of the School Board's Five-Year District Facilities Work Plan within the same CSA as the proposed residential development, the developer may pay his proportionate share to mitigate the proposed development in accordance with the formula provided in the adopted Interlocal Agreement for Public School Facility Planning and School Concurrency and the School District shall move the project(s) into the first three years of the Five-Year District Facilities Work Plan. 
iii.  If a capacity project does not exist in the Five-Year District Facilities Work Plan, the developer may petition the School Board to add a capacity project to satisfy the impacts from a proposed residential development if it is funded through the developer's proportionate share mitigation contributions. The School District is not bound to approve this petition if it finds the local School District cannot support the project. 
c.  School capacity mitigation options may include, but are not limited to: 
i.  Contribution of or payment for acquisition of new or expanded school sites; or 
ii.  Construction or expansion of, or payment for, permanent school facilities; or 
iii.  Mitigation Banking. 
Relocatable and modular facilities are not acceptable as proportionate share mitigation. 
d.  For mitigation measures (c.i), (c.ii) and (c.iii) above, the estimated cost to construct the mitigating capacity will reflect the estimated future construction costs at the time of the anticipated construction. 
e.  A proportionate share mitigation contribution shall not be subsequently amended or refunded after final site plan or plat approval to reflect a reduction in planned or constructed residential density. 
f.  Any proportionate share mitigation must be directed by the School Board toward a school capacity improvement identified in the School Board's Five-Year District Facilities Work Plan. 
g.  Upon conclusion of the one hundred twenty (120) day negotiation period or earlier if a mitigation agreement is executed, a Final School Capacity Availability Determination (FSCAD) shall be issued. If mitigation is agreed to, the School Board shall indicate its support for approving the development subject to the written agreement including those mitigation measures agreed to by the City, Developer and the School Board. Prior to site plan approval, final subdivision approval or the functional equivalent, the mitigation measures shall be memorialized in an enforceable and binding agreement with the City, the School Board and the Developer that specifically details mitigation provisions to be paid for by the developer and the relevant terms and conditions. If mitigation is not agreed to, the FSCAD shall detail why any mitigation proposals were rejected and why the development is not in compliance with school concurrency requirements. A FSCAD constitutes final agency action by the School Board for purposes of F.S. ch. 120. 
h.  Appeal Process. A person substantially affected by a School Board's adequate capacity determination made as a part of the School Concurrency Process may appeal such determination through the process provided in F.S. ch. 120. 
    3-5.3. Burden of showing compliance on developer. The burden of showing compliance with level of service requirements shall be upon the developer. All applications for development approval shall provide sufficient information showing compliance with these standards. 
    3-5.4. Initial determination of concurrency. The initial determination of concurrency occurs during the review of the application for development approval, and shall include compliance with the level of service standards adopted by the City. 
Sec. 3-6. - Transportation concurrency management system. 
    3-6.1. Purpose. The purpose of the transportation concurrency management system (CMS) portion of this Article is to enable the City of Marianna to identify and account for the collective transportation impacts of new development on the City roadway system and to provide information allowing a concurrency determination to be made on each roadway segment in the transportation concurrency roadway network. In accordance with F.S. § 163.3180(5), the premise of concurrency is that the public facilities will be provided in order to achieve and maintain the adopted level of service standard. Consistent with the adopted Traffic Circulation Element of the City of Marianna Comprehensive Plan, it is the intent of the transportation concurrency management system portion of this Article to establish an equitable and consistent methodology that identifies procedures and requirements for submitting a transportation concurrency analysis in the City of Marianna, which measures the potential impact of a development upon the adopted minimum acceptable level of service (LOS) standard for concurrency roadway facilities. 
    3-6.2. Minimum requirements. Pursuant to the City of Marianna Comprehensive Plan, Traffic Circulation Element, the methodology and procedures for a transportation concurrency analysis shall apply to new non-residential development and residential subdivisions within the City of Marianna unless an exemption is granted based on the development's consistency with the City's Comprehensive Plan and the project that promotes public transportation, and/or is located within an area designated in the plan for urban refill, urban development or downtown revitalization consistent with F.S. § 163.3180(1)(f)3. It will be the responsibility of the applicant to demonstrate to the City of Marianna that: (1) the adopted level of service (LOS) standard on the transportation concurrency roadway network within the study area will be maintained without mitigation; or (2) the adopted level of service (LOS) standard on the transportation concurrency roadway network within the study area will be maintained with a specified and City approved mitigation plan. 
(A)  Multi-phased and single-phased non-residential facilities and services to be provided by the City shall be included in and consistent with the capital improvements element of the Comprehensive Plan. Public facilities and services to be provided by the developer shall be guaranteed in an enforceable development agreement, including development agreements pursuant to subsection 2-5.6 of this Code. The following shall apply to multi-phased and single-phased non-residential developments and residential subdivisions within the City of Marianna: 
(1)  First application. A transportation concurrency analysis with a City issued certificate of transportation concurrency shall remain valid and in effect subject to the terms and conditions of the associated final development order, unless a different term is agreed to by the City and specified in a development agreement. 
(2)  Subsequent applications. Subsequent development phases, not included in the first application as described in subsection (A) above seeking concurrency determination shall be required to provide an updated transportation concurrency analysis with current data. 
(3)  Amended applications. Amendments to single-phase or multi-phase approved development orders, which do not increase the net p.m. peak hour trips entering and exiting on any roadway segment in the transportation concurrency network or intersection shall not be subject to the methodology and procedures of this Article. For the purposes of this determination, the trip generation rates, internal capture and pass-by rates (if applicable) shall be updated to the current standard for both the approved and proposed land uses. If an increase in net external p.m. peak hour trips shall be subject to additional transportation concurrency review. All amended applications subject to new transportation concurrency review shall be required to submit roadway segment capacity and intersection analysis prescribed under subsections 3-6.10 and 3-16.11, respectively. 
(4)  Expired development orders. If a development order has been determined to be expired, then any subsequent applications for a development approval will be subject to transportation concurrency review. 
(B)  Redevelopment projects. To encourage infill and redevelopment, proposed projects that are the subject of a redevelopment shall be exempt from transportation concurrency review for up to 110 percent of the traffic generated by the immediately preceding existing development. 
This exemption shall be limited to 100 percent if the existing plus committed traffic demand on the directly accessed roadway exceeds 110 percent of the maximum service volume capacity at the adopted level of service standard as identified in the City of Marianna's Transportation Concurrency Management System, or if the directly accessed roadway is a designated primary hurricane evacuation route. 
To qualify as a redevelopment project, the immediately preceding existing development must have been active, operational or occupied within 24 months prior to the filing for a concurrency review for this provision to apply. Active, operational or occupied status shall be based on at least one of the following criteria: 
(a)  A valid unexpired certificate of occupancy for the premises; 
(b)  Maintained utility connections and/or service; 
(c)  Active or continued marketing of the property; 
(d)  Ongoing legal proceedings related to the subject property (i.e. change of ownership, foreclosures, bankruptcies, land use amendments, etc.); or 
(e)  The owner/applicant is granted an extension by the Marianna City Commission or its designee. 
Vested rights. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 3 to the contrary, the requirements of Article 3 shall not apply in any manner to impair vested rights established pursuant to Florida law, to the extent that any land development project, or portion thereof, is vested against the requirements of Article 3. 
Inter-local agreements. Jackson County may, with the consent of the Marianna City Commission, enter into an inter-local agreement with the City Commission whereby Jackson County, by a concurrency management ordinance, implements the methodologies and procedures in Article III in their respective land development approval process. The agreeing Jackson County shall be responsible for maintaining its own concurrency management system (CMS) and for reviewing transportation concurrency for land development projects within its jurisdiction. The agreement and ordinance shall ensure that all development is subject to the methodologies and procedures in Article III, and that the data is forwarded to the City of Marianna Municipal Development Department. 
Pursuant to F.S. § 163.3180(5)(g), in establishing adequate level of service standards for any arterial roads, or collector roads as appropriate, which traverse multiple jurisdictions, local governments are encouraged to coordinate with adjacent local governments for the purpose of using common methodologies for measuring impacts on transportation facilities. To implement the concurrency management system, both the City of Marianna and Jackson County shall use professionally accepted methodologies for measuring impacts on transportation facilities. Coordination with Jackson County is encouraged for the purpose of using common methodologies for measuring impacts and implementing concurrency management within the transportation network. 
(C)  In respect to arterials and collectors which traverse the City of Marianna, the City shall use the same professionally accepted methodologies for measuring impacts on City transportation facilities as on state and county roadways. The City will coordinate with county and state governments for the purpose of implementation. 
(D)  Transportation concurrency review process. 
(1)  Development review and approval authority. Transportation concurrency review and approval authority of a proposed land development project shall be subject to, and consistent with, applicable procedures pursuant to Article II. 
(2)  Preliminary transportation concurrency review. Upon submittal of a completed application for a development order, the City will make a preliminary assessment of transportation concurrency. 
(a)  If the preliminary assessment of transportation concurrency finds a lack of available capacity on one or more roadways in the transportation concurrency network, the applicant may exercise one or more of the following options: 
(i)  Rescind the application; 
(ii)  Phase the land development project and seek phase approval as roadway capacity becomes available sufficient to support the proposed land development project; 
(iii)  Postpone the land development project until roadway capacity becomes available; 
(iv)  Revise the transportation concurrency analysis as directed by City staff, or otherwise reduce the size of the project to fit within the roadway capacity that is available; or 
(v)  Pursue and enter into a development agreement that specifically addresses a mitigation plan for the identified roadway capacity deficiencies. This may include participation in the proportionate fair-share program as provided for in section 3-7. 
(b)  If the preliminary assessment of transportation concurrency for the original submittal, or a resubmitted application as described under subsection 3-6.2(D)(2), favorably determines that sufficient roadway capacity exists to support the proposed project, then the City shall, pending the approval and issuance of a final development order: 
(i)  Issue a preliminary certificate of transportation concurrency to be valid for 90 days; and 
(ii)  Temporarily reserve roadway capacity under the preliminary certificate of transportation concurrency for the proposed project's p.m. peak hour traffic. 
(c)  Subject to the approval of the City and payment of a renewal fee (per the City's review fee schedule), an applicant may exercise a one-time option to renew the preliminary certificate of transportation concurrency for an additional 60 days. 
(d)  If an applicant submits an application for a transportation mitigation proportionate fair-share agreement, consistent with subsection 3-7.6, then a preliminary certificate of transportation concurrency shall be issued and will remain valid while the application is under review. 
(E)  Certificate of transportation concurrency. 
(1)  Applicability. A certificate of transportation concurrency, which may or may not include conditions, shall apply to a land development project, as described in subsection 3-6.2, with specified land use(s), density(ies), and intensity(ies). The issuance of a certificate of transportation concurrency does not equate to a development order, nor does it relieve an applicant from complying with all requirements necessary to obtain a development order and it does not afford an applicant the right to obtain subsequent development orders for the same land development project. A City issued certificate of transportation concurrency does nothing more than to certify that the land development project, as specified, satisfies the applicable stated goals, objectives and policies set forth in the transportation and circulation element of the adopted City of Marianna Comprehensive Plan. 
(2)  Capacity reservation. A certificate of transportation concurrency, which may or may not include conditions, shall provide certification that roadway capacity has been reserved adequate to accommodate the proposed new land development project for the term of the certificate. If the certificate applies to one or more phases or a multi-phased development, the capacity reservation shall be assignable to other contiguous phases within the same land development project, but only if the identified impacted facilities impacted are the same. The capacity reservation shall not be assignable to non-contiguous phases of the same multi-phased land development project nor to other land development projects on different sites. The reservation of capacity for land development projects subject to transportation concurrency review shall occur on a first-come, first-served basis. 
(3)  Expiration. A certificate of transportation concurrency shall have a term equivalent to the terms and conditions of the associated final development order, unless a different term is agreed to by the City and approved by the City Commission. 
(4)  Forfeiture of capacity reservation. For any land development project subject to transportation concurrency review, the amount of roadway capacity reserved and the scheduled build-out date for each phase shall be specified in the certificate of transportation concurrency. Any phase capacity not utilized prior to the scheduled phase build-out date shall be forfeited back to the City for use by subsequent applicants unless the scheduled phase build-out date is extended under amended terms and conditions of the final development order. 
(5)  Payment of impact fees. At which time the City may adopt an impact fee ordinance pertaining to transportation facilities. Applicants for a land development project subsequently shall pay all applicable impact fees related to roadway facilities prior to the issuance of a certificate of transportation concurrency. 
(6)  Payments for transportation mitigation. For land development projects that require improvements to one or more transportation concurrency facilities in order to mitigate existing deficiencies or deficiencies created by the applicable land development project, a development agreement shall be executed. The applicant shall pay the applicable proportionate fair-share cost of all transportation infrastructure improvements pursuant to section 3-7 less any applicable impact fees in accordance with subsection 3-6.2(E)(5) required to satisfy concurrency for the development project prior to the issuance of a certificate of transportation concurrency. 
(F)  Final development orders. 
(1)  Final concurrency review. Prior to approval of a final development order for a land development project as described in subsection 3-6.2, the City shall: 
(a)  Perform a final concurrency review to ensure that the pending agreed upon development parameters satisfy the conditions for a favorable transportation concurrency determination. 
(b)  If subsection 3-6.2 (F)(1) is satisfied, reassign the temporarily reserved project traffic to the City's concurrency-approved committed demand contained in the transportation concurrency management system (CMS). 
(c)  Calculate and collect any applicable payments toward the proportionate fair-share program pursuant to a proportionate fair-share agreement. The City of Marianna reserves the right to deny approval of a development order for which improvements needed to meet concurrency requirements cannot be funded by the developer. 
(d)  Assess and collect any applicable impact fees subject to such time the City may adopt an impact fee ordinance pertaining to transportation facilities. 
(e)  If subsections 3-6.2 (F)(1)(a-d) are satisfied, issue a certificate of transportation concurrency. 
(2)  Project development changes. A new review for a transportation concurrency determination is not required for any subsequent sequential final development orders for a land development project with a valid certificate of concurrency unless the land use(s), density(ies), or intensity(ies) of the land development project has (have) changed. 
    3-6.3. Level of service standards. 
(A)  The minimum level of service standards for a transportation concurrency determination shall be consistent with the Traffic Circulation Element of the City of Marianna Comprehensive Plan and subsection 3-3.3 of this Article. 
(B)  The City shall consult with DOT when proposed development plans directly connect to state facilities or when the development accesses them via local and/or private roads. Additionally, if the development has a significant impact (as defined in subsection 3-6.10) to 1-10 then the City shall consult with FDOT. 
(C)  When two or more roadways with differing classifications or adopted level of service (LOS) standards intersect and an intersection analysis is required, the lower LOS standard shall govern the intersection. 
    3-6.4. Planned and programmed improvements. The City shall meet the following standards to satisfy concurrency for transportation facilities: 
(A)  At the time a development order is issued, the necessary roadway facilities to support the new land development project are to be in place or under construction; or 
(B)  A development order may be issued subject to the conditions that the necessary roadway facilities and services needed to serve the new development are scheduled to be in place or under actual construction not more than three years after issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The schedule of capital improvements may recognize and include transportation projects in the transportation concurrency management system within the first three years of FDOT's adopted five-year work program; or the City of Marianna Capital Improvements Plan (CIP) as referenced in subsection 3-6.10(C)(2)(c); or 
(C)  A planned roadway improvement may be included as part of the transportation concurrency network if it is scheduled for completion prior to the initial date of project impact on the roadway, if such roadway improvement is to be completed pursuant to an enforceable development agreement or a binding executed agreement. 
    3-6.5. Transportation concurrency database management. The City shall be the custodian of the data used to maintain and update the transportation concurrency management system (CMS). The data to be maintained and monitored include the following: 
(A)  Transportation concurrency network traffic count data. For each roadway segment in the transportation concurrency network, as identified annually in the City of Marianna Levels of Service on State Roads report prepared by the Apalachee Regional Planning Council (ARPC), the City shall maintain and update, on an annual basis, the two-way peak hour peak season traffic volume data to be used as a baseline for transportation concurrency determinations. The locations of the traffic count stations will include all temporary (portable) and permanent stations maintained and operated by the Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT). An applicant may be required to supplement the City's traffic count data where needed or for locations where recent or adequate data are not readily available. 
(B)  Transportation concurrency management system database. For each roadway segment in the transportation concurrency network, the City shall monitor, maintain and update, on a continual basis, a database of the Citywide transportation concurrency conditions. 
(C)  Transportation concurrency management system database maintenance. 
(1)  In coordination with the Apalachee Regional Planning Council and the Florida Department of Transportation, this information may include, but is not limited to: 
(i)  New p.m. peak hour traffic volume counts or turning movement counts. 
(ii)  Changes in the schedule for programmed improvements. 
(iii)  Changes in signal timings and phasing. 
(iv)  Any other actions affecting roadway capacity and traffic circulation on the transportation concurrency network. 
(2)  Based on the information maintained pursuant to subsection 3-6.5(B), City staff will update the transportation concurrency management system (CMS) database to account for any changes to the available capacity. 
(3)  Pursuant to subsection 3-6.2(F)(1)(b), City staff will incorporate updates to the committed demand on affected roadway segments in the transportation concurrency network. 
(4)  City staff will incorporate any updates to the CMS by subtracting trips from the committed demand due to the build-out of vested, exempt or concurrency approved projects. In addition, City staff will incorporate any changes in committed demand due to the withdrawal of a concurrency project. 
(5)  The roadways to be included in the transportation concurrency network and the data contained in the transportation concurrency management system database may be updated by City staff as necessary. 
    3-6.6. Levels of transportation concurrency review. 
(A)  De Minimis Developments (projects that have a negligible or insignificant impact on the transportation roadway network). 
(1)  The impact of a single-family home on an existing lot will constitute a de minimis impact on all roadways regardless of the level of deficiency of the roadway. 
(2)  Consistent with the City of Marianna Comprehensive Plan Traffic Circulation Element, residential developments of nine or fewer dwelling units would not be subject to transportation concurrency review. Residential developments of this size will be considered to have a negligible impact on the transportation concurrency network. 
(B)  Development within the DISTA. 
(1)  Developments located within the DISTA shall be exempt from transportation concurrency. The exemption from traditional transportation concurrency is aimed to promote urban infill and redevelopment where opportunities for multi-modal transportation exist. 
(2)  Development/redevelopment projects located within the DISTA shall address their transportation impacts and mitigation through alternative means. This means alternative methods will be examined and considered instead of the typical roadway widening and automatic capacity enhancing improvement projects consistent with the following conditions: 
 Development/redevelopment within the DISTA shall mitigate transportation impacts through mechanisms supporting multi-modal objectives and policies. 
 Mitigation measure(s) shall be in proportion to the transportation impacts. 
 Mitigating measure(s) shall advance the goals of the DISTA. 
 Mitigation measure(s) may include, but not be limited to the following: 
? Participation in a transit pass program for employees, van pooling and/or ride sharing programs 
? Pedestrian Improvements 
? Bus Shelter/Transit Stop Improvements 
? Bicycle Improvements 
? Lighting Improvements 
? Connectivity Improvements 
? Streetscape Improvements 
? Any other measures which increase mobility options and inter-modal connections as may be approved by the City 
(3)  Cost estimates will be required from the applicant for these improvements. Once verified by City Staff, these values will be used to determine the mitigating measure(s). 
(4)  Projects may have impacts outside of the DISTA and those improvements will still be required. These measures will be consistent with the policies to mitigate the transportation impacts of the project and further the goals of promoting economic revitalization and community redevelopment. 
(C)  Small projects. 
(1)  Developments whose p.m. peak hour trip generation is estimated to be 50 trips or less constitute small projects. 
(2)  The traffic analysis for small projects may either be conducted by planning staff (based on the project parameters as provided by the applicant) or may be provided by the applicant. The applicant has the option of providing the traffic analysis either in lieu of having an analysis conducted by planning staff or to refute the findings of a traffic analysis which has been conducted by planning staff. Any traffic analysis submitted by the applicant must be conducted pursuant to the requirements of subsection 3-6.6(B). 
(D)  Developments requiring a transportation concurrency analysis. 
(1)  Consistent with the City of Marianna Comprehensive Plan Traffic Circulation Element and section 3-6.2 of this Article, new nonresidential development and residential developments generating more than 50 p.m. peak hour trips shall be required to submit a transportation concurrency analysis (referred to in the City of Marianna Comprehensive Plan as a traffic impact analysis) quantifying the proposed development's impact on the surrounding collector and arterial roads and outlining the steps to be taken to prevent the level of service from degrading below the adopted LOS standard. 
(2)  As a part of the pre-application conference, the applicant may present the City methodologies or strategies for addressing the transportation concurrency requirements. All methodologies for addressing transportation concurrency are subject to the review and approval of the City. 
(3)  A transportation concurrency analysis must satisfy the following submission requirements to be reviewed for a transportation concurrency determination. 
(a)  Four copies of the completed transportation concurrency analysis must be submitted to the City at the time of development order application submittal. 
(b)  The format of the transportation concurrency analysis must contain the elements specified in subsection 3-6.6(B)(5). 
(c)  A transportation concurrency analysis must be prepared and submitted by an individual with responsible transportation engineering and/or transportation planning experience. The individual must be either a Florida certified professional engineer (P.E.), or certified through the American Institute of Certified Planners (A.I.C.P.) and be acting as a designated representative of the applicant. 
(4)  The City shall determine if all required data submitted for a transportation concurrency analysis is sufficient and acceptable. 
(5)  To facilitate the transportation concurrency review process an applicant submitting a transportation concurrency analysis will be required to submit a report containing the following elements: 
(a)  Letter of transmittal addressed to the City of Marianna Municipal Development Department. 
(b)  Title page, table of contents, list of exhibits (including figures and maps) and list of tables. 
(c)  Introduction and executive summary: 
(i)  The introduction shall include a description of the location (including a general site location map), proposed development plan, current land uses (if proposal is a redevelopment), current and proposed zoning, phasing schedule and build-out year. 
(ii)  The executive summary shall include a concise summary of the study purpose, conclusions, and recommendations. This section of the report shall not contain detailed technical information. 
(d)  Proposed land development plan. The proposed land uses shall be identified by land use type with the intensity expressed in units. This information shall be submitted for each phase with the build-out year for each phase identified. In addition, a site plan showing internal traffic circulation shall be provided in each phase. 
(e)  Study area. The methodology criteria for establishing the study area for determining the roadway segments in the transportation concurrency network that shall be included in a transportation concurrency analysis are identified in subsection 3-6.7. 
(f)  Existing p.m. peak hour traffic volume conditions. An inventory of existing p.m. peak hour traffic volumes on all roadway segments in the transportation concurrency network is maintained by the City of Marianna. The information contained in this database for existing conditions, as well as data for committed project demand, shall be used as the base traffic conditions for all roadways segments identified in the study area. 
(g)  Estimate of site-generated traffic. A p.m. peak hour trip generation analysis shall be provided based on the criteria detailed in subsection 3-6.8. 
(h)  Project trip distribution and assignment. The required information to be provided for project trip distribution and assignment is detailed in subsection 3-6.9. 
(i)  Roadway segment analysis. An evaluation of p.m. peak hour project traffic impacts shall be provided for each segment in the transportation concurrency network determined to be within the project study area. Criteria for conducting the roadway segment analysis are specified in subsection 3-6.10. 
(j)  Intersection operations analysis. Based on criteria in subsection 3-6.11, analyses will be provided, if applicable, addressing intersection level of service and safety issues. Based on the type of development proposed, the City may require that additional time periods beyond the p.m. peak hour conditions be analyzed. Whether or not other time periods will need to be analyzed will be determined at the pre-application conference. 
(k)  Mitigation plan. For any roadway segment or intersection level of service deficiency identified in the roadway segment analysis and/or the intersection operations analyses, a mitigation plan shall be provided identifying the strategy(ies) for addressing each deficiency. These strategies may be addressed through the transportation mitigation proportionate fair-share program as specified in section 3-7. 
(l)  Site circulation and access management. For each site access point onto a roadway in the transportation concurrency network, in accordance with subsection 3-6.12, an analysis shall be provided addressing driveway separation, turn lane requirements, adequate site distance requirements, and minimum driveway throat length. 
(m)  Appendices. Based on the analyses required, the applicant shall provide the following data (where applicable): 
i.  Traffic count data summaries and raw data. 
ii.  Intersection capacity analysis worksheets. 
iii.  Arterial level of service (LOS) analysis worksheets. 
iv.  Other applicable traffic analysis worksheets. 
    3-6.7. Traffic impact study area. The following procedure will be used to determine the study area (area of influence) for a transportation concurrency analysis. 
(A)  At a minimum the impacts of p.m. peak hour net external project traffic shall be assigned to all roadway segments in the transportation concurrency network (in accordance with subsection 3-6.9) that are within a driving radius of 0.25 miles each access point of the proposed project. 
(B)  In addition to the criteria in subsection 3-6.7(A), the impacts of p.m. peak hour net external project traffic shall be assigned to all roadway segments in the Transportation Concurrency Network (in accordance with subsection 3-6.9) located outside the 0.25 mile driving radius on which project trips are equal to or greater than three percent of the maximum service volume at the adopted level of service (LOS) standard. 
(C)  The study area shall cover one segment beyond the criteria listed in subsection 3-6.7(A) and (B) to show that the criteria are satisfied. 
(D)  Projects with a phased land development plan shall be required to perform a transportation concurrency analysis assessing the impacts of the phase(s) seeking a certificate of concurrency as well as a separate analysis of cumulative impacts of the total planned build-out of the project. The purpose for analyzing the total build-out plan is to provide an assessment of the system-wide transportation improvement needs due to the proposed development's impact. The analysis of the total build-out plan shall not, however, serve as a basis for determination of transportation concurrency or for issuance of a certificate of concurrency of the phase(s) seeking a certificate of concurrency. 
    3-6.8. Trip generation procedures. 
(A)  A transportation concurrency analysis shall specify all land uses (including units and intensities) with the applicable ITE Trip Generation Land Use Code. 
(B)  Trip generation data sources. Trip generation data for the transportation concurrency analysis may be based on the most recent edition of the report entitled Trip Generation published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), or other professionally accepted and City approved methodology. 
(C)  Internal capture for multi-use sites. A multi-use project development is considered to consist of two or more land uses classifications between which project-related trips can be made without using the external roadway network. These internally captured project trips can be made entirely on an internal street network (or pathway system) without using public roadways that are external to the site. The guidelines for applying internal capture are as follows: 
(1)  Internal capture may only be applied after the total site trip generation has been calculated for all proposed land uses in the development plan. Internal capture shall be estimated as a percentage of the total number trips estimated for a site. 
(2)  A separate internal capture analysis shall be provided for each cumulative phase of development seeking a concurrency determination. The format of the analysis shall consist of a table, matrix, or diagram and shall clearly show that the internally captured trips balance among all proposed land uses. 
(3)  All calculated internally captured trips, shall be substracted from the total trip generation before any applicable pass-by trip reductions are applied (guidelines for pass-by reductions are contained in subsection 3-6.8(D)). 
(D)  Pass-by traffic. As defined by ITE, pass-by trips are trips made as intermediate stops on the way from an origin to a primary destination. Pass-by trips are attracted from traffic passing on an adjacent street that has direct access to the land development project. These trips do not require a diversion from another roadway and do not represent the new trips added to the system. The guidelines for applying pass-by reduction are as follows: 
(1)  Pass-by trips are drawn from the passing traffic stream, but are always included in the site driveway movements for traffic operations analyses. 
(2)  Typically, credit for pass-by is only allowed for commercial and retail-oriented land uses (ITE's Trip Generation Handbook provides guidance for average pass-by trip rates for several common commercial and retail-oriented land uses). Subject to approval by the City of Marianna, and applicant must provide justification for applying pass-by reductions for non-commercial/retail-oriented land uses. 
(3)  Pass-by calculations are applied toward the external trip generation after any reductions to the total trip generation have been made due to internal capture. 
(4)  Based on FDOT recommended procedures, the number of pass-by trips should not exceed ten percent of the adjacent street traffic during the peak hour or 25 percent of the project's external trip generation potential. 
    3-6.9. Project traffic distribution assignment. 
(A)  For the purpose of a transportation concurrency analysis project traffic will be distributed and assigned only to roadways that are identified and monitored in the City's transportation concurrency management system (CMS). 
(B)  The applicant shall provide the p.m. peak hour project trip distribution and assignment expressed as a two-way volume for all roadways in the traffic impact study area. In providing this information, the analysis shall include: 
(1)  By means of a map or diagram, identification of all vehicular site access points, including indication of permitted and restricted turning movements into and out of the proposed project development. This shall include information regarding any existing or proposed median breaks (if applicable) that would facilitate access to the site. 
(2)  For proposed land project developments with access to more than one roadway in the transportation concurrency network, a copy of the proposed site plan shall be provided, which clearly illustrates the location, configuration and number of existing and/or proposed parking areas (if applicable). 
(3)  For each roadway in the traffic impact study area, as defined in subsection 3-6.7, project traffic shall be reported by the applicant in both tabular and map format. 
(4)  If the proposed project under review does not directly access a roadway segment on the transportation concurrency network, then project traffic shall be distributed and assigned on non-concurrency network roadways to the nearest roadway segment(s) on the transportation concurrency network. Impacts subject to transportation concurrency review shall be evaluated only on the roadway segments in the transportation concurrency network to which project traffic is assigned relative to its adopted LOS. 
(5)  The table provided in accordance with subsection 3-6.9(B)(3) shall be formatted to identify separately the impact of each major land use category, as well as the cumulative project impact, on each segment in the transportation concurrency network. 
(6)  A separate map for each proposed major land use category shall be provided illustrating each land use's trip distribution for each proposed major land use category. In addition, a map shall be provided showing the cumulative project trip distribution. 
(7)  The assignment should clearly show the specific roadways or driveways onto which project trips are assigned. All trip attenuation (mid-segment reductions) must be clearly shown and explained. 
(8)  An electronic copy of the trip distribution and assignment table shall be provided in a format requested by the City of Marianna and suitable for review. 
(C)  The distribution and assignment of project traffic to roadway segments in the transportation concurrency network shall be made in accordance with the accepted traffic engineering and transportation planning principles and as approved by the City. 
    3-6.10. Roadway segment capacity analysis. 
(A)  For a transportation concurrency analysis a roadway segment capacity analysis shall apply to all roadway segments in the transportation concurrency network that are identified to be in the traffic impact study area. 
(B)  Definitions. For the purpose of a roadway segment capacity analysis, the maximum service volume at the adopted level of service (LOS), the existing and committed traffic volume demand, and the proposed project traffic demand are defined as follows: 
(1)  Maximum service volume. The maximum hourly rate at which vehicles can be reasonably expected to traverse a point of uniform section of a roadway under prevailing roadway, traffic and control conditions while maintaining the adopted LOS standard. 
(2)  Existing traffic demand. The p.m. peak hour (two-way) traffic volume demand on a segment in the transportation concurrency network that is attributable to existing development travel patterns and is established from annual traffic volume counts. These counts are adjusted to the peak season unless the counts are otherwise obtained during the peak season period. 
(3)  Committed traffic demand. The p.m. peak hour traffic demand on a segment in the transportation concurrency network that is held in reserve and is expected to occur due to unbuilt, concurrency-approved or vested development projects. 
(4)  Proposed project traffic demand. The p.m. peak hour traffic demand on a segment in the transportation concurrency network that is estimated to occur due to a proposed development project under review for a transportation concurrency determination. 
(C)  Roadway segment capacity analysis. Once the estimated net external project trips from a proposed development have been distributed and assigned, the impacts of these trips are evaluated on each roadway segment in the traffic impact study area to determine if the project impacts are significant on a roadway segment that is determined to be exceeding its available capacity at the adopted level of service standard (deficient). If a proposed land development project is estimated to significantly impact a roadway segment in the transportation concurrency network during the p.m. peak hour that is estimated, based on total traffic demand (existing, committed, and project demand), to be over capacity (deficient), then the transportation concurrency requirements have not been satisfied. 
(1)  Test for significance. The significance of a land development's project traffic is determined by calculating the percentage of p.m. peak hour (two-way) traffic on a roadway segment that is generated by that development in relationship to the maximum service volume ("capacity") at the adopted level of service standard. 
(a)  De Minimis impact. 
i.  A de minimis impact is an impact on a roadway segment that would not affect more than one percent of the p.m. peak hour maximum service volume at the adopted level of service standard of the affected transportation facility in the transportation concurrency network that is located within the traffic impact study area pursuant to subsection 3-6.7. 
ii.  No impact will be determined to be de minimis for a roadway segment in the transportation concurrency network if the sum of the existing traffic demand (existing peak season traffic count) and the committed traffic demand (projected volumes from concurrency approved projects) would exceed 110 percent of the maximum service volume at the adopted level of service standard. 
iii.  An impact of a single-family home on an existing lot of record will constitute a de minimis impact on all roadways regardless of the level of the deficiency of the roadway. 
iv.  With the exception of subsection 3-6.10 (C)(1)(a)iii, no impact will be considered de minimis if it would exceed the adopted level of service standard of any affected designated primary hurricane evacuation route. 
(b)  Significant impact. If a proposed development project is projected to contribute greater than one percent of the maximum service volume at the adopted level of service standard on any roadway segment in the transportation concurrency network that is located within the traffic impact study area pursuant to subsection 3-6.7 during the p.m. peak hour (two-way), then it is determined to have a significant impact on that roadway segment. 
(2)  Test for deficiency. A roadway segment in the transportation concurrency network that is located within the traffic impact study area pursuant to subsection 3-6.7 is considered to be deficient if the roadway segment is estimated to be significantly impacted by project traffic pursuant to subsection 3-6.10(C)(1)(b) and: 
(a)  The sum of existing, committed and project demand exceeds the p.m. peak two-way maximum service volume at the adopted level of service standard; or 
(b)  Is currently identified as a constrained roadway facility (a roadway that will not be widened or expanded because of physical, policy or environmental limitations); or 
(c)  Is currently identified as a backlogged roadway facility (a roadway that is currently operating below its LOS standard but is not programmed for improvement within three years of FDOT's Five Year Work Program or within five years of the City's capital improvements plan (CIP)). 
    3-6.11. Intersection operations level of service analysis. 
(A)  For a transportation concurrency analysis, an intersection operational analysis shall be performed for any signalized, or unsignalized intersection, corresponding to an endpoint of a defined segment in the transportation concurrency network where the total peak hour traffic demand (existing traffic demand, committed traffic demand, and the proposed project traffic demand) on one or more roadway segments forming a leg of the intersection is projected to equal or exceed 90 percent of the maximum service volume at the adopted level of service standard for any phase of a proposed land development project. 
(B)  For a transportation concurrency analysis, the intersection level of service shall be analyzed by approach. Consistent with subsection 3-6.3(C), when two or more roadways with differing classification or adopted level of service (LOS) standards intersect and an intersection analysis is required, the lower LOS standard shall govern the intersection, unless one of the roadways is on the strategic intermodal system (SIS) or Florida Interstate Highway System, in which case the SIS/FIHS standard will prevail. 
(C)  The procedures for conducting an intersection analysis shall be based upon a professionally accepted methodology approved by the City. 
(D)  For each analyzed intersection where the total traffic impact results in a level of service below the adopted standard, the applicant shall provide the recommended improvement(s), as well as an additional intersection analysis to show that the recommended improvement(s) will solve the level of service deficiency. 
(E)  For each intersection level of service analysis, the applicant shall provide the following: 
(1)  Printed summary report outputs. 
(2)  Copies of any traffic counts collected (turning movement counts or traffic volume counts), or used in the analysis, including any adjustment factors applied. 
(3)  Any other applicable data or information. 
    3-6.12. Site access requirements. 
(A)  Driveway separation and site access. For the proposed site access points, the applicant shall show separation between access points or between an access point and an intersection consistent with the requirements set forth in subsection 4-6.6 of the City of Marianna Land Development Code and Policies 2.7.1, 2.7.2, 2.7.3, 2.7.4, and 2.7.5 of the Traffic Circulation Element of the City of Marianna Comprehensive Plan. Access management plans for a land development project shall be consistent with the provisions set forth in subsection 4-6.6 of the City of Marianna Land Development Code and Policies 2.7.1, 2.7.2, 2.7.3, 2.7.4, and 2.7.5 of the Traffic Circulation Element of the City of Marianna Comprehensive Plan. 
(B)  Auxiliary turn lanes. For each site access point from a roadway on the transportation concurrency network, the applicant shall provide an analysis to determine whether exclusive left and/or right turn lanes are warranted to accommodate project traffic. The procedures for conducting a turn lane needs assessment shall be based on professionally accepted methodologies approved by the City. 
(C)  Adequate sight distance. For each access point, regardless of whether the access is provided to a roadway in the transportation concurrency network, the applicant shall provide analysis to show that adequate sight distance is provided to facilitate safe egress from the site driveways in accordance with FDOT standards. 
(D)  Driveway throat length. The applicant shall demonstrate that two-minute stacking for each driveway access during critical peak hour(s) is provided without obstruction to parking or internal access aisles. 
    3-6.13. Supplemental traffic data collection. If additional traffic data collection is required to facilitate the evaluation of a land development project for a transportation concurrency determination or for related traffic operations analyses, the data shall be collected in accordance with FDOT recommended and accepted procedures. 
Sec. 3-7. - Transportation mitigation proportionate fair share program. 
    3-7.1. Purpose and intent. The purpose of the transportation mitigation proportionate fair share program is to establish a method whereby the impacts of development on transportation facilities can be mitigated by the cooperative efforts of the public and private sectors, to be known as the transportation mitigation proportionate fair-share program, in a manner consistent with F.S. § 163.3180(5)(h)3. 
    3-7.2. Findings. The Marianna City Commission finds and determines that capacity on transportation facilities is a commodity that has a value to both the public and private sectors and that a City adopted transportation mitigation proportionate fair-share program would: 
(A)  Provide a method by which the impacts of development on transportation facilities can be mitigated by the cooperative efforts of the public and private sectors; 
(B)  Allow developers to proceed under certain conditions, notwithstanding the failure of transportation concurrency, by contributing their proportionate fair-share of the cost to improve or construct a transportation facility; 
(C)  Contribute to the provision of adequate public transportation facilities for future growth and promote a strong commitment to comprehensive transportation facilities planning, thereby reducing the potential for moratoria or unacceptable levels of traffic congestion; 
(D)  Maximize the use of public funds for adequate transportation facilities to serve future growth and may, in certain circumstances, allow the City to expedite transportation improvements by supplementing funds currently allocated for transportation improvements in the capital improvements program; 
(E)  Ensure that a development is not responsible for the costs of correcting transportation deficiencies prior to the addition of project traffic pursuant to F.S. § 163.3180(5)(h)3.c.(II)(B); and 
(F)  Be consistent with the requirements of F.S. § 163.3180(5). 
    3-7.3. Applicability and exclusions. 
(A)  Applicability. The transportation mitigation proportionate fair-share program shall apply to all developments within the City of Marianna that have been notified of a lack of capacity to satisfy transportation concurrency on a transportation facility monitored by the City of Marianna Transportation Concurrency Management System, including transportation facilities maintained by FDOT or another jurisdiction that are relied upon for concurrency determinations. 
(B)  Exclusions. The transportation mitigation proportionate fair-share program does not apply to developments of regional impact (DRIs) using proportionate fair-share under F.S. § 163.3180(5), or to developments exempted from concurrency as provided in subsection 3-6.6(A), and/or F.S. § 163.3180, regarding exceptions and de minimis impacts. Also excluded are transportation improvements required for public safety and site access requirements pursuant to subsection 3-6.12. The City of Marianna reserves the right to choose which transportation improvements are to be included or excluded from the transportation mitigation proportionate fair-share program. If the City chooses to exclude a transportation improvement from the transportation mitigation proportionate fair-share program, the developer may pay in full for all required transportation concurrency improvements in order to receive a development order. The City of Marianna reserves the right to deny approval of a development order for which improvements needed to meet concurrency requirements cannot be funded in by the developer. 
(C)  DISTA Exemption. Development located within the DISTA is exempt from transportation concurrency as outlined in subsection 3-6.6(B). 
    3-7.4. General requirements. To satisfy transportation concurrency roadway deficiencies, an applicant may elect to participate in the City's transportation proportionate fair share program under the following conditions: 
(A)  The proposed development is consistent with the City's Comprehensive Plan and any applicable land development requirements identified in the City's Land Development Code. 
(B)  The five-year schedule of capital improvements in the City's Capital Improvements Element (CIE) includes the necessary transportation improvement(s) that, upon completion, will satisfy the requirements of the transportation concurrency management system to support the additional traffic estimated to be generated by a proposed land development project. 
(C)  If the necessary transportation improvement(s) needed to satisfy concurrency are not presently contained within the five-year schedule of capital improvements in the City's CIE, the City may choose to allow an applicant to satisfy transportation concurrency through the transportation mitigation proportionate fair-share program by contributing to an improvement that, upon completion, will satisfy the requirements of the transportation concurrency management system to support the additional traffic estimated to be generated by a proposed land development project, where the following apply: 
(1)  The City Commissioners vote to add the improvement to the five-year schedule of capital improvements in the City's CIE no later than the next regularly scheduled update. 
(2)  If the funds allocated for the five-year schedule of capital improvements in the City's CIE are insufficient to fully fund construction of a transportation improvement required by the transportation concurrency management system, the City may still enter into a binding proportionate fair-share agreement with the applicant authorizing construction of a land development project on which the proportionate fair-share is calculated if the proportionate fair-share amount in such agreement is sufficient to pay for one or more improvements which will, in the opinion of the City or other governmental entity(ies) maintaining the transportation facility(ies), significantly benefit the impacted transportation system. 
(3)  If there are no funds allocated for the project in the five-year schedule of capital improvements in the City's CIE or the funds allocated are insufficient and the City is unable or unwilling to pay for the improvements needed to satisfy concurrency requirements. 
The type of improvement(s) considered for funding by this provision will be at the discretion of the City. Also, any improvement(s) funded by proportionate fair-share under this provision must be adopted into the five-year capital improvements schedule of the City's CIE at the next annual update of the CIE. 
(D)  Any improvement project proposed to meet the developer's fair-share obligation must meet design standards of the City for locally maintained roadways, of the county on county maintained roadways, and those of the Florida Department of Transportation for state highway system. 
    3-7.5. Intergovernmental coordination. Pursuant to policies within the Intergovernmental Coordination Element of the City of Marianna Comprehensive Plan, the City shall coordinate with affected jurisdictions (in accordance with subsection 3-7.11), including FDOT, regarding mitigation to impacted facilities not under the jurisdiction of the local government receiving the application for proportionate fair-share mitigation. An interlocal agreement or memorandum of understanding (MOU) may be established with other affected jurisdictions for this purpose. 
    3-7.6. Application process. The transportation mitigation proportionate fair-share program shall be administered according to the following procedures: 
(A)  Consistent with the City's development review process (Article 2 and section 3-6 of the City of Marianna Land Development Code), upon notification of a lack of capacity to satisfy transportation concurrency, the applicant shall also be notified in writing of the opportunity to satisfy transportation concurrency through the transportation mitigation proportionate fair-share program. 
(B)  Prior to submitting an application for a transportation mitigation proportionate fair-share agreement, a pre-application meeting shall be held to discuss eligibility, application submittal requirements, potential mitigation options and related issues. If the impacted transportation facility is on the strategic intermodal system (SIS), then the Florida Department of Transportation (FDOT) will be notified and invited to participate in the pre-application meeting, pursuant to F.S. § 163.3180.(5)(h)1. 
(C)  Eligible applicants shall submit an application to the City that includes an application fee in accordance with the City's review fee schedule and the following: 
(1)  Name, address and phone number of owner(s), developer(s), and agent(s); 
(2)  Property location, including parcel identification numbers; 
(3)  Copy of the recorded deed, including the legal description; 
(4)  Survey of the property; 
(5)  Project description, including type, intensity and amount of development; 
(6)  Phasing schedule, if applicable; 
(7)  Description of requested proportionate fair-share mitigation method(s); and 
(8)  Copy of transportation concurrency analysis and City-issued letter notifying the applicant of a lack of capacity. 
(D)  The Municipal Development Department shall review the application and certify that the application is sufficient and complete within 30 working days. If an application is determined to be insufficient, incomplete or inconsistent with the general requirements of the transportation mitigation proportionate fair-share program, then the applicant will be notified in writing of the reasons for such deficiencies within 30 working days of submittal of an application. If the applicant does not remedy such deficiencies within 60 days of receipt of the written notification, then the application will be deemed abandoned. The City Commission may, in its discretion, grant an extension of time not to exceed 30 days to cure such deficiencies, provided that the applicant has shown good cause for the extension and has taken reasonable steps to affect a cure. The preliminary concurrency certificate shall remain valid while the proportionate fair share agreement is under review. 
(E)  When an application is deemed sufficient, complete and eligible, the applicant shall be advised in writing and a proposed proportionate fair-share obligation and binding agreement will be prepared by the City and delivered to the applicant and the jurisdiction maintaining the transportation facility that is subject of the agreement, for review (i.e. Jackson County or FDOT for any proposed proportionate fair-share mitigation on a strategic intermodal system (SIS) facility), no later than 90 days from the date at which the applicant received the notification of a sufficient application and no fewer than 21 days prior to the City Commission meeting when the agreement will be considered. 
(F)  The City shall notify the applicant regarding the date of the City Commission meeting and when the agreement will be considered for final approval. No proportionate fair-share agreement will be effective until approved by the City Commission. 
(G)  Pursuant to subsection 3-6.2(D)(2)(d), a preliminary certificate of transportation concurrency shall remain valid while an application for a transportation mitigation proportionate fair-share agreement, consistent with subsection 3-7.6. 
    3-7.7. Determining proportionate fair-share obligation. This section establishes the methodology for determining the proportionate fair-share obligation of the applicant: 
(A)  Pursuant to F.S. § 163.3180(5)(h)3, a development shall not be required to pay more than its proportionate fair-share or cost of reducing or eliminating deficiencies prior to the addition of project traffic. The fair market value of the proportionate fair-share mitigation for the impacted facilities shall not differ regardless of the method of mitigation. 
(B)  The methodology used to calculate an applicant's proportionate fair-share obligation shall be as provided in F.S. § 163.3180(5)(h)3,c.(II), as follows: 
(1)  The proportionate-share contribution shall be calculated based upon the number of trips from the proposed development expected to reach roadways during the peak hour from the stage or phase being approved, divided by the change in the peak hour maximum service volume of roadways resulting from construction of an improvement necessary to maintain or achieve the adopted level of service, multiplied by the construction cost, at the time of development payment, of the improvement necessary to maintain or achieve the adopted level of service. 
(2)  In using the proportionate-share formula provided in this subparagraph, the applicant, in its traffic analysis, shall identify those roads or facilities that have a transportation deficiency in accordance with the transportation deficiency as defined in F.S. § 163.3180(5)(h)3.e. The proportionate-share formula provided in this subparagraph shall be applied only to those facilities that are determined to be significantly impacted by the project traffic under review. If any road is determined to be transportation deficient without the project traffic under review, the costs of correcting that deficiency shall be removed from the project's proportionate-share calculation and the necessary transportation improvements to correct that deficiency shall be considered to be in place for purposes of the proportionate-share calculation. The improvement necessary to correct the transportation deficiency is the funding responsibility of the entity that has maintenance responsibility for the facility. The development's proportionate share shall be calculated only for the needed transportation improvements that are greater than the identified deficiency. 
(3)  When the provisions of this subparagraph have been satisfied for a particular stage or phase of development, all transportation impacts from that stage or phase for which mitigation was required and provided shall be deemed fully mitigated in any transportation analysis for a subsequent stage or phase of development. Trips from a previous stage or phase that did not result in impacts for which mitigation was required or provided may be cumulatively analyzed with trips from a subsequent stage or phase to determine whether an impact requires mitigation for the subsequent stage or phase. 
(C)  The context of the term "cumulative" in subsection 3-7.7(B), includes only those trips from the stage or phase of a development being considered in the application. The trips expected to reach the failing roadway for this calculation are those identified in the development's transportation concurrency analysis. All assumptions used in the proportionate fair-share calculation shall be consistent with the provisions of the City's transportation concurrency review procedures and the maintenance of the transportation concurrency management system. 
(D)  For the purposes of determining proportionate fair-share obligations, the City shall determine improvement costs based upon actual cost of the improvement as obtained from the capital improvements plan (CIP) or the Florida Department of Transportation's Work Program. Where such information is not available, improvement cost shall be determined using one of the following methods: 
(1)  An analysis by the City of costs by cross section type that incorporates data from recent projects and is updated annually and approved by the City Commission. In order to accommodate increases in construction material costs, project costs shall be adjusted by the inflation factor established by FDOT's Long Term Construction Cost Inflation Forecast; or 
(2)  The most recent issue of FDOT Transportation Costs ; locally available data from recent projects on right-of-way acquisition, drainage and utility costs; and significant changes in the cost of materials due to unforeseeable events. Cost estimates for state road improvements not included in the adopted FDOT Work Program shall be determined using this method in coordination with the FDOT District. 
(E)  If the City has accepted an improvement project proposed by the applicant, then the value of the improvement shall be determined using one of the methods provided in this section. 
(F)  If the fair-market value of an alternative form of fair-share mitigation is less than the total proportionate fair-share obligation as determined by one of the methods provided in this section, the applicant must pay the difference. However, under no circumstances shall the City approve an application that obligates the City to compensate an applicant for proportionate fair-share mitigation that exceeds the value calculated by one of the methods provided in this section. 
(G)  If the City has accepted right-of-way dedication as a form of proportionate fair-share mitigation, credit for the dedication of the related right-of-way shall be valued on the date of the dedication at 115 percent of the most recent assessed value by the Jackson County Property Appraiser or, at the option of the applicant, by fair market value established by an independent appraisal approved by the City and at no expense to the City. The applicant shall supply a certified survey and legal description of the land and certificate of title or title search of the land to the City at no expense to the City. If the estimated value of the right-of-way dedication proposed by the applicant is less than the City estimated total proportionate fair-share obligation for that development, then the applicant must also pay the difference. 
    3-7.8. Impact fee credit for proportionate fair-share mitigation. At which time the City adopts an impact fee ordinance related to transportation facilities, the following provisions shall apply: 
(A)  Proportionate fair-share contributions shall be applied as a credit against impact fees to the extent that all or a portion of the proportionate fair-share mitigation is used to address the same transportation improvement contemplated by a City impact fee ordinance. Credits will be applied toward the portion of the applicant's transportation impact fees that would have been used to fund the improvement on which the proportionate fair-share mitigation is calculated. If the proportionate fair-share mitigation is based on only a portion of the development's traffic, the impact fee credit will be limited to that portion of the impact fees on which the proportionate fair-share mitigation is based. 
(B)  Impact fee credits for the proportionate fair-share contribution will be determined when the transportation impact fee obligation is calculated for the proposed development. Impact fees owned by the applicant will be reduced per the proportionate fair-share agreement as they become due per an applicable City-adopted impact fee ordinance. If the applicant's proportionate fair-share obligation is less than the development's anticipated road impact fee for the specific stage or phase of development under review, then the applicant or its successor must pay the remaining impact fee amount to the City pursuant to the requirements of the applicable City-adopted impact fee ordinance. 
(C)  The proportionate fair-share obligation is intended to mitigate the transportation impacts of a proposed development at a specific location. As a result, any road impact fee credit based upon proportionate fair-share contributions for a proposed development cannot be transferred to any other location. 
    3-7.9. Proportionate fair-share agreements. 
(A)  Upon execution of a proportionate fair-share agreement, and having satisfied all other requirements for a transportation concurrency determination, the applicant shall receive a certificate of transportation concurrency. Should the applicant fail to apply for the appropriate building permit(s) within 12 months of the execution of the proportionate fair-share agreement, then the agreement shall be considered null and void, and the applicant shall be required to reapply. 
(B)  Payment of the proportionate fair-share or other contribution necessary to meet concurrency requirements is due in full prior to issuance of the final development order or execution of the final plat and shall be non-refundable. If a building permit is applied for more than 12 months from the date of execution of the proportionate fair-share agreement, then the proportionate fair-share cost shall be recalculated at the time of payment based on the best estimate of the construction cost of the required improvement at the time of payment, pursuant to subsection 3-7.8 and adjusted accordingly. 
(C)  All developer improvements authorized under a proportionate fair-share agreement must be completed prior to issuance of the appropriate building permit(s), or as otherwise established in a binding agreement that is accompanied by proportionate fair-share contributions (in the form of a security instrument approved by the City Commission) that are sufficient to ensure the completion of all required improvements. 
(D)  Dedication of necessary right-of-way for facility improvements pursuant to a proportionate fair-share agreement must be completed prior to issuance of the final development order or execution of the final plat. 
(E)  Any requested change to a land development project subsequent to the issuance of the development order may be subject to additional proportionate fair-share contributions to the extent the change would generate additional traffic that would require mitigation. 
(F)  Applicants may submit a letter to withdraw from the proportionate fair-share agreement at any time prior to the execution of the agreement, or the issuance of a certificate of transportation concurrency. The application fee and any associated advertising costs to the City will be non-refundable. 
(G)  By approval of the City Commission, the City may consider joint applications for proportionate fair-share mitigation to facilitate collaboration among multiple applicants on improvements to a shared transportation facility. Such applications may include coordination with other jurisdictions through inter-local agreements. 
    3-7.10. Appropriation of fair-share revenues. This section establishes the methods for appropriating the revenue from proportionate fair-share contributions. 
(A)  Proportionate fair-share revenues shall be placed in the appropriate project account for funding of scheduled improvements in the City's capital improvements plan (CIP), or as otherwise established in the terms of the proportionate fair-share agreement, certificate of transportation concurrency, or other development approval conditions. At the discretion of the City, proportionate fair-share revenues may be used for operational improvements prior to construction of the capacity project from which the proportionate fair-share revenues were derived. Proportionate fair-share revenues may also be used as the 50 percent local match for funding under FDOT's Transportational Regional Incentive Program (TRIP). 
(B)  In the event a scheduled facility improvement is removed from the capital improvements plan (CIP), then the revenues collected for its construction shall be applied toward the construction of other transportation improvements in the CIP or the construction of another improvement within the City that would mitigate the impacts of development pursuant to the requirements of subsection 3-7.4(C)(2). 
    3-7.11. Cross jurisdictional impacts. Consistent with the intergovernmental coordination element in the City's Comprehensive Plan, this section provides an opportunity for the City to address the impacts of a proposed development near its border with Jackson County. It is intended as a means of managing development on regional transportation facilities. 
(A)  In the interest of intergovernmental coordination and to reflect the shared responsibilities for managing development and concurrency, the City may enter into an agreement with Jackson County on regional transportation facilities. The agreement shall provide for the application of the methodology in this section to address the cross-jurisdictional transportation impacts of development. 
(B)  A development application submitted to the City subject to transportation concurrency review meeting all of the following criteria shall be subject to this section: 
(1)  All or part of the proposed development is located within 0.25 mile of the area which is under the jurisdiction, for transportation concurrency of Jackson County; and 
(2)  Using its own concurrency analysis procedures, the City concludes that the additional traffic from the proposed development would use five percent or more of the adopted peak hour maximum service volume at the adopted level of service (LOS) standard of a regional transportation facility within the concurrency jurisdiction of the adjacent local government; and 
(3)  The impacted regional facility is projected to be operating below the level of service standard, adopted by the adjacent local government, when the traffic from the proposed development is included. 
(C)  Upon identification of an impacted regional facility pursuant to subsection 3-7.11(B)(1-3), the City shall notify the applicant and Jackson County in writing of the opportunity to derive an additional proportionate fair-share contribution, based on the projected impacts of the proposed development on the impacted adjacent facility. 
(1)  Jackson County shall have up to 60 days in which to notify the City of a proposed specific proportionate fair-share obligation, and the intended use of the funds when received. Jackson County must provide reasonable justification that both the amount of the payment and its intended use comply with requirements of F.S. § 163.3180(5)(g). Should Jackson County decline proportionate fair-share mitigation under this section, then the provisions of this section would not apply and the applicant would be subject only to the proportionate fair-share requirements of the City. 
(2)  If the subject application is subsequently approved by the City, the approval shall include a condition that the applicant provides, prior to the issuance of any development order covered by that application, evidence that the proportionate fair-share obligation to the adjacent local government has been satisfied. The City may require Jackson County to declare, in a resolution, ordinance or equivalent document, its intent for the use of the concurrency funds to be paid by the applicant. 
Sec. 3-8. - Aggregation. 
    Properties near and adjacent to the submitted application owned by the same property owner or owner(s) shall be reviewed for aggregation. 
    The legal description for determining whether two or more properties shall be considered separate or aggregated as provided in F.S. § 380.065(14) and as stated in Rule 9J-2.0275, F.A.C., shall apply to all proposed land development projects in the City of Marianna. 
Sec. 3-9. - Guarantee of adequate capacity. 
    Upon determination of adequate capacity as described in this Article the City shall guarantee to the developer availability of capacity in the types, amounts, or volumes specified in the final development order or development agreement. Such guarantees of available capacity shall be valid for a period of six months from the date the final development order is issued. 
    Any guarantee of adequate capacity shall become null and void in the event circumstances beyond the control of the City cause adequate capacity to become unavailable. Such circumstances shall include, but not be limited to: acts of other governmental agencies; war; act of God; or, changes in laws, rules or other legislative actions. 
Article IV - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

Sec. 4-1. - Zoning districts. 
    4-1.1. Purpose. In order to promote consistency with the goals, objectives, and policies of the Comprehensive Plan and this Code, it is necessary and proper to establish a series of zoning districts to ensure that the City can: preserve, promote, protect and improve the public health, safety, comfort, good order, appearance, and general welfare; provide adequate and efficient public facilities and services; conserve and protect natural resources; and, ensure the compatibility of adjacent land uses. 
    4-1.2. Applicability. All development within each zoning district as described in subsection 4-1.3 shall be consistent with the stated purposes, allowable uses and development standards as set forth in this Article. 
    4-1.3. Zoning districts. The following zoning districts or abbreviations shall be used for implementing this section: 
1.  R-1, Single-Family Residential District; 
2.  R-2, Single and Two-Family Residential District; 
3.  R-3, Multiple-Family Residential District; 
4.  MU, Mixed Use District; 
5.  COM, Commercial District; 
6.  IND, Industrial District; 
7.  REC, Recreation District; 
8.  PI, Public/Institutional District; 
9.  CON, Conservation District; 
10.  RT, Rural Transition; 
11.  DISTA, Downtown Improvement Special Treatment Area; 
12.  WPSTA, Wellhead Protection Special Treatment Area; 
13.  HSTA, Historic Special Treatment Area; 
14.  ISTA, Industrial Special Treatment Area; and 
15.  DPSTA, Distribution Park Special Treatment Area. 
16.  MUSTA, Mixed Use Special Treatment Area 
17.  PUD, Planned Unit Development. 
    4-1.4. Zoning district map. The boundaries and designations of zoning districts specified in subsection 4-1.3 shall be as shown on the map entitled "Zoning Map of the City of Marianna, Florida." Such map shall be on file in the office of the Municipal Development Department and shall be available for inspection by all interested parties during normal working hours. 
    4-1.5. Interpretation of districts or boundaries. Where, due to the scale, lack of detail or legibility of the zoning map, the boundary line of any district is uncertain, the Director shall determine its location. Any person aggrieved by the location of a boundary line as determined by the Director may appeal the determination to the appeals board. The Director and the appeals board shall apply the following standards in determining the location of a district boundary line: 
1.  Zoning district boundary lines are intended to follow lot lines, or be parallel or perpendicular thereto, or along the right-of-way lines of alleys, streets, easements, rail lines, or watercourses unless such boundary lines are fixed by dimensions on the zoning map. 
2.  Where the zoning map indicates a district boundary line along or following a lot line, the lot line shall be the boundary line. 
3.  Where a zoning district boundary line divides a tract or plot of land, the location of the boundary line, unless indicated by dimensions on the zoning map, shall be determined by the use of the map scale shown thereon. 
4.  If, after the application of the foregoing rules, uncertainty still exists as to the exact location of a zoning district boundary line, any determination of the boundary line shall give due consideration to the history of the uses of property, the history of building permits, and all other relevant facts. 
    4-1.6. Scrivener's error. In the event that an error(s) occurs through drafting, reproduction or other means in the location of a zoning district boundary line as shown on the zoning map, the Director will fully document the error(s) and report the results to the Planning and Zoning Board. The Planning and Zoning Board shall hold a public hearing concerning the correction of such error(s) and, after conduct of the public hearing, shall have the authority to direct the correction of such error(s) to show accurate zoning district boundary lines. 
    4-1.7. Allowable uses and development standards. 
1.  R-1, single-family residential district. 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide areas for the preservation or development of low density residential neighborhoods consisting of single-family dwelling units on individual single-family lots. 
b.  Allowable uses. The following uses are allowed as of right in R-1 districts; all other uses are conditional uses as specified in paragraph c or prohibited: 
i.  Single-family detached dwellings on single-family lots. 
ii.  Gardens customary to residential occupancy and accessory structures incidental thereto. 
iii.  Neighborhood parks. 
iv.  Accessory uses or structures as set forth in section 4-2 of this Article, including accessory dwelling units. 
v.  Residential subdivisions as specified in section 4-7 of this Code. 
vi.  Public utilities customarily found in residential areas. 
vii.  Signs as specified in Article 5 of this Code. 
c.  Conditional uses. The following uses may be allowed in the R-1 district upon approval by the Planning and Zoning Board and the City Commission subject to the following conditions, or any other conditions that might be considered necessary to maintain the integrity of the R-1 district. 
i.  Public/institutional uses, except for those including maintenance yards, repair yards, vehicle parking lots, equipment storage, or other similar facilities, provided all landscaping and buffer requirements as specified in section 4-3 are met. 
ii.  Community residential homes if within a 1,000 foot radius of another community residential home or contains more than six residents. 
d.  Development standards. 
i.  Minimum lot area(s): 10,000 square feet. With no City water or sewer service available, 21,780 square feet (one-half acre). 
ii.  Minimum lot width(s): 
Square or rectangular: 75 feet. 
Corner: 90 feet. 
Cul-de-sac or curve: 20 feet. 
iii.  Maximum building height: 35 feet unless within the Downtown Improvement Special Treatment District which has a height limitation of 70 feet. 
iv.  Density: No more than four dwelling units per acre. 
v.  Intensity: No more than 50 percent lot coverage, 50 percent required open space. 
vi.  Minimum building setbacks for principal structures: 
Front: 20 feet from lot line. 
Side(s): Ten feet from lot line. 
Rear: 20 feet from lot line. 
Setbacks on odd-shaped lots will be determined by averaging the setback measures at right angles from the lot line to the building corners. 
Front setbacks on curves or culs-de-sac will be determined by measuring at right angles from a line drawn through the front lot line corners to the front of the building. 
Setbacks for corner lots will be determined by measuring the front setback as the distance from the lot line to the side of the building with the main entrance. Side setbacks will be measured from the lot line to the side of the building without a main entrance. Rear setbacks will be established by the Director. 
For buildings with unusual shapes or offset entrances setbacks will be determined by the Director but shall not be less than the minimum required in this Code. 
vii.  Minimum setbacks for accessory structures: Three feet from any abutting property line. 
viii.  Parking: Two spaces per dwelling unit. 
ix.  Landscaping: All yards must be grassed or vegetated, or otherwise covered with pervious material so as to prevent stormwater runoff and soil erosion. 
x.  Buffers: None required. 
2.  R-2, one-and two-family residential district. 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide areas for a mix of one- and two-family dwellings. 
b.  Allowable uses. The following uses are allowed as of right in the R-2 district; all other uses are conditional uses as specified in paragraph c, or prohibited. 
i.  All uses allowed as of right in the R-1 district. 
ii.  Duplex residential dwelling units. 
iii.  Home office of convenience as specified in section 4-2. 
c.  Conditional uses. The following uses may be allowed in the R-2 district upon approval by the Planning and Zoning Board and the City Commission subject to the following conditions or any other conditions considered necessary to maintain the integrity of the R-2 district. 
i.  All conditional uses which may be allowed in the R-1 district. 
ii.  Residential design manufactured homes. 
iii.  Home occupations as specified in section 4-2. 
d.  Development standards. 
i.  Minimum lot area(s): 
With City water and sewer: 
Single-family: 7,500 square feet. 
Duplex: 8,000 square feet. 
With City water only: 10,000 square feet. 
With no City water or sewer: 21,780 square feet. 
ii.  Minimum lot width(s): 
Square or rectangular: 65 feet. 
Corner: 75 feet. 
Curve or cul-de-sac: 20 feet. 
iii.  Maximum building height: 35 feet unless within the Downtown Improvement Special Treatment District which has a height limitation of 70 feet. 
iv.  Density: No more than 5.5 dwelling units per acre. 
v.  Intensity: No more than 50 percent lot coverage, 50 percent required open space. 
vi.  Minimum building setbacks for principal structures: 
Front: 20 feet from lot line. 
Side(s): Ten feet between structures. 
Rear: Ten feet from rear property line. 
Setbacks for corner lots shall be calculated as set forth for the R-1 district. 
vii.  Minimum setbacks for accessory structures: Three feet from any abutting property line. 
viii.  Dwellings with zero lot lines and other complexes with courtyard or common parking areas shall be subject to approval by the Director; unattached zero lot line subdivision dwellings shall be subject to approval by the Planning and Zoning Board and the City Commission. 
ix.  Parking: Two spaces per dwelling unit. 
x.  Landscaping: All yards must be grassed or vegetated, or otherwise covered with pervious material so as to prevent stormwater runoff and soil erosion. 
xi.  Buffers: None required. 
3.  R-3, multiple-family residential district. 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide areas for a mix of residential uses from single-family dwellings to multifamily dwellings (apartments, townhouses, etc.). 
b.  Allowable uses. The following uses are allowed as of right in the R-3 district; all other uses are conditional uses as specified in paragraph c, or prohibited. 
i.  All uses allowed as of right in the R-1 and R-2 districts. 
ii.  Multiple-family residential buildings. 
iii.  Home office of convenience as specified in section 4-2. 
iv.  Home occupation as specified in section 4-2. 
v.  Accessory structures as specified in section 4-2. 
vi.  Boardinghouse, roominghouse or guesthouse. 
vii.  Residential design manufactured homes. 
c.  Conditional uses. The following uses may be allowed in the R-3 district upon approval of the Planning and Zoning Board and the City Commission subject to the following conditions or any other conditions considered necessary to maintain the integrity of the R-3 district. 
i.  All conditional uses which may be allowed in R-1 and R-2 districts. 
ii.  Manufactured home parks or subdivisions subject to the requirements of section 4-8. 
iii.  Child care facility or family day care home provided a written, notarized statement of no objection is obtained from all adjacent property owners and buffers are provided as specified in section 4-3. 
d.  Development standards. 
i.  Minimum lot area(s): 
Single-family: 7,500 square feet. 
Other multifamily: 8,000 square feet for the first two dwelling units plus 2,500 square feet of lot area for each additional dwelling unit thereafter. 
ii.  Minimum lot width(s): 
Square or rectangular: 75 feet. 
Corner: 75 feet. 
Cul-de-sac or curve: 20 feet. 
All other multifamily buildings: 100 feet. 
iii.  Maximum building height: 35 feet unless within the Downtown Improvement Special Treatment District which has a height limitation of 70 feet. 
iv.  Density: No more than 16 dwelling units per acre. 
v.  Intensity: No more than 75 percent lot coverage, 25 percent required open space. 
vi.  Minimum building setbacks for principal structures: 
Front: 20 feet from front lot line. 
Side(s): Ten feet between structures. 
Rear: Ten feet from rear lot line. 
vii.  Minimum setbacks for accessory structures: Three feet from any abutting property line. Setbacks for corner lots shall be calculated as set forth for the R-1 district. 
viii.  Dwellings with zero lot lines and other complexes with courtyard or common parking areas shall be subject to approval by the Planning and Zoning Board and the City Commission; unattached zero lot line subdivisions shall be subject to approval by the Planning and Zoning Board and the City Commission. 
ix.  Parking: Two spaces per dwelling unit for the first 30 units plus 1 1/2 spaces for each dwelling unit exceeding 30 units. 
x.  Landscaping: All yards must be grassed or vegetated, or otherwise covered with impervious material so as to prevent stormwater runoff and soil erosion. 
xi.  Buffers: Landscaped buffers as specified in section 4-3 are required between any R-3 use and any R-1 or R-2 use. 
4.  Mixed use district (MU). 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of the mixed use category is to provide areas for an attractive and functional mix of residential, professional office, neighborhood commercial, and other similar low intensity uses. This category is further intended to provide for a range of uses for the purpose of stimulating the redevelopment or revitalization of underutilized or blighted areas. 
b.  Allowable uses. The following uses are allowed as of right in the mixed use district; all other uses are conditional uses as specified in paragraph c, or prohibited. 
i.  All residential uses and conditional uses allowed in R-1, R-2, and R-3 districts. 
ii.  Neighborhood and community parks. 
iii.  Public/institutional uses. 
iv.  Public and private recreation uses. 
v.  Accessory uses and structures as specified in section 4-2, including accessory dwelling units and home occupations. 
vi.  Signs as provided for in Article V. 
vii.  Public utilities. 
c.  Conditional uses. The following uses may be allowed in the mixed use district subject to the conditions set forth herein provided that no more than 25 percent of the area may be used for retail commercial or 50 percent of the area may be used for office/service related uses within any MU district. Or, the following uses may be permitted as allowable uses if submitted as part of a PUD. 
Neighborhood commercial uses: 
Athletic or health clubs. 
Antique dealers. 
Bakery. 
Bookstore or newsstand. 
Card or gift shop. 
Convenience store. 
Dance or music studio. 
Child care centers. 
Delicatessen or carryout. 
Drugstore. 
Dry cleaner. 
Fast food restaurant. 
Florist shop. 
Garden supplies. 
Health products. 
Jewelers. 
Laundromat, washateria. 
Locksmith. 
Printing or copying shop. 
Repair shop, electronics. 
Restaurant. 
Shoe repair. 
Food or supermarket. 
Service or filling station. 
Other similar low intensity uses as determined by the Planning and Zoning Board. 
Office, medical, and related uses: 
Abstract or title companies. 
Advertising agencies. 
Agents. 
Architects, engineers, surveyors. 
Auditors, accountants. 
Bonding companies. 
Book agents. 
Business college. 
Employment agency. 
Film, photography, or art studio. 
Finance companies. 
Law offices. 
Medical offices or clinics. 
Professional office building. 
Real estate office. 
Tailor or seamstress shop. 
Travel agency. 
Other related uses as determined by the Planning and Zoning Board. 
Concealed telecommunication facilities. 
The following conditions shall apply to neighborhood commercial and office, medical and related uses in the mixed use district. 
i.  Gross floor area, either singularly or as a complex, shall not exceed 10,000 square feet with a maximum of 35 parking spaces. 
ii.  Hours of operation or opening shall be no more than 5:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. when serving the public except for the following approved uses with visual screens and buffers: automatic car wash, ATM, and bulk ice vending machines. 
iii.  Landscaped buffers as specified in section 4-3 shall be installed between any R-1, R-2, or R-3 zoning district boundary. 
iv.  All performance standards as specified in subsection 4-1.8 must be adhered to. 
d.  Development standards. 
i.  Minimum lot area: 6,500 square feet. 
ii.  Minimum lot widths: 
Square or rectangular: 65 feet. 
Corner: 75 feet. 
Curve or cul-de-sac: 20 feet. 
iii.  Maximum building height: 50 feet unless within the Downtown Improvement Special treatment District which has a height limitation of 70 feet. 
iv.  Density: No more than 16 dwellings units per acre. 
v.  Intensity: No more than 75 percent lot coverage, 25 percent required open space. 
vi.  Minimum building setbacks for principal structures: 
Front: 40 feet from lot line for properties fronting upon U.S. 90; 20 feet from lot line in other areas. 
Side(s): Ten feet from side lot line. 
Rear: Ten feet from rear property line. 
vii.  Minimum setbacks for accessory structures: Three feet from any abutting property line. 
viii.  Dwellings with zero lot lines and other complexes with courtyard or common parking areas shall be subject to approval by the Director; unattached zero lot line subdivisions shall be subject to approval by the Planning and Zoning Board and the City Commission. 
ix.  Parking: As specified in section 4-6. 
x.  Landscaping: All yards must be grassed or vegetated, or otherwise covered with impervious material so as to prevent stormwater runoff and soil erosion. For multifamily or nonresidential development parking areas shall be landscaped as specified in section 4-3. 
xi.  Buffers: Landscaped buffers as specified in section 4-3 shall be required between the following: 
Any single-family dwelling or R-1 use and any multifamily structure or R-3 use (buffers are not required between R-1 and R-2 uses); 
Any residential use and any nonresidential use. 
5.  COM, Commercial District. 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of the commercial district is to provide areas for general commercial development including retail sales and services, wholesale sales, shopping centers, office complexes and other compatible commercial uses. 
b.  Allowable uses. The following uses are allowed as of right in the commercial district; all other uses are conditional uses as specified in paragraph d, or prohibited. 
i.  Any commercial, retail, wholesale, trade, service, profession, business or occupation required to obtain an occupational license pursuant to Chapter 62 - Taxation, City Code of Ordinances, except for manufacturing, industrial, salvage yards, auto wrecking yards, fuel storage and similar uses. 
ii.  Public/institutional uses. 
iii.  Public utilities. 
iv.  Public and private recreation sites and facilities. 
v.  Signs as specified in Article V. 
c.  Conditional uses. The following uses may be allowed in the commercial district upon approval by the Planning and Zoning Board and the City Commission, subject to the following conditions or any other conditions considered necessary to maintain the integrity of the commercial district. 
i.  Residences, dwellings or apartments within the DISTA only, when located within or above commercial activities provided all residential and commercial Building Code standards are met. 
ii.  Uses which sell, serve or allow consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 6 Alcoholic Beverages, City Code of Ordinances. 
iii.  Sexually oriented and body altering businesses. 
iv.  Concealed telecommunication facilities. 
d.  Development standards. 
i.  Minimum lot requirements: 
Area: 5,000 square feet. 
Width: 50 feet at the front lot line. 
Depth: 100 feet along the side lot line. 
ii.  Minimum lot widths: 
Square/rectangular: 65 feet. 
Corner: 75 feet. 
Cul-de-sac or curve: 20 feet. 
iii.  Maximum building height: 70 feet. 
iv.  Density: No more than 16 dwelling units per acre within the DISTA. 
v.  Intensity: No more than 90 percent lot coverage, ten percent required open space. 
vi.  Minimum building setbacks: 
Front: 40 feet from road right-of-way. 
Side(s): No less than 20 feet from the property line when the side lot abuts a residential district, or ten feet when abutting another commercial use or district. 
Rear: Each lot shall have a rear setback of not less than ten feet from the rear property line, except where the building is serviced from the rear or abuts a residential district, in which case the setback shall be 30 feet from the rear property line. 
vii.  Parking: As specified in section 4-6. 
viii.  Landscaping: Parking areas shall be subject to the requirements of subsection 4-3.4. 
ix.  Buffers: Buffers shall be required between any commercial use and any residential uses or rural transition use as specified in section 4-3. 
e.  Limitations. The requirements of the Commercial Development Standards shall not apply within the DISTA area as described in subsection 4-1.3.9. 
6.  IND, Industrial Districts. 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of the industrial district is to provide areas for distribution, warehousing, manufacturing, fuel storage, or limited sales activities which, by nature of their normal operations, have the potential to create excessive noise, smoke, emissions, traffic or other characteristics which have the potential to cause nuisances or hazards. 
b.  Allowable uses. The following uses are allowed as of right in the IND district; all other uses are conditional uses as specified in paragraph c or prohibited: 
i.  Distribution; 
ii.  Warehousing; 
iii.  Manufacturing; 
iv.  Fuel storage; 
v.  Associated sales activities; and 
vi.  Other similar uses. 
c.  Conditional uses. The following uses may be allowed in the IND district upon approval by the Planning and Zoning Board and the City Commission, subject to the following conditions or any other conditions considered necessary to maintain the integrity of the district. 
i.  Telecommunication facilities. 
d.  Development standards. 
i.  Maximum building height: 70 feet. 
ii.  Intensity: No more than 90 percent lot coverage, ten percent required open space. 
iii.  Minimum building setbacks: 
Front: 20 feet. 
Side(s): 20 feet or 40 feet when abutting Residential or Mixed Use districts. 
Rear: 20 feet or 40 feet when abutting Residential or Mixed Use districts. 
v.  Parking: As specified in section 4-6. 
vi.  Landscaping: Parking areas shall be subject to the requirements of subsection 4-3.4. 
vii.  Buffers: Buffers shall be required between all other uses except industrial as specified in section 4-3. 
e.  Limitations. Industrial uses shall be strictly limited to those existing as shown on the zoning map. Any additional industrial areas or expansion of existing industrial areas must be approved by the City Commission on a case-by-case basis. 
7.  REC, Recreation District. 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide areas for public recreation, and private recreation open to the public. 
b.  Allowable uses. The following uses are allowed as of right in the REC district; all other uses are conditional uses as specified in paragraph C or are prohibited: 
i.  Public parks, open space, refuges, ballfields, public ways, golf courses and other such activities intended for public recreation; 
ii.  Public buildings and grounds; 
iii.  Public services and utilities; 
iv.  Private outdoor recreation activities. 
c.  Conditional uses. The following uses may be allowed in the REC district upon approval by the Planning and Zoning Board and the City Commission, subject to the following conditions or any other conditions necessary to maintain the integrity of the district. 
i.  Telecommunication facilities. 
d.  Development standards. 
i.  Maximum Building Height: 35 feet 
ii.  Intensity: No more than 90 percent lot coverage. 
iii.  Minimum building setbacks: 
Front: 20 feet from property line. 
Rear: Ten feet from property line abutting any commercial or public/institutional zoning districts; 20 feet from property line abutting residential or mixed use zoning districts. 
Side(s): Ten feet from property line abutting residential or mixed use districts. 
iv.  Minimum open space: Ten percent of lot or parcel. 
v.  Parking: As specified in section 4-6. 
vi.  Landscaping: Ten percent of the area to be used for off-street parking as specified in subsection 4-3.4. 
vii.  Buffers: 
Buffers shall be required between abutting residential or mixed use land uses. 
Buffers shall not be required between abutting commercial or public/institutional uses. 
Requirements for buffers shall be as specified in section 4-3. 
8.  PI, Public/Institutional District. 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide areas for public/institutional uses such as education facilities, public buildings and grounds, churches, institutions, cemeteries, and other similar uses. 
b.  Allowable uses. The following uses are allowed as of right in the public/institutional district; all other uses are prohibited. 
i.  Churches, tabernacles, synagogues, or other similar houses of worship. 
ii.  Public schools, private schools, colleges, universities. 
iii.  Cemeteries. 
iv.  Government buildings and grounds. 
v.  Hospitals, institutions. 
vi.  Public housing. 
vii.  Nonprofit clubs or organizations. 
viii.  Other similar uses. 
c.  Conditional uses. The following uses may be allowed in the PI district upon approval by the Planning and Zoning Board and the City Commission, subject to the following conditions or any other conditions considered necessary to maintain the integrity of the district. 
i.  Telecommunication facilities (concealed, if deemed appropriate by the Director). 
d.  Development standards. 
i.  Minimum Lot Area: 4,000 sq. ft. 
ii.  Maximum Building Height: 70 feet. 
iii.  Intensity: No more than 90 percent lot coverage. 
iv.  Minimum building setbacks: 
Front: 20 feet from property line or consistent with existing setbacks. 
Rear: Ten feet from property line abutting any commercial or public/institutional zoning districts; 20 feet from property line abutting residential or mixed use zoning districts. 
Side(s): Ten feet from property line abutting residential or mixed use districts. 
v.  Minimum open space: Ten percent of lot or parcel. 
vi.  Parking: As specified in section 4-6. 
vii.  Landscaping: Ten percent of the area to be used for off-street parking as specified in subsection 4-3.4. 
viii.  Buffers: 
Buffers shall be required between abutting residential or mixed use land uses. 
Buffers shall not be required between abutting commercial or public/institutional zoning districts. 
Requirements for buffers shall be as specified in section 4-3. 
9.  CON, Conservation District. 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide reasonable levels of protection for locally designated environmentally sensitive resources. Designation of areas within this district is not intended to preclude or prohibit development but rather to provide an indicator that physical or environmental features may exist which will require limitations on development, special permit requirements, or special construction. 
b.  Allowable uses. The following uses are allowed as of right in the CON district; all other uses are prohibited: 
i.  Conservation. 
ii.  Recreation. 
iii.  Residential. 
iv.  Public uses that support and further flood control, groundwater and surface water protection, floodplain management, and protection of wildlife habitat. 
c.  Limitations. 
i.  All development undertaken within the conservation areas shall be in conformance with the environmental protection standards specified in section 4-4 of this Code. 
d.  Development standards. 
i.  Maximum Building Height: 35 feet. 
ii.  Density: 1 du/ac unless otherwise stated in the Comprehensive Plan 
iii.  Minimum building setbacks: 
Front: 20 feet. 
Rear: 10 feet. 
Side(s): 20 feet. 
v.  Buffers: 
Buffers shall be required between all abutting uses except Conservation. 
Requirements for buffers shall be as specified in section 4-3. 
10.  RT, Rural Transition. 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of this district is to allow for general agricultural activity, rural and/or existing residential uses, the co-existence of other uses generally consistent with agricultural activities, and provide a transitional area from rural to suburban. This district is intended to meet specific needs where there is the meeting of rural and suburban areas. 
b.  Applicability. The Rural Transition District shall only be designated by the City as a transitional district when unincorporated lands are annexed. 
c.  Allowable uses. The following uses are allowed as of right in the RT district; all other uses are prohibited: 
i.  Agriculture. 
ii.  Silviculture. 
iii.  Residential. 
iv.  Neighborhood and community parks. 
v.  Public/institutional uses. 
vi.  Public and private recreation uses. 
vii.  Accessory Dwelling Units per Section 4-2.1.2. 
d.  Development standards. 
i.  Minimum Lot Area: 43,560 square feet. 
ii.  Maximum Building Height: 35 feet for residential uses and unlimited for agriculture related uses. 
iii.  Density: 1 du/ac unless otherwise stated in the Comprehensive Plan. 
iv.  Minimum building setbacks: 
Front: 20 feet 
Side(s): 20 feet 
Rear: 20 feet 
v.  Buffers: 
Buffers shall be required between all abutting uses except industrial, conservation, and recreation. If the same uses are adjacent to one another, such as residential adjacent to residential, buffering is not required. 
Requirements for buffers shall be as specified in section 4-3. 
11.  DISTA, Downtown Improvement Special Treatment Area. 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of the downtown improvement special treatment area is to promote the redevelopment and revitalization of the downtown central business district by providing opportunities for a broad range of commercial, government, professional, entertainment, and residential uses. This area is further intended to be the focus of special incentives for development or redevelopment efforts. 
b.  Applicability. The Downtown Improvement Special Treatment Area shall be considered an overlay district on the designated zoning district upon which it is superimposed. Unless otherwise specified, the underlying district requirements, including allowable uses, densities, intensities, etc., shall also be applicable within the Downtown Improvement Special Treatment Area. 
c.  Allowable uses. The following uses are allowed as of right in the DISTA; all other uses are conditional uses as specified in paragraph c or prohibited: 
i.  Professional offices. 
ii.  Hotels and motels. 
iii.  Financial institutions. 
iv.  Eating and drinking establishments, but not drive-in restaurants. 
v.  Business service establishments. 
vi.  Commercial and job printing. 
vii.  Establishments offering repair services on items brought in by customers. 
viii.  Bakery, where products made on the premises only are sold at retail. 
ix.  Personal service establishments. 
x.  Parking lots or parking garages. 
xi.  Public/institutional uses. 
xii.  Public utilities. 
xiii.  Other retail sales, personal or professional services, or establishment which promotes the redevelopment/revitalization objective of the district. 
xiv.  Residences, dwellings or apartments located within or above commercial activities provided all residential and commercial building Code standards are met. 
d.  Conditional uses. The following uses may be allowed in the DISTA upon approval by the Planning and Zoning Board and the City Commission, subject to the following conditions, or any other conditions considered necessary to maintain the integrity of the district. 
i.  R-3 residential areas, provided that adjacent commercial or nonresidential uses which abut the residential use shall not be subject to the buffer requirements of section 4-3. 
ii.  Other conditional uses which promote the redevelopment/revitalization objective of the district. 
iii.  Concealed telecommunication facilities. 
e.  Limitations. 
i.  All business activity shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building except for parking and loading. 
ii.  Any building uses for any of the allowed and conditional uses shall have no more than 25 percent of the floor area devoted to storage purposes incidental to the principal use. 
f.  Development standards. 
i.  Minimum lot requirements: None. 
ii.  Intensity: No more than 95 percent lot coverage. 
iii.  Maximum building height: 70 feet. 
iv.  Minimum building setbacks: 
Front: Five feet from front lot line. 
Side(s): Ten feet between unattached buildings. 
Rear: As needed for loading or deliveries. 
v.  Parking: None required except for hotels and motels as specified in section 4-6, and for any residential uses one space per dwelling unit. 
vi.  Landscaping: None required. 
vii.  Buffers: None required. 
viii.  Awnings: Awnings shall be allowed 8 feet above the ground surface made of canvas or suitable material supported by metal frames or brackets securely fastened to the building without posts or other devices that will obstruct the sidewalk or hinder or interfere with the full passage of pedestrians. 
ix.  Balconies/porches: The bottom floor of the balcony/porch shall be 8 feet above the ground surface. The balcony/porch may project outward one inch for every inch of additional height for a maximum of 4 feet. Balconies/porches shall be made of painted material matching the abutting wall or otherwise suitable material. 
g.  Special provisions. 
i.  Development within the DISTA shall be exempt from transportation concurrency as described in Subsection 3-6.6(B). 
ii.  When providing residential above retail space, residential parking requirements are waived within the DISTA. 
iii.  When providing residential above retail space, development review fees (not including advertisement fees and engineering fees) will be reduced by 60%. 
iv.  Development within the DISTA is eligible to utilize the fast track approval process identified in subsection 2-4.3. 
v.  Development within the DISTA shall be exempt from the open space requirement as identified in the applicable zoning category. 
vi.  Signage. The following regulations shall apply to all sandwich board and under-canopy signs which are permitted in existing and future DISTA areas. All others sandwich board and under-canopy signs shall be prohibited. Any unlawful signage within the DISTA shall be brought into compliance by December 1, 2018. 
(1)  Standardized sandwich board signs shall be provided by the City of Marianna when new businesses open within the limits of the DISTA for temporary display in the front of the business. 
(2)  One under-canopy sign per occupancy, not to exceed eight square feet in sign area. 
(3)  Window signs may not obscure the display area. Not more than 30 percent of the total window space per frontage can be used for signage. 
12.  WPSTA, Wellhead Protection Special Treatment Area. 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of the Wellhead Protection Special Treatment Area is to protect water wells and cones of influence within the City. 
b.  Applicability. The Wellhead Protection Special Treatment Area shall be considered an overlay district on the designated zoning district upon which it is superimposed. Unless otherwise specified, the underlying district requirements, including allowable uses, densities, intensities, etc., shall also be applicable within the Wellhead Protection Special Treatment Area. 
c.  Development standards. 
i.  The City shall prohibit installation of septic tanks within two-hundred feet of municipal potable water wells. 
ii.  Uses which store, transfer, or use hazardous materials shall not be permitted within two-hundred feet of municipal potable water wells. 
iii.  Underground storage tanks containing gasoline, diesel fuel, or other hazardous substances shall not be permitted within three-hundred feet of municipal potable water wells. 
13.  HISTA, Historic Special Treatment Areas. 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of the Historic Special Treatment Area is to provide for the protection, preservation, or reuse of identified historic sites. 
b.  Applicability. The Historic Special Treatment Area shall be considered an overlay district on the designated zoning district upon which it is superimposed. Unless otherwise specified, the underlying district requirements, including allowable uses, densities, intensities, etc., shall also be applicable within the Historic Special Treatment Area. 
c.  Development standards. 
i.  Development and/or redevelopment in the Historic Special Treatment Area shall be evaluated as to potential impacts on historic resources. Structures identified as being of historic significance will be subject to review by the Planning and Zoning Board and conditional development requirements prior to permits being issued for demolition or substantial alteration. The Jackson County survey of historically significant sites shall be used to identify properties to which historic preservation requirements of this subsection shall apply. 
ii.  The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings, codified in 36 CFR 67, shall be used as a basis' to determine the need for historic preservation and for providing guidelines for rehabilitation of historic structures. 
iii.  Incentives may be made available to developers for restoration or rehabilitation of historic properties subject to approval by the Planning and Zoning Board and City Commission. 
iv.  Telecommunication facilities shall be permitted as a conditional use within the HISTA. 
14.  ISTA, Industrial Special Treatment Area. 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of the Industrial Special Treatment Area is to encourage economic development by promoting a range of uses including industrial, warehousing, manufacturing and assembly, and other employment-oriented uses. 
b.  Applicability. The Industrial Special Treatment Area shall be considered an overlay district on the designated zoning district upon which it is superimposed. Unless otherwise specified, the underlying district requirements, including allowable uses, densities, intensities, etc., shall also be applicable within the Industrial Special Treatment Area. 
c.  Special provisions. 
i.  When shared parking is utilized between businesses, the total number of required spaces shall be reduced by 10%. 
ii.  Stormwater facilities shall be counted toward the minimum open space requirement when a landscape plan illustrating the type and location of proposed plantings is submitted and approved. 
iii.  When a landscape plan illustrating the type and location of proposed plantings is submitted and approved, the City will provide and install a landscape meter. 
iv.  Development within the ISTA is eligible to utilize the fast track approval process identified in subsection 2-4.3. 
v.  Temporary banners for announcements that are of general public good (excluding sales events, grand openings, closings and similar events) are allowed with the posting time to be determined by the Director or City Manager. 
15.  DPSTA, Distribution Park Special Treatment Area. 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of the Distribution Park Special Treatment Area is to encourage economic development by promoting a range of uses including warehouse/distribution uses, mixed use, and other employment-oriented uses that benefit from direct access to Interstate-10. 
b.  Applicability. The Distribution Park Special Treatment Area shall be considered an overlay district on the designated zoning district upon which it is superimposed. Unless otherwise specified, the underlying district requirements, including allowable uses, densities, intensities, etc., shall also be applicable within the Distribution Park Special Treatment Area. 
c.  Special provisions. 
i.  When shared parking is utilized between businesses, the total number of required spaces shall be reduced by 10%. 
ii.  Stormwater facilities shall be counted toward the minimum open space requirement when a landscape plan illustrating the type and location of proposed plantings is submitted and approved. 
iii.  When a landscape plan illustrating the type and location of proposed plantings is submitted and approved, the City will provide and install a landscape meter. 
iv.  Development within the DPSTA is eligible to utilize the fast track approval process identified in subsection 2-4.3. 
v.  Temporary banners for announcements that are of general public good (excluding sales events, grand openings, closings and similar events) are allowed with the posting time to be determined by the Director or City Manager. 
16.  MUSTA, Mixed Use Special Treatment Area. 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of the Mixed Use Special Treatment Area is to encourage economic development by promoting a mix of uses including residential, professional office, neighborhood commercial, and other similar low intensity uses. 
b.  Applicability. The Mixed Use Special Treatment Area shall be considered an overlay district on the designated zoning district upon which it is superimposed. Unless otherwise specified, the underlying district requirements, including allowable uses, densities, intensities, etc., shall also be applicable within the Mixed Use Special Treatment Area. 
c.  Allowable uses. In addition to the uses identified above in 4.b. Mixed Use District, the following uses are allowed as of right in the MUSTA; all other uses are conditional uses as specified in paragraph d, or prohibited. 
i.  Advertising agencies; 
ii.  Antique dealers; 
iii.  Architects/engineers/surveyors; 
iv.  Auditors/accountants; 
v.  Bakeries; 
vi.  Bonding companies; 
vii.  Book agents; 
viii.  Book stores; 
ix.  Card/gift shops; 
x.  Child care facilities; 
xi.  Drugstores; 
xii.  Dry cleaners; 
xiii.  Film/photo/art studio; 
xiv.  Finance companies; 
xv.  Florists; 
xvi.  Garden supplies; 
xvii.  Jewelry stores; 
xviii.  Law offices; 
xix.  Locksmiths; 
xx.  Medical offices/clinics; 
xxi.  Print shops; 
xxii.  Professional office buildings smaller than 3,000 sq. ft.; 
xxiii.  Real estate offices; 
xxiv.  Repair shops; 
xxv.  Tailors/seamstress shops; 
xxvi.  Title companies; and 
xxvii.  Travel agencies. 
d.  Conditional uses. The following uses may be allowed in the MUSTA upon approval by the Planning and Zoning Board and the City Commission, subject to the following conditions or any other conditions considered necessary to maintain the integrity of the Special Treatment Area. 
i.  Athletic/health clubs; 
ii.  Bail bonds companies; 
iii.  Body altering businesses; 
iv.  Business colleges; 
v.  Concealed telecommunication facilities; 
vi.  Convenience stores; 
vii.  Electronic stores; 
viii.  Fast food restaurants/carryout; 
ix.  Filling/service stations; 
x.  Massage businesses; 
xi.  Music/dance studios; 
xiii.  Supermarkets; and 
xiv.  Other low intensity uses. 
e.  Special provisions. 
i.  When shared parking is utilized between businesses, the total number of required spaces shall be reduced by 10%. 
ii.  Stormwater facilities shall be counted toward the minimum open space requirement when a landscape plan illustrating the type and location of proposed plantings is submitted and approved. 
iii.  All development order review fees shall be reduced by 15% (not to include advertisement fees and engineering fees) when applying within the MUSTA. 
iv.  Development within the MUSTA is eligible to utilize the fast track approval process identified in subsection 2-4.3. 
17.  PUD, Planned Unit Development. 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of the planned unit development zoning district is to promote innovative and sustainable development. Each PUD should achieve the following objectives when possible: 
i.  Promote sustainable development that utilizes innovative design features; 
ii.  Preserve and incorporate natural environments into the design of development; 
iii.  Integrate different housing types that fulfill the housing needs of a diverse population of various income levels; and 
iv.  Provide for a functionally integrated, mixed use community. 
b.  Review criteria. 
i.  Compliance with the City's Comprehensive Plan. Each PUD shall comply with all requirements of the future land use designation for the property proposed to be zoned PUD. 
ii.  Specifications as set forth in these Land Development Regulations shall serve as the minimum standards. Innovative and creative alternative designs are encouraged. 
iii.  Permitted uses. A PUD must contain a minimum of two uses with one use being residential and the other being recreation and open space. It may include any use allowed in any zoning district provided such use is consistent with the future land use category for the property. PUDs shall not be permitted within the RT zoning category. 
iv.  Area. A PUD must be a minimum of 10 acres. 
v.  Density. The maximum density for residential uses is 16 dwelling units per acre. 
vi.  Intensity. The maximum intensity for nonresidential uses is 90% lot coverage. 
vii.  Maximum Building Height. The maximum building height within the PUD shall be 70 feet above base flood elevation. 
viii.  Compatibility. All development proposed within the PUD shall be compatible with surrounding existing uses. 
ix.  Natural features. All development proposed within the PUD shall minimize adverse impacts of development on the natural features and maximize the natural features as amenities for the development. 
(1)  When possible, trees with a diameter of 18" or larger at 54" above ground level shall be preserved. 
(2)  Care should be taken during construction to avoid killing roots of trees slated for preservation. 
x.  Transportation network. The transportation network for each PUD shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Traffic network. The PUD shall provide for the continuation of all existing highway, arterial, and collector roadway traffic. The transportation system shall connect to existing adjacent streets, pedestrian ways, and bicycle paths. 
(2)  Circulation. The transportation network within the PUD shall be designed to: 
(a)  Provide safe and efficient flow of traffic; 
(b)  Provide safe and effective access to land uses within the development and roadways adjacent to the development; 
(c)  Accommodate future traffic circulation at established level of service standards; and 
(d)  Achieve interconnectivity among land uses when possible. 
(3)  Access. Each unit or permitted use in the PUD shall have access to a public street directly or via an approved road, pedestrian way, court, or other area dedicated to public or private use, or a common element that guarantees such access. 
(4)  Parking, loading, and storage. Parking, loading, and storage within a PUD shall be designed to be functionally integrated into the development. 
(5)  Pedestrian/bicycle network. Each PUD should include a unified pedestrian and bicycle circulation system when possible. 
(6)  Street design. Specifications for street materials as set forth in the City ordinances shall serve as the minimum standards. Innovative and creative alternative designs for lane width, curbs, and drainage are encouraged in order to calm traffic, encourage non-vehicular transportation, and achieve design goals. 
xi.  Open spaces and recreation areas. Each PUD shall include open spaces and recreation areas in order to provide appropriate recreational opportunities, protect sensitive natural areas, conserve areas of unique beauty or historical significance, provide structure to neighborhood design, and achieve compatibility with surrounding land uses. 
c.  Procedure for PUD Zoning. Applications for PUD Zoning shall be submitted, processed and reviewed as for other amendments to the Zoning Map. Material submitted with the application, or on subsequent request by the Director, shall include the specific zoning district classification requested, the material required by Article II and other plans, maps, studies and reports, as required below, with sufficient copies for necessary referrals and records. 
i.  Preapplication conference. The applicant shall participate in at least one preapplication conference with the Municipal Development Department. 
ii.  PUD application. An application for a rezoning to the PUD zoning district shall include the following: 
(1)  The name, addresses, and phone numbers of the owner, applicant, and representatives of the applicant. 
(2)  Legal description including total acreage. 
(3)  A document that demonstrates unified ownership or control of the property. 
(4)  A master site plan that contains the following: 
(a)  General types and locations of proposed development, lot sizes and setbacks, open space, conservation areas, transportation networks, and buffers; 
(b)  A general transportation circulation plan; and 
(c)  A description of uses including total number of dwelling units, total square footage of nonresidential uses, housing types, heights of buildings, and total amount of open space. 
(5)  A project narrative that demonstrates compliance with each of the standards set forth in 4-1.7.16.c. 
(6)  An analysis of the future land use categories and zoning districts for the properties surrounding the property proposed to be rezoned to PUD. 
(7)  An analysis of each requested deviation from the requirements of the City's land development regulations. Such analysis shall include: 
(a)  A description of each requested deviation; and 
(b)  A comparison between the applicable requirement of the City's land development regulations and the requested deviation. 
(8)  A list of the public benefits proposed in the PUD and an analysis which demonstrates that such proposed public benefits are sufficient to justify the requested deviation(s) from the City's land development regulations. 
(9)  An environmental assessment report. 
(10)  A proposed development phasing schedule. 
(11)  An analysis of the anticipated impacts of the proposed development, including: 
(a)  Potable water demand. 
(b)  Wastewater demand. 
(c)  Stormwater facilities. 
(d)  Transportation impacts. 
(e)  Park and open space. 
(f)  Solid waste demand. 
(g)  School impacts. 
iii.  Expiration. The master site plan for the PUD shall expire two years from the date of approval by the City Commission unless the applicant obtains a development order from the City for a phase. Subsequent phases must receive a development order within two years upon completion of previous phase. If the master site plan expires, the applicant must reapply for a PUD zoning and conform to the current requirements of the City's Land Development Code. 
iv.  Extension. An applicant may request a one-year extension of the expiration date, provided such request is filed with the City 45-days prior to the expiration date. 
v.  Modifications. All modifications to the PUD, including the master site plan, must be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Board, and approved by the City Commission with the same process as required for the initial approval of the PUD rezoning. 
vi.  Issuance of development orders. City Commission approval of an application for a rezoning to the PUD zoning district shall be required prior to or concurrent with the granting of any development order for a PUD project. 
Table 4.1: Summary Development Standards 
Zoning Category 
Min Lot Area 
Min Lot Width 
Max Bldg Height
Density 
Lot Coverage 
Open Space 
Front 
Side 
Rear 
R-1 Single-family residential 10,000 sq. ft. 75 ft. 35 ft. 4 du/ac 50% 50% 20 ft. 10 ft. 20 ft. 
R-2 One- and two-family residential SF: 7,500 sq. ft. 65 ft. 35 ft. 5.5 du/ac 50% 50% 20 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 
R-3 Multi-family residential 2,500 sq. ft. 75 ft. 35 ft. 16 du/ac 75% 25% 20 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 
MU Mixed use 6,500 sq. ft. 75 ft. 50 ft. 16 du/ac 75% 25% 20 ft.10 ft. 20 ft. 
COM Commercial Area 5,000 sq. ft. 65 ft. 70 ft. 16 du/ac 90% 10% 40 ft. 20 ft. 10 ft. 
IND Industrial N/A N/A 70 ft. N/A 90% 10% 20 ft. 20 ft. 10 ft.
40 ft. when abuts R or MU 20 ft.  40 ft. when abuts R or MU 
REC Recreation N/A N/A 35 ft. N/A 90% N/A 20 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 
PI Public/institutional 4,000 sq. ft. N/A 70 ft. N/A 90% N/A 20 ft. 10 ft. 10 ft. 
CON Conservation N/A N/A 35 ft. 1 du/ac N/A N/A 20 ft. 10 ft. 20 ft. 
RT Rural transition 43,560 sq. ft. N/A 35 ft. 1 du/ac N/A N/A 20 ft. 20 ft. 20 ft. 
PUD Planned unit development Per site plan Per site plan 70 ft. 16 du/ac 90% 10% Per site plan  
*Building height may be extended up to 70 feet if within the DISTA. 
  

NOTES:
**21,780 square feet with no city water/sewer. 
  
***10,000 square feet with city water only and 21,780 square feet with no city water/sewer. 
  
****Residential uses are only permitted within the DISTA. 
    4-1.8. Supplemental performance standards. 
1.  Purpose. The performance standards set forth herein are intended to reduce the potential for nuisances between adjacent land uses and zoning districts. 
2.  Applicability. The following performance standards shall apply to all zoning districts within the City. 
a.  Noise. No development shall be allowed adjacent to residential properties which causes unreasonably loud and raucous sound levels on such residential properties. 
i.  Factors for determining whether a sound is unreasonably loud and raucous include, but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  The proximity of the sound to sleeping facilities, whether residential or commercial; 
(2)  The land use, zoning, and nature of the area from which the sound emanates and the area where it is received or perceived; 
(3)  The time of day or night the sound occurs; 
(4)  The duration of the sound; and 
(5)  Whether the sound is recurrent, intermittent, or constant. 
b.  Lighting and glare. No multifamily residential or nonresidential development shall be allowed adjacent to any low density residential properties which causes excessive illumination or glare upon such residential properties. All lighting or illumination proposed as part of any multifamily or nonresidential development shall be located and installed so that no direct or indirect light falls upon adjacent residential properties. All driveways, parking lots or other vehicular access associated with multifamily or nonresidential development shall be designed and constructed so that no direct light from vehicle headlights is shown upon or into any adjacent residential dwelling. 
c.  Electromagnetic interference. In all zoning districts, no use, activity or process shall be conducted which produces electric and/or magnetic fields which adversely affect public health, safety or welfare including but not limited to interference with normal radio, telephone, or television reception from off the premises where the activity is conducted. 
d.  Toxic or noxious matter. The emission of toxic or noxious matter beyond any property line is prohibited. 
e.  Odor. No offensive odors shall be emitted which are detectable with or without instruments beyond any property line. 
f.  Smoke. No smoke shall be emitted from any property which violates state air quality standards. 
g.  Eyesores and junk. No equipment, material, vehicle or product shall be stored or kept in such a manner as to present an offensive or unsightly appearance when viewed from any adjacent property. 
Sec. 4-2. - Accessory land uses and structures. 
    4-2.1. Accessory land uses. 
1.  Purpose. This subsection is intended to regulate the type, location, configuration and conduct of accessory land uses in order to ensure that such accessory uses are not harmful either physically or aesthetically to residents of surrounding areas. 
2.  Accessory dwelling units. 
a.  Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to provide for inexpensive housing units to meet the needs of older households, making housing available to elderly persons who might otherwise have difficulty finding homes, and to provide living quarters for housekeeping or maintenance persons on-premises. This section is also intended to protect the property values and residential character of neighborhoods where accessory dwelling units are located. 
b.  Standards. An accessory dwelling unit may be allowed in conjunction with single-family homes but will count towards the maximum density requirement, provided that all of the following requirements are met: 
i.  No more than one accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted on any residential lot. 
ii.  Accessory dwelling units, in conjunction with single-family homes, may be incorporated within the principal structure, attached to the principal structure, or may be a freestanding or detached structure. 
iii.  An accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed 25 percent of the square footage of the principal structure on the residential lot. 
iv.  The accessory dwelling unit shall be located and designed not to interfere with the appearance of the principal structure as a single-family dwelling unit. 
v.  No variations, adjustments, or waivers to the requirements of this Code shall be allowed in order to accommodate an accessory dwelling unit. 
3.  Home occupations. A home occupation shall be allowed in a bona fide dwelling unit within R-2, R-3, and mixed use districts, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  No person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in such occupation. 
b.  The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and shall under no circumstances change the residential character of the structure. 
c.  There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation, other than one sign not exceeding four square feet in area, nonilluminated, mounted flat against the wall. 
d.  No home occupation shall occupy more than 25 percent of the first-floor area of the dwelling. No accessory building, freestanding or attached, shall be used for a home occupation. 
e.  No traffic shall be generated by such occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the street or right-of-way. 
f.  No equipment, tools, or process shall be used in a home occupation which creates interference to neighboring properties due to noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio, telephone, or television receivers off the premises or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises. 
g.  Fabrication of Articles commonly classified under the terms "arts and handicrafts" may be deemed a home occupation, providing no retail sales are made at the home. 
h.  Outdoor storage of materials shall not be permitted. 
i.  The following shall not be considered home occupations: beauty shops and barbershops (more than one chair), band instrument or dance instructors, swimming instructor, studio for group instruction, public dining facility or tearoom, antique or gift shops, photographic studio, fortunetelling or similar activity, outdoor repair, food processing, retail sales, nursery school, kindergarten, or child day care center. 
j.  The giving of individual instruction to one person at a time, such as an art or piano teacher, shall be deemed a home occupation; individual instruction as a home occupation for those activities listed in paragraph i above shall be prohibited. 
k.  A home occupation shall be subject to all applicable City occupation licensing requirements, fees and other business taxes. 
4.  Home office of convenience. A home office of convenience shall be allowed in a dwelling unit within R-2, R-3 and mixed use districts, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  No person other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in the business activity. 
b.  The use of the dwelling unit for the home office shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and shall under no circumstances change the residential character of the structure. 
c.  There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of business activity. Signs or any visible advertising is prohibited. 
d.  No home office shall occupy more than 25 percent of the first-floor area of the dwelling. No accessory building, freestanding or attached, shall be used for a home office. 
e.  No traffic shall be generated by such home office in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood. 
f.  No equipment, tools, or process shall be used in a home office which creates interference to neighboring properties due to noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio, telephone, or television receivers off the premises or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises. 
g.  Any business activity undertaken in a home office shall be limited to that which is conducted by phone or mail only. 
h.  Outdoor storage of materials is prohibited. 
i.  Reserved. 
j.  A home office of convenience shall be subject to all applicable City occupation licensing requirements, fees and other business taxes. 
5.  Dining rooms, recreation centers, and other amenities. 
a.  Generally. Residential and nonresidential development projects may provide amenities for the exclusive use of the employees and/or residents of the project. Such amenities shall be allowed only as provided below. 
b.  Dining rooms, cafeterias, snack shops, etc. A development may provide a central dining facility to serve the employees and/or residents of the project subject to the following restrictions: 
i.  The facility shall not be open to the general public. 
ii.  There shall be no off-site signs advertising the presence of the facility. 
c.  Community centers/recreation centers. Residential project may provide a central facility to provide a meeting place and indoor recreation opportunities for residents subject to the following restrictions: 
i.  Such facilities shall not include health clubs, gift shops, gyms and the like, offering services to the general public. 
ii.  Parking to serve the building shall be provided as required by this Code. 
iii.  There shall be no identification signs, other than directional signs. 
d.  Employee fitness centers. Nonresidential development projects may provide a fitness or exercise center for the use of employees subject to the following restrictions: 
i.  Such facilities shall not be open to the general public. 
ii.  There shall be no signs other than directional or occupant signs, identifying the facility. 
    4-2.2. Accessory structures. 
1.  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to regulate the type, installation, configuration, and use of accessory structures in order to ensure that they are not harmful either aesthetically or physically to residents and surrounding areas. 
2.  General standards and requirements. Any number of different accessory structures may be located on a parcel, provided that the following requirements are met: 
a.  There shall be a permitted principal use on the parcel, located in full compliance with all standards and requirements of this Code. 
b.  All accessory structures shall comply with standards pertaining to the principal use, unless exempted or superseded elsewhere in this Code. 
c.  Accessory structures shall not be located in required buffer or landscape areas. 
d.  Accessory structures shall be included in all calculations of impervious surface water and stormwater runoff. 
e.  Accessory structures shall be subject to development review and shall require a site development plan with full supporting documentation as required in Article 2 of this Code. 
f.  Accessory structures shall be allowed only in side or rear yards, unless otherwise specified herein. 
3.  Storage buildings and other structures used for storage, shops, utility buildings, greenhouses, garages, carports, and similar structures. 
a.  No accessory building shall be used for industrial storage of hazardous, incendiary, noxious, or pernicious materials. 
b.  Storage buildings, greenhouses, and the like shall not be located closer than three feet from any abutting interior property line or five feet from any alley right-of-way. 
c.  Storage and other buildings regulated by this subsection shall be permitted only in side and rear yards. 
d.  Storage and other buildings regulated by this subsection shall be included in calculations for impervious surface, floor area ratio, or any other site design requirements applying to the principal use of the lot. 
e.  Motor vehicles, mobile homes, trailers or recreational vehicles shall not be used as storage buildings, utility buildings, or other such uses within any residential district. 
f.  A temporary permit may be issued by the Director for the placement of a temporary storage structure for longer than 14 calendar days in the Res-1, Res-2, Res-3, or MU districts. 
i.  A permit shall be temporary, not to exceed a period of three months. 
ii.  A permit shall be renewable for an additional, one time three month period for extenuating circumstances and shall be subject to revocation at any time that the City, in its discretion, determines that the conditions under which it was issued have materially changed or that revocation is required to protect the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens of the City. 
4.  Private swimming pools. 
a.  This section does not apply to small, temporary pools without motors, which are commonly referred to or known as "kiddy pools" as identified in the Preston de Ibern/McKenzie Merriam Residential Swimming Pool Safety Act. 
b.  Swimming pools shall be permitted only in side and rear yards, and shall conform to accessory building setback requirements. 
c.  Enclosures for pools may be considered a part of the principal or accessory structure and shall comply with standards for minimum distance between buildings, yard requirements, and other building location requirements of this Code. 
d.  All pools shall be completely enclosed with an approved wall, fence or other substantial structure not less than four feet in height. The enclosure shall completely surround the pool and shall be of sufficient density to prohibit unrestrained admittance to the enclosed area through the use of self-closing and self-latching doors or gates. 
e.  No overhead electric power lines shall pass over any pool unless enclosed in conduit and rigidly supported, nor shall any power line be nearer than ten feet horizontally or vertically from the pool's water edge. 
5.  Fences. 
a.  Fences or hedges may be located in all front, side and rear yard setback areas. No fences or hedges shall exceed four feet in height when placed in the front yard. Each fence located in the side and rear yard setbacks shall not exceed eight feet in height, and for side yards shall not extend beyond the front of the principal structure. 
b.  Fences shall be setback a minimum of three feet from the property line. 
c.  In areas where the property faces two roadways or is located in any other area construed to be a corner lot, no fence shall be located in the sight distance vision triangle. 
d.  Any fence located adjacent to a public right-of-way or private road shall be placed with the finished side facing that right-of-way. 
e.  A fence required for safety and protection of hazard by another public agency may not be subject to height limitations above. Approval to exceed minimum height standards may be given by the Planning and Zoning Board upon receipt of satisfactory evidence of the need to exceed height standards. 
f.  No fence or hedge shall be constructed or installed in such a manner as to interfere with drainage on the site, unless such structure is intended for purposes of stormwater management. Gates or removable fences may be required to allow access to utility easements. 
g.  No fence, wall or similar structure shall be located in or upon any body of water or submerged lands, or located in such a manner as to restrict public access to or along any riparian property line. 
h.  Farms located within the Rural Transition zoning category shall be exempt for the requirements identified above. 
6.  Decks, patios. 
a.  Decks or patios shall be located in side and rear yards only in residential districts, unless otherwise approved by the Director. 
b.  Any enclosure of a deck or patio shall be subject to the development review and site plan requirements as specified in Article II of this Code. 
c.  Decks or patios shall not be located closer than three feet from any abutting property line or public right-of-way. 
d.  If the deck or patio is attached to the principal structure all setbacks for principal structures shall apply; if attached to an accessory building all setbacks for accessory buildings shall apply. 
7.  Telecommunication facilities. 
a.  The Federal Communications Act of 1934 as amended by Telecommunications Act of 1996 grants the Federal Communication Commission (FCC) exclusive jurisdiction over: 
i.  the regulation of the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions from communication towers and/or communication antenna facilities. 
ii.  The regulation of radio signal interference among users of the radio frequency spectrum. 
b.  The City's regulation of communication towers and/or communication antennas cannot have the effect of prohibiting any person from providing wireless telecommunication services. 
c.  This subsection shall not govern the installation of any amateur radio facility that is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive-only antennas. 
d.  Towers and telecommunication facilities provided for public safety and emergency uses are exempt from the requirements of this subsection. 
e.  Towers and telecommunication facilities are permitted as conditional uses within the Mixed Use (MU), Commercial (COM), Industrial (IND), Recreation (REC), Public/Institutional (PI), and Rural Transition (RT) districts. Towers and Telecommunication Facilities are prohibited from the Residential-1 (R-1), Residential-2 (R-2), Residential-3 (R-3), DISTA, and HISTA. 
f.  Standards. 
i.  Single use communication towers shall not exceed one hundred eighty (180) feet in height as measured from grade. 
ii.  Communication towers that have two (2) or more collocation abilities shall not exceed two hundred (200) feet in height as measured from grade. 
iii.  Communication towers placed on top of a building, the tower plus the building height may not exceed the maximum tower height as defined within Section 4-2.2.7. 
iv.  A communication tower shall be deemed to have collocation ability if its design is certified by the engineer as being appropriate for collocation and the applicant certifies that it is prepared to offer adequate space on the tower to others at commercially fair and reasonable terms. 
v.  All communication towers shall be separated from all residentially zoned lands by a minimum, of two hundred (200) feet. Tower separation distances for the purpose of compliance with this article shall be measured from the center of the base of the communication tower to the lot line. 
vi.  Communication antennas attached to communication towers are exempt from the setback standards of this Section and from setbacks for the zone in which they are located. However, such communication antennas shall not extend more than ten (10) feet horizontally beyond the center of the communication tower. 
vii.  Towers shall be lighted as required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). Further, unless prohibited by the FAA, communication towers for which illumination is not otherwise required by the FAA shall have a beacon light placed on top of the tower. To the extent allowed by the FAA, all lighting and beacons upon a tower which, at the time of commencement of construction, are located within a distance of three hundred (300) percent of the height of the tower from a residential use or residential zoning district shall be erected with shields mounted underneath the lights or beacons in such a manner so as to obstruct the view of said lights or beacons from the ground for a distance from the communication tower of three hundred (300) percent of the height of the tower. 
viii.  Communication towers not requiring FAA paintings /markings shall have either a galvanized finish or a painted non-contrasting blue, gray, or black finish as to minimize visual impact. 
ix.  Prior to the approval of a communication tower, the applicant shall provide evidence that the communication tower is in compliance with all FAA regulations. Where a communication tower will not exceed the highest point of an existing structure upon which it is to be mounted, such evidence is not required. 
x.  The use of any portion of a communication tower and its accessory structures for signs or advertising purposes, including company name, shall be prohibited. 
xi.  A minimum six (6) foot fence as measured from the finished grade shall be provided around each tower site. Access to the tower site shall be through a locked gate. 
xii.  The visual impact of a communication tower shall be mitigated for nearby viewers through landscaping or other screening materials at the base of the tower and secondary structures. 
xiii.  All towers shall be designed and constructed so that in the event of collapse or failure the tower structure will fall completely within the parcel or property where the tower is located. 
g.  Owners shall at all times employ ordinary and reasonable care and shall install, maintain and use nothing less than commonly accepted industry methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public. 
h.  In the event the use of any communication tower and/or communication antenna has been discontinued for a period of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, the tower and/or communication antenna shall be deemed to be abandoned. Determination of the date of abandonment shall be made by the Municipal Development Department, based upon documentation and/or affidavits from the communication tower and/or communication antenna owner/operator regarding the issue of tower usage. Upon such abandonment the owner/operator of the communication tower and/or communication antenna shall have an additional ninety (90) days within which to: 
i.  Reactivate the use of the communication tower and/or communication antenna or transfer the tower to another owner/operator who makes actual use of the tower. 
ii.  Dismantle and remove the tower. 
If such tower or telecommunication facility is not removed within said ninety (90) days, the City may remove such tower or telecommunication facility at the owner's expense. If there are two (2) or more users of a single telecommunication facility, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower or telecommunication facility. 
Sec. 4-3. - Buffer and landscaping standards. 
    4-3.1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for aesthetic improvement during the process of development, mitigate loss of natural vegetation, assist in controlling vehicular and pedestrian traffic, provide standards for maintenance of required open space, and to provide buffers between adjacent zoning districts. 
    4-3.2. Applicability. 
1.  Required buffers. Landscaped buffers are required between uses as follows: 
a.  R-3 multifamily district. Between any multifamily use with more than four dwelling units and any R-1 or R-2 residential use. 
b.  Mixed use district. 
i.  Between any single-family dwelling or R-1 use and any multifamily structure or R-3 use (buffers are not required between R-1 and R-2 uses); and 
ii.  Between any residential use and any nonresidential conditional use. 
c.  Commercial. Between any commercial use and any residential use or rural transition use. 
d.  Industrial. Between all other uses except industrial. 
e.  Recreation. Between abutting residential or commercial uses. Buffers shall be determined on a case by case basis between abutting commercial or public institutional uses at the Director's discretion. 
f.  Public/institutional. Between abutting Residential or Mixed Use uses. Buffers are not required between abutting commercial or public institutional uses. 
g.  Conservation. Between all abutting uses except conservation. 
h.  Rural transition. Between all abutting uses except rural transition, industrial, conservation, and recreation uses. If the same uses are adjacent to one another, such as residential adjacent to residential, buffering is not required. 
i.  All other uses. Between any residential use and any nonresidential use. 
j.  Exception. Buffers shall not be required for uses which are separated by a public roadway. 
2.  Natural drainageway buffers. A buffer of natural vegetation of at least ten feet in width shall be maintained from any natural drainageway. 
3.  Waivers. Buffer requirements may be waived by the Director upon approval by the Planning and Zoning Board. Any such waiver shall only be approved upon delivery by the developer of written, notarized statements of no objection from all adjacent property owners. 
    4-3.3. Location, size and composition of landscaped buffers. 
1.  Location. All required buffers shall be located along the side(s) and rear property lines. Rear buffers shall run the entire length of the property line. Side buffers shall be located so as to screen lighting, sound, and view from abutting side properties all parking areas and buildings, except in no case shall a buffer block sight distance of motor vehicle operators entering onto public roadways. 
2.  Size and composition. 
a.  Size. Required vegetated buffers shall be at least six feet wide and six feet in height and of sufficient density so as to block from view abutting land uses. If existing vegetation is sparse or not of sufficient density to block from view abutting land uses a visual screen or fence may be required in conjunction with the vegetated buffer. Required vegetated buffers may be reduced at the discretion of the Director based on land use and compatibility. 
b.  Composition. 
i.  Required buffers shall be comprised entirely of natural vegetation if such vegetation is of sufficient density and height as to block from view abutting land uses or zoning districts. 
ii.  Required buffers may also be comprised of landscaped trees, shrubs, vines or other vegetation, or a combination of vegetation, screens, berms, or fences, provided any such buffer is of sufficient density so as to block from view abutting land uses or zoning districts. 
iii.  Screens or fences may be constructed of wood, block, masonry or other common fencing material provided such buffer is 100 percent solid material. 
iv.  Water efficient irrigation and xeriscaping techniques shall be used. 
3.  Pedestrian access. Pedestrian access such as doors, gates, etc. may be installed, and are encouraged, to provide access between residential areas and adjacent nonresidential areas. Such accessways shall only be located so as to provide access to a public right-of-way, unless mutually agreed upon between property owners, and shall not be more than five feet in width. 
    4-3.4. Landscape requirements for off-street parking facilities and vehicular use areas. Except for parking areas in the downtown improvement special treatment area, areas used for off-street parking or other vehicular storage must be landscaped for ten percent of the parking area developed, in addition to the following requirements: 
1.  Setback areas. 
a.  All parking areas must be set back ten feet from the property lines in front and four feet from the side and rear lot lines. The area between the parking areas and the property lines shall be landscaped and may be counted in computing the ten percent landscape requirements. 
b.  Natural vegetation may be used, if not cleared, to meet the ten percent requirement. 
c.  If natural vegetation is not used, a tree shall be planted for each 50 linear feet of lot frontage. Trees may be clustered rather than evenly spaced. 
d.  Acceptable landscape materials shall include: vines, lawn grass, ground cover, pebbles, brick pavers, and mulch with low growing plants, including the preservation of existing trees and shrubs. 
e.  Water efficient irrigation and xeriscaping techniques shall be used. 
2.  Visual screen for vehicular use areas. A visual screen or barrier must be used to block from visual view all parking area or vehicular use areas from adjacent public streets, or residential developments, if no buffer exists or is required. The visual screen must consist of 70 percent solid materials and have a minimum height of two feet at planting and 3 1/2 feet within one year; low shrubs, hedges, berms, fences or a combination thereof are acceptable. 
3.  Motor vehicle overhang. Motor vehicles shall not overhang into any landscaped setback or planted area. 
4.  Interior landscape requirements for vehicular use areas. Vehicular use or parking areas which are 10,000 square feet or greater in size must also meet the following requirements: 
a.  At least 25 percent of the general landscape requirement shall be devoted to separate interior planting areas of one per 10,000 square feet of vehicular use areas. 
b.  The interior planting areas shall be located in a manner that assists and helps to control the movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
i.  Provide a continuous landscape strip between every four rows of parking. This should be a minimum of eight feet in width to accommodate a low hedge and shade trees. 
ii.  Create large planting islands (over 600 square feet) to be located throughout the lot and planted with shade trees, low shrubs, and/or ground cover. These should preferably be located at the ends of parking rows. 
iii.  Provide planting islands (a minimum of nine feet wide) between every ten to 15 spaces to avoid long rows of parked cars. Each of these planting islands should provide at least one shade tree having a clear trunk height of at least six feet. 
c.  Vehicles may not overhang into any interior planting area. 
5.  Plant material requirements. Any vegetative form used to fulfill any provision of the parking area landscaping requirements must meet the following basic standards: 
a.  Trees. Trees must be at least six feet tall when planted and must reach a minimum of 15 feet at mature height and normal adult dripline of 15 feet. 
b.  Shrubs and hedges. Shrubs and/or hedges must be a minimum height of two feet when planted and 3 1/2 feet within one year. 
c.  Ground covers. Ground covers should be planted with a spacing which will provide 75 percent coverage within one year. 
d.  Lawn grasses. Grasses should be planted to a density which will achieve permanent coverage within one year. Planting methods may be seeding, sprigging, plugging or sodding. 
e.  Synthetic plants and planters. Artificial plant material may not be used for any landscaping requirement. Architectural planters may be substituted for landscape requirements when planted with live plants. 
f.  Natural vegetation. Use of natural vegetation will involve retention of all native or naturally occurring plants, shrubs or trees in required landscaping areas. Planters for shrubs are required to have a depth of 18 inches and ten square feet of area. Planters for trees must have a depth of 30 inches and 25 square feet of area. 
    4-3.5. Maintenance requirements for landscaping or buffers. 
1.  Responsibility for property maintenance of required landscaping or buffers shall be with the owner of the property or any consenting lessee. 
2.  Maintenance of landscaped areas or vegetated buffers shall consist of: 
Mowing, pruning, removal of litter, replacement of dead plant material, and proper watering, fertilizing, etc. 
A water supply for irrigation purposes shall be provided for each landscaped or buffered area. Such water supply shall be shown on a landscaping site plan or sketch. 
3.  Maintenance of visual barriers or fences shall include keeping such structures in good appearance and repair including replacement of damaged or deteriorated sections. 
Sec. 4-4. - Environmental protection standards. 
    4-4.1. Purpose. The destruction or pollution of environmentally significant resources within the City constitutes a menace to the public health and welfare; creates public nuisances; is harmful to wildlife, fish and other aquatic life; and can be reasonably expected to decrease quality of life for residents of the City. It is hereby declared that the prevention, abatement and control of development activities which cause destruction or pollution of environmentally significant resources are affected with a public interest, and the provisions of this section are established for the purpose of protecting the health, safety, and general welfare of the public. The purpose of this section is to provide standards intended to prevent or restrict development activities which destroy or pollute environmentally significant resources, when such development activities are contrary to the public interest. 
    4-4.2. Applicability. This section is intended to establish those resources or areas of a development site that must be protected from harmful effects of development. A developer should apply the provisions of this section to a proposed development site before any other development design work is done. Application of the provisions of this section will divide a proposed development site into areas that may be developed and areas that must generally be left free of development activity. The proposed development should then be designed to fit within the areas that may be developed. No development order may be issued by the City until such time as the provisions of this section have been met. 
    4-4.3. Environmentally significant resources. Environmentally significant resources are those identified in the Comprehensive Plan and as follows. 
1.  Soils; 
2.  Wetlands; 
3.  Flood zones; 
4.  Chipola River; 
5.  Aquifer recharge areas; 
6.  Wildlife habitat; 
7.  Water wells and cones of influence; and 
8.  Natural vegetation. 
    4-4.4. Protection standards. 
1.  Soils. All grading, filling, excavation, storage or disposal of soil and earth materials associated with development activities shall be undertaken so as to reduce the potential for soil erosion and sedimentation of water bodies or drainageways. Erosion control measures shall be required for all such activities. 
As part of the development review process required pursuant to Article II of this Code, a developer of developments classified as Major Developments shall include an "erosion and sediment control plan." Such plan shall contain: 
(a)  Calculations of maximum runoff based on the 25-year, 24-hour storm event; 
(b)  A description of, and specifications for, sediment retention devices; 
(c)  A description of, and specifications for, surface runoff and erosion control devices; 
(d)  A description of vegetative measures; 
(e)  A map showing the location of all items listed in subsections (a) through (d) in this paragraph. 
A developer may propose the use of any erosion and sediment control techniques provided such techniques represent best management practices, and are certified by a registered professional engineer. 
Once development activity begins, the developer shall maintain in good order all erosion and sediment control measures specified in the erosion and sediment control plan regardless of whether the development project is completed or not. 
2.  Wetlands. Most wetlands constitute a productive and valuable public resource, the unnecessary alteration or destruction of which should be considered contrary to the public interest. As such, the following procedures and restrictions shall apply to development activities in wetlands identified by the City. 
(a)  Identification. The City shall identify those areas which exhibit physical features indicative of wetlands and shall depict such areas on a map. Wetland areas shown on the map shall be subject to the restrictions set forth in paragraph (b) unless the developer(s) of such areas can satisfactorily demonstrate to the City that wetlands do not exist on the site. 
(b)  Development restrictions. The following restrictions shall apply to development activities in wetlands identified pursuant to paragraph (a), and in wetland areas identified by jurisdictional interpretation through FDEP or the Corps of Engineers. 
i.  Use of fill, by dredging or any other means, is prohibited. 
ii.  Buildings or structures may be constructed on piles, posts or piers in wetlands provided: 
There are no upland areas suitable for development after wetlands have been delineated; 
The building or structure is constructed so as to allow for the continuation of natural functions such as drainage patterns, sedimentation patterns and natural flushing characteristics; 
The elevation of the lowest habitable floor is at least one foot above the base flood elevation; 
All development activity is confined to the land area upon which the building is located ("building footprint"); and 
Development is undertaken in a manner so as to preserve wetlands on the building site. 
iii.  All required permits must also be obtained from the FDEP or Corps of Engineers, as applicable. 
iv.  Residential density shall not exceed one dwelling unit per five acres. 
v.  Lot coverage shall be no greater than 30 percent of the wetland area. 
vi.  A buffer of natural vegetation at least ten feet in width shall be maintained between delineated wetlands and any upland development. 
vii.  Development shall be clustered on upland areas of the development site where possible. 
viii.  Structures used for public utilities or other public purpose may be located in wetland areas provided that disturbance of the wetland is limited to the immediate area necessary to locate such structure. 
3.  Flood zones. All development activity undertaken within designated A zones as shown on the official flood insurance rate map for Marianna, Florida, published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency shall be subject to the restrictions and standards of the City's flood damage prevention ordinance (part II, Chapter 30), as may be amended or superseded. Development in the floodplain shall be restricted to conservation, recreation, residential, or public purposes only, except that commercial uses may be allowed adjacent to U.S. 90 provided that lot coverage is limited to no more than 50 percent of the total lot or parcel. 
4.  Chipola River. 
(a)  As a designated "Outstanding Florida Water" the Chipola River shall be subject to the requirements of section 62-302.700, F.A.C. 
(b)  For development adjacent to the riverine shoreline, all vegetation shall be preserved except for that which must be removed to provide access, and to provide a building site. Any vegetation removed shall be limited to the immediate area necessary to locate such buildings ("building footprint"). 
(c)  No development activity shall be permitted which can reasonably be expected to damage or destroy the natural functions and values of the riverine system. 
(d)  All septic tanks shall be located no closer than 100 feet from the ordinary high-water line. 
(e)  No hazardous material or waste shall be stored or located within 500 feet of the ordinary high-water line. 
5.  Aquifer recharge areas. 
(a)  The City shall restrict lot coverage to 30 percent of the lot or parcel to be developed in identified aquifer recharge areas. 
(b)  All stormwater detention or retention structures shall be constructed so as to comply with minimum groundwater criteria specified in Chapter, 62-302.500, F.A.C. 
(c)  A minimum ten-foot vegetated buffer shall be required between any structure, including parking areas, and identified aquifer recharge areas. 
(d)  The development of public or private facilities which have the potential to discharge pollutants or otherwise contaminate the surface or deep aquifer shall be prohibited in identified aquifer recharge areas, unless the developer can provide assurances that reasonable measures will be undertaken to prevent aquifer contamination. 
(e)  All groundwater shall at all places and at all times be free from domestic, industrial, agricultural, or other man-induced nonthermal components of discharges in concentrations which, alone or in combination with other substances, or components of discharges (whether thermal or nonthermal): 
i.  Are harmful to plants, animals or organisms that are native to the soil and responsible for treatment or stabilization of the discharge relied upon by DEP permits; or 
ii.  Are carcinogenic, mutagenic, teratogenic, or toxic to human beings, unless specific criteria are established for such components in Rule 62-302.500(2) or Rule 62-302.530, F.A.C; or 
iii.  Are acutely toxic to indigenous species of significance to the aquatic community within surface waters affected by the groundwater at the point of contact with surface waters; or 
iv.  Pose a serious danger to the public health, safety, or welfare; or 
v.  Create or constitute a nuisance; or 
vi.  Impair the reasonable and beneficial use of adjacent waters. 
6.  Wildlife habitat. Development shall not be permitted which will significantly damage or destroy the habitat of species listed as endangered or threatened as specified in the "Official Lists of Endangered Fauna and Flora in Florida," published by the Florida game and fresh water fish commission. 
The developer of any areas identified as containing wildlife habitat shall be responsible for the conduct of an analysis to determine the value and extent of such habitat. This habitat analysis shall form the basis of habitat conservation and preservation measures to be established either as a condition of development approval or in an enforceable development agreement pursuant to F.S. §§ 163.3220-163.3243. 
7.  Water wells and cones of influence. 
(a)  The City shall prohibit installation of septic tanks within 200 feet of municipal potable water wells. 
(b)  Land uses which store, transfer or use hazardous materials shall not be permitted within 200 feet of municipal potable water wells. 
(c)  Underground storage tanks containing gasoline, diesel fuel, or other hazardous substances shall not be permitted within 300 feet of municipal potable water wells. 
(d)  No new potable water well shall be located within 500 feet of any known source of groundwater contamination. 
8.  Natural vegetation. The City shall preserve natural vegetation as part of the required buffers specified in this subsection and in subsection 4-3. All developers are strongly encouraged to preserve as much natural vegetation as possible during design and construction of development projects. 
(a)  When possible, trees with a diameter of 18" or larger at 54" above ground level shall be preserved. 
(b)  Care should be taken during construction to avoid killing roots of trees slated for preservation. 
Sec. 4-5. - Utilities. 
    This section is intended to provide basic standards for availability of utilities services as follows. 
    4-5.1. Applicability. 
1.  Electricity and telephone. All habitable developments shall have available a source of electricity and telephone adequate to accommodate the permitted development. 
2.  Water and sewer. All habitable development within the City shall be connected onto the City water and sewer system or, if City water and sewer service is not available, within six months of the availability of such service. All connections or extensions into either the water or sewer systems shall be as specified in the Florida Building Code. 
3.  Fire hydrants. The developers of any residential development shall provide a system of fire hydrants which meets or exceeds the standards set forth in the "Florida Fire Prevention Code." 
4.  Drainage and stormwater management. 
a.  Management plan required. Site plans submitted pursuant to Article II of this Code shall include a drainage and stormwater management plan which addresses the following requirements; unless exempted by 62-346.051, Florida Administrative Code. 
b.  Stormwater design standards. 
i.  Stormwater quality. Minimum stormwater quality standard is: 
Retention, or detention with filtration of the runoff from the first one inch of rainfall or, for drainage areas less than 100 acres, facilities required to provide retention, or detention with filtration, of the first one-half inch of runoff from a 24-hour, critical duration storm event. 
Higher standards may be applied in areas of special concern as determined by the Director. 
All stormwater discharge structures shall have sediment controls and skimming devices. 
Off-site discharge flows shall be limited to non-erosion velocities. 
ii.  Stormwater quantity. Minimum stormwater quantity standard: 
All developments shall provide facilities required to attenuate the 25-year, 24-hour storm event while limiting discharge to the difference between predevelopment levels and postdevelopment levels or to the capacity of the receiving water or drainage control structure. 
The minimum time of concentration shall be ten minutes. 
Design engineers shall verify the capacity of the outfall system with analytical analysis, unless waived by the Director. 
c.  Erosion and siltation control. The minimum for erosion and siltation control: 
i.  Provide an erosion and siltation plan for temporary and permanent vegetative and structural control measures. 
ii.  Best management practices contained in the FDEP Florida Development Manual: A Guide to Sound Land and Water Management, will be followed. 
iii.  Denuded areas shall be stabilized with mulch, sod or other temporary vegetation within 30 days. Final stabilization measures shall be in place within 60 days of final grading. 
iv.  Soil stockpiles shall be protected from erosion. Dust from soil stockpiles shall be controlled. 
v.  Storm drainage inlets shall be protected by hay bales, sod screens or other measures to prevent siltation during construction. 
vi.  Sediment basins, sediment traps, perimeter berms, filter fabric fences, hay bales and other measures indicated on the erosion control plan shall be installed as a first step in land alteration (see subsection 4-4.4, paragraph 1). 
vii.  Exemptions may be authorized by the Director as follows: construction of one single-family dwelling unit, one duplex, one triplex, or one quadraplex residential unit provided the unit is not a part of a larger development; or other activities determined by the Director. 
d.  Drainage and stormwater management plan requirements. 
i.  The applicant shall provide sufficient information for the City to evaluate the characteristics of the affected area, the potential impacts on City water and the acceptability of compensating measures including: maps, sketches, graphs, tables, photographs, narratives and other information. 
ii.  The drainage and stormwater management plan shall be prepared by a professional engineer registered in the State of Florida, unless exempted by the Director. 
iii.  The drainage and stormwater management plan shall include the following, unless exempted by the Director. 
Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
Location map and aerial photo outlining project boundaries. 
Existing environmental and hydrologic conditions of the site and receiving waters including: 
Predevelopment flow rate, direction and volume of stormwater runoff on the site. 
Off-site adjacent upland acreage, watercourses, water bodies and wetlands. 
Groundwater levels. 
Vegetation and soils. 
Other appropriate site-specific information including outfall system information. 
Components of the proposed stormwater management system including: 
Postdevelopment flow rate, direction and volume of stormwater runoff with a comparison to predevelopment conditions. 
Construction plans for stormwater system improvements. 
Erosion and sedimentation control measure plan (see subsection 4-4.4, paragraph 1). 
Plan and schedule for maintenance of stormwater management system and erosion/sedimentation control measures. 
Other appropriate site-specific information. 
e.  Plan adherence. 
i.  The applicant shall be required to adhere to the drainage and stormwater management plan as approved. 
ii.  Any changes or amendments to the plan must be approved by the City. 
iii.  After completion of the project, the City shall require the project engineer to certify that the project meets the approved plan. 
f.  Maintenance. 
i.  The installed systems required by these standards shall be maintained by the owner unless the City or other agencies have accepted the responsibility of maintenance. 
ii.  If the owner fails to maintain his systems, the Director shall give the owner written warning for enforcement action as specified in section 1-11 of this Code. 
g.  Inspections. 
i.  The owner, engineer or contractor shall arrange scheduling with the City for the following inspections during construction: 
Erosion and sediment control inspection: as necessary to ensure effective control of erosion and sedimentation, including prior to land clearing. 
Bury inspections: prior to covering of underground drainage structures. 
Final inspection: when all work, including installation of stormwater management facilities, has been completed. 
h.  Off-site facilities. 
i.  Developers may provide off-site quality and quantity stormwater facilities subject to approval by the Director. 
ii.  Developers may request participation by a pro rata share in existing or planned public or regional stormwater facilities in lieu of on-site facilities subject to a development agreement with the City. 
i.  Exemptions to protection standards. 
i.  Any new development, alteration or improvement of existing structures which will not increase the peak discharge rate, the volume of runoff or deposit additional pollution materials beyond the boundaries of the development. 
ii.  Maintenance work on existing mosquito control drainage structures for public health and welfare purposes. 
iii.  Construction of up to 4,000 square feet of impervious or semi-impervious parking/vehicular circulation areas, and up to 5,000 square feet of building areas provided: 
a.  The total project area is equal to or less than one acre; 
b.  All state stormwater requirements are met; 
c.  The project does not directly discharge into the Chipola River as listed in Rule 62-302-700 and 62-346.051, F.A.C.; 
d.  The improvements will not cause or contribute to adverse water quantity impacts to receiving waters or adjacent lands; 
e.  Will not cause adverse flooding to on-site or off-site properties; and 
f.  Will not cause adverse impacts to existing surface water conveyance capabilities. 
iv.  Emergencies requiring immediate action to prevent material harm or danger as in fires, violent storms, hurricanes, or other extraordinary hazards. A report of the emergency action will be made to the City as soon as possible. 
v.  Developments which discharge into an existing stormwater treatment facility with sufficient reserve quality and quantity capacity as determined by the Director. 
vi.  Developments which must meet a higher stormwater management standard mandated by another agency. 
vii.  Phased completion of development project approved before adoption of this Code. 
j.  Combination of management plan with erosion and sediment control plan. Requirements for drainage and stormwater management plans may be combined with the requirements for an erosion and sediment control plan as specified in section 4-4 insofar as all requirements for both plans are met. 
5.  Solid waste. All developments providing dumpsters shall provide six foot tall, gated, opaque enclosure around said dumpster. 
    4-5.2. Placement/location of utilities. To the maximum extent practicable, all utilities shall be placed, installed or otherwise located in conformance with requirements identified by the Public Works Department. 
    4-5.3. Utility easements. When a developer installs, or causes the installation of, water, sewer, electrical power, telephone or cable television facilities and intends that such facilities shall be owned, operated or maintained by a public utility or any entity other than the developer, the developer shall transfer title to such utility or entity the necessary ownership or easement rights to enable the utility or entity to operate and maintain such facilities. 
Sec. 4-6. - Traffic circulation and parking. 
    4-6.1. Purpose. This section establishes minimum requirements applicable to transportation systems, including public and private streets, bikeways, pedestrian ways, parking and loading areas, and access control to and from public streets. The standards in this section are intended to minimize the traffic impacts of development, to assure that all developments adequately and safely provide for the storage and movement of vehicles consistent with good engineering and development design practices, and to promote a convenient and safe motorized and nonmotorized transportation system. 
    4-6.2. Technical construction standards. Design and construction of all highways, roads, or streets including pavement width, right-of-way, sight clearance and all other associated design considerations shall be as specified in the most recently published edition of the Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways , Florida Department of Transportation (commonly known as the "Florida Green Book") unless otherwise specified in this Code. 
    4-6.3. Functional classifications of roadways. Roadways within the City have been identified in the Comprehensive Plan as to functional classification established by the Florida Department of Transportation. Functional classifications of roadways within the City are as follows. 
1.  Urban principal arterial-Interstate. 
a.  Interstate-10. 
2.  Urban minor arterial. 
a.  U.S. 90 (Lafayette St.). 
b.  SR 73 (N. of U.S. 90). 
c.  SR 166 (Jefferson St./Caverns Rd., N. of U.S. 90). 
d.  SR 71. 
3.  Urban collector. 
a.  SR 73 (Jefferson St., S. of U.S. 90). 
b.  SR 276 (Kynesville Rd./Penn Ave.). 
c.  CR 1650 (Cottondale Rd., W. of SR 276). 
d.  CR 167 (South St., W of McPherson St.). 
e.  CR 1665 (McPherson St./Caledonia St., S. of U.S. 90). 
f.  CR 0458 (Kelson St.). 
g.  CR 0453 (College St.). 
h.  Old U.S. Rd. 
4.  Local streets. All other streets not previously listed. 
The preceding functional classifications shall be used in reference to standards as applied in this section, or as otherwise specified in this Code. 
    4-6.4. General design standards. 
1.  All streets in a new development shall be designed and constructed pursuant to the standards or tests contained in the technical construction standards manual specified in subsection 4-6.2 and right-of-way standards specified in subsection 4-6.5. Streets may be dedicated to the City upon completion, inspection, and acceptance by the City. 
2.  The street system of the proposed development shall, to the extent practicable, conform to the natural topography of the site, preserving existing hydrological and vegetative patterns, and minimizing erosion potential, runoff, and the need for site alteration. Particular effort should be directed toward securing the flattest possible grade near intersections. 
3.  Streets shall be designed so as to avoid environmentally sensitive areas. 
4.  Private streets may be allowed within developments that will remain under common ownership, provided they are designed and constructed pursuant to the standards specified in this section and inspected and approved by the City. 
5.  The street layout in all new development shall be coordinated with and interconnected to the street system of the surrounding area. 
6.  Streets in proposed subdivisions shall be connected to rights-of-way in adjacent areas to allow for proper interneighborhood traffic flow. If adjacent lands are vacant but platted, stub-outs in the new development shall be provided for future connection(s) to the adjacent platted land. 
7.  Residential streets shall be arranged to discourage through traffic. 
8.  Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and in no case shall be less than 75 degrees. 
9.  New intersections along one side on an existing street shall, where possible, coincide with existing intersections. Where an offset (jog) is necessary at an intersection, the distance between centerlines of the intersecting streets shall be no less than 150 feet. 
10.  No two streets may intersect with any other street on the same side at a distance of less than 400 feet measured from centerline to centerline of the intersecting street. When the intersected street is an arterial, the distance between intersecting streets may be no less than 100 feet. 
11.  Lots in residential subdivisions shall be designed and arranged so that the front yard and driveway of each lot does not abut, front upon, or connect with any collector or arterial roadway or right-of-way (see subsection 4-6.3). 
12.  All shopping centers and malls shall have a fire and safety lane of a minimum width of ten feet contiguous and adjacent to the pedestrian walkway fronting the entrance to shops and stores in the shopping center or mall, and should a pedestrian walkway not exist, then a fire lane shall be contiguous to the exterior perimeter wall of the shopping center or mall structure. 
Compliance with this requirement shall be deemed to have been met where there is a minimum of two traffic lanes having a width of not less than 12 feet each which are adjacent and contiguous to the pedestrian walkway fronting the entry into the stores or shops in the shopping center or mall or the exterior perimeter wall thereof. 
The fire safety lane shall be posted at intervals of 50 feet by a sign which states: "Fire Safety Lane. Parking, standing or stopping of motor vehicles prohibited at all times." 
    4-6.5. Rights-of-way. 
1.  Right-of-way width. Right-of-way requirements for road construction shall be as follows: 
Principal arterial: 150 feet. 
Minor arterial: 100 feet. 
Collector: 100 feet. 
Local: 60 feet. 
Alleys: At the discretion of the Director. 
2.  Pavement width. Pavement width for roadway construction shall be as follows. 
Four-Lane (feet) Two-Lane (feet) Principal arterial 60 36 Minor arterial 60 36 Collector 60 36 Local 48 24  
3.  Protection and use. 
a.  No encroachment, including driveway connections, shall be permitted into City rights-of-way, except as authorized by the City. 
b.  Use of the right-of-way for public or private utilities, including, but not limited to, sanitary sewer, potable water, telephone wires, cable television wires, gas lines, or electricity transmission, shall be allowed subject to the placement specifications identified by the Public Works Department and other applicable laws or regulations. 
c.  Sidewalks and bicycle ways shall be placed within the right-of-way. 
4.  Vacations of rights-of-way. Applications to vacate a right-of-way shall be approved by the City Commission upon a finding that all of the following requirements are met: 
a.  The requested vacation is consistent with the traffic circulation element of the City Comprehensive Plan. 
b.  The right-of-way does not provide the sole access to any property. Remaining access shall not be by easement. 
c.  The vacation would not jeopardize the current or future location of any utility. 
d.  The proposed vacation is not detrimental to the public interest, and provides a positive benefit to the City. 
    4-6.6. Access control. 
1.  State highway system. All driveways, access points, entrances or exits or other vehicular connections to the state highway system must be authorized by the Florida Department of Transportation, and any access connections to County roadways must be authorized by Jackson County. Vehicular connection permits must be obtained by developers pursuant to Chapter 14-96, Florida Administrative Code; such permits are required for vehicular connections onto the state highway system. Spacing requirements for driveways, access points, entrances or exits or other vehicular connections to the state highway system must meet the access management standards pursuant to Chapter 14-97, Florida Administrative Code. 
2.  Collector and local streets. 
Location and spacing of access points. Location and spacing of access points shall be as specified in subsection 4-6.4 for intersections, and as specified in the technical construction and standards manual (subsection 4-6.2) for other access points. 
Emergency access. 
a.  All residential subdivisions or multifamily developments, including mobile home parks, with roadway segments over 500 feet in length shall have at least two roadway outlets which will allow for emergency ingress and egress. 
    4-6.7. Bicycle and pedestrian ways. 
1.  Installation requirement. All new developments shall be required to install sidewalks and/or bicycle lanes/paths when the need for such facilities has been established as an integral part of the City's nonautomotive traffic circulation system. Decisions by the Director in applying the requirement for bicycle paths or sidewalks shall be based on the following criteria: 
a.  Application of this requirement is necessary to install or complete a portion of the sidewalk system or bicycle lane,/path system; 
b.  Installation of sidewalks or bicycle lanes/paths is not contrary to public safety; 
c.  The cost of providing sidewalks or bicycle lanes/paths is not excessively disproportionate to the need or probable use; and 
d.  Other available factors or means do not indicate an absence of need. 
e.  Sidewalks and/or bike lanes/paths will not be required when located on a state road. 
2.  Technical construction standards. Required bicycle lanes, paths and sidewalks shall be designed and constructed in conformance with the standards set forth in the Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways (the Florida Green Book) as published by the Florida Department of Transportation. 
3.  The minimum sidewalk width shall be 5 feet when separated from the back of curb by a buffer strip. When separated from the curb, the minimum separation for a sidewalk from the back of curb is 2 feet. The minimum sidewalk width may be reduced to 4 feet when physical constraints exist. When sidewalks must be constructed adjacent to the curb, the minimum width shall be 6 feet. Sidewalks should be constructed as defined in the current version of the Florida Green Book - Chapter 8 - Pedestrian Facilities. In areas of high use, refer to the Highway Capacity Manual for calculation of appropriate width. 
Maximum cross slope shall be 2%, and grades shall not exceed 8.33%. Curb ramps shall be provided at all intersections (F.S. § 336.045(3)). For additional details, refer to the current Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Accessibility Guidelines (as described in the Federal Register), and the Florida Accessibility Code for Building Construction (Rule 9B-7.0042). 
4.  Bicycle lanes shall have a minimum functional width of 4 feet. At least 1 foot additional width is needed when the bicycle lane is adjacent to a curb or other barrier, on-street parking is present, there is substantial truck traffic (>10%), or posted speeds exceed 50 mph. Bicycle Lanes should be constructed as defined in the current version of the Florida Green Book - Chapter 9 - Bicycle Facilities. 
    4-6.8. Off-street parking and loading. 
1.  General requirements. In all districts except the downtown improvement STA, there shall be provided, at such time any building or structure is erected or enlarged or increased in capacity, off-street parking spaces for automobiles in accordance with the following requirements: 
a.  Off-street parking for other than residential use shall be either on the same lot or within 200 feet of the building it is intended to serve measured from the nearest point of the building to the nearest point of the off-street parking lot, without crossing any major thoroughfare; provided, however, churches may establish joint parking facilities not to exceed 50 percent of the required spaces, with institutions and agencies that do not have a time of day conflict in parking demand. The joint parking facilities shall be located not to exceed 400 feet from the church sanctuary. 
b.  Residential off-street parking space shall consist of a parking lot, driveway, garage, or combination thereof and shall be located on the lot that they are intended to serve. 
c.  For uses not specifically mentioned herein, off-street parking requirements shall be interpreted by the Planning and Zoning Board. 
d.  Any area once designated as required off-street parking shall not be changed to any other use unless and until equal facilities are provided elsewhere. 
e.  Driveways shall be located a minimum of 50 feet apart and 100 feet from roadway and railroad intersections, except for single-family and two-family residential uses. Single-family and two-family dwellings shall provide a minimum of 30 feet spacing between access connections and a minimum of 40 feet from intersections of roads and railroads. Driveways for single-family and two-family dwellings located on a cul-de-sac shall be a minimum of 15 feet apart. A maximum of two connections will be allowed, which meet the spacing requirements. 
f.  Off-street parking existing at the effective date of these regulations in connection with the operation of an existing building or use shall not be reduced to an amount less than hereinafter required for a similar new building or use. 
g.  Two or more buildings or uses may collectively provide the required off-street parking in which case the required number of parking spaces shall be not less than the sum of the requirements for the several individual uses computed separately. 
h.  The required off-street parking shall be for occupants, employees, visitors, and patrons and shall be limited in use to motor vehicles. The storage of merchandise, motor vehicles for sale, or the repair of vehicles is prohibited. 
i.  Every company car, truck, tractor and trailer normally stored at the plant site shall be provided with off-street parking space in an area reserved for the use as determined by the Planning and Zoning Board. 
j.  In cases of dual functioning of off-street parking where operating hours do not overlap, the Planning and Zoning Board may grant an exception. 
k.  Requirements for off-street parking may be reduced, upon approval by the Planning and Zoning Board, for the purpose of protecting or preserving natural vegetation or other environmental resources. 
2.  Table of minimum required parking spaces. 
Uses Parking Spaces Required Dwellings: Single-family, duplex, cluster or townhouse dwelling units Two per unit Apartment or condominium Two per unit (plus one per each ten units) Community residential homes One per bedroom Hotels and motels One per unit (plus one per five employees) Mobile home parks Two per unit (plus three per 300 square feet of service buildings) Boarding homes and dormitories One per bedroom Public assembly: Church, temple or other place of worship One per four seats in main assembly room Fraternal organization or private club One per 300 square feet gross floor area, plus one and one-half per bedroom Auditorium, theater, gymnasiums or convention hall One per four seating spaces Libraries and museums One per 500 square feet gross area Private schools, kindergartens and day care centers One per four seats in assembly hall plus one per classroom Amusement place, dancehall, swimming pool or exhibition hall One per four seating spaces or one per each 100 square feet of floor or grounds used for amusement or assembly Health facilities: Hospitals Two per bed Sanitariums, convalescent homes or similar institutions One per 500 square feet of gross floor area Animal hospitals One per 400 square feet of gross floor area Medical, dental and health offices and clinics One per 300 square feet of gross floor area Funeral parlors or mortuaries One per each four chapel seats Business: Bowling alley Five per alley Food stores and drugstores One per 300 square feet of gross floor area (over 4,000 square feet: use one per 100 square feet gross floor area) Commercial, retail business, personal services One per 300 square feet of gross floor area Furniture store One space per 1,500 square feet Health spa or club One per 300 square feet of gross floor area Business and professional offices One per 300 square feet of gross floor area Banks or other financial institutions One per 300 square feet of gross floor area Printing, publishing or broadcasting One per 300 square feet of gross floor area Restaurant, lounge or establishment for consumption of beverages on premises One per 100 square feet of floor area or one per four seats, whichever is greater Drive-in restaurants Subject to approval by the Director Shopping centers Two spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area for each square foot up to 150,000 square feet, plus one space per 1,000 square feet for each square foot over 150,000 square feet of gross floor area Gasoline service station Four spaces per 1,000 square feet Convenience food stores Subject to approval by the Director Industrial uses One space per 1,500 square feet of gross floor area up to 20,000 square feet, and one space per 2,500 square feet of gross floor area in excess of 20,000 square feet, and one space per 300 square feet of office area Warehouse One space per 1,500 square feet of gross floor area up to 20,000 square feet, and one space per 2,500 square feet of gross floor area in excess of 20,000 square feet, and one space per 300 square feet of office area  
3.  Off-street parking lot layout, construction and maintenance. Whenever the required off-street parking requires the building of a parking lot, and wherever a parking lot is built, such parking lot shall be laid out, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the following regulations: 
a.  Except for parcels of land devoted to one- and two-family uses, all areas devoted to off-street parking shall be so designed and be of such size that no vehicle is required to back into a public street to obtain egress. 
b.  Each parking space shall be not less than 200 square feet in area (20 feet by ten feet) and shall be a marked stall adequate for one motor vehicle. 
c.  In any determination of parking requirements as set forth in this section, where the resultant figure contains a fraction, any fraction less than one-half may be dropped and any fraction of one-half or more shall be counted as one parking space. 
d.  Clearly defined driveways used for ingress and egress shall be confined to and shall not exceed 25 feet in width with one in one out entrance and 36 feet in width for one in two out entrance, exclusive of curb returns. 
e.  All areas devoted to permanent off-street parking as required under this section shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner that no dust will result from continuous use. 
f.  The parking lot shall be drained to eliminate surface water, or be constructed of pervious, dustless material so as to allow for percolation. 
g.  Where the parking lot abuts side lot lines of a residential district, there shall be established a setback line four feet from such side lot lines. 
h.  Where the parking lot is contiguous to a residential district which has common frontage in the same block with the parking lot, there shall be established a setback line ten feet from the street right-of-way. 
i.  Where the parking lot abuts rear property lines of a residential district, there shall be established a setback line four feet from the rear lot line. 
j.  Where parking is to be provided in the front yard of a multiple-family dwelling, there shall be established a setback line ten feet from the street right-of-way. 
k.  Landscaped buffers are required as specified in subsection 4-3.4. 
l.  Plans for the layout of a parking lot must be approved by the Planning and Zoning Board based on design standards specified in the current version of A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, AASHTO. 
m.  The Planning and Zoning Board shall have the authority to approve off-street parking in any district which is more restrictive than that required for the major land use it is intended to serve subject to the preceding conditions. 
n.  The landscaping requirements specified in section 4-3 shall apply to construction and maintenance of all parking lots. 
4.  Joint use of facilities. 
a.  Joint use of off-street parking for two or more buildings or uses shall be permitted in the following designated areas: 
i.  Mixed Use Special Treatment Area (MUSTA), 
ii.  Downtown Improvement Special Treatment Area (DISTA), 
iii.  Industrial Special Treatment Area (ISTA), and 
iv.  Distribution Park Special Treatment Area (DPSTA). 
b.  Off-site parking may be provided in the areas designated in 4-6.8.4.a. per the standards below. 
i.  Joint use parking facilities shared by uses which have different principal operating hours. The schedule of operation of all such land uses shall provide that none of the uses sharing the facilities normally require parking at the same time as the other uses sharing them. 
ii.  Joint use parking facilities shared by uses with similar operating hours. Parking requirements shall be calculated by adding the total number of spaces required by each separate function as listed in Table of Minimum Required Parking Spaces (subsection 4-6.8.2) and dividing the total by the appropriate factor from the Shared Parking Factor Matrix. 
Shared Parking Factor Matrix 
Residential Lodging Office Retail Public
Assembly Residential 1.0 1.2 1.6 1.4 1.4 Lodging 1.2 1.0 1.7 1.5 1.5 Office 1.6 1.7 1.0 1.4 1.6 Retail 1.4 1.5 1.4 1.0 1.6 Public Assembly 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.6 1.0  
Example: 10,000 square feet of retail and 10,000 square feet of office. 
Retail Requirement: 4 spaces/1,000 square feet 10,000 square feet/1,000 square feet = 10 * 4 spaces = 40 spaces. 
Office Requirement: 4 spaces/1,000 square feet 10,000 square feet/1,000 square feet = 10 * 4 spaces = 40 spaces. 
Total number of spaces per "Table of Minimum Required Parking Spaces" = 40 retail spaces + 40 office spaces = 80 spaces. 
Shared Parking Factor = 80 / 1.4 spaces = 57 spaces. 
Parking requirement with Shared Parking = 57 spaces. 
    4-6.9. Storage and parking of trailers and commercial vehicles. Commercial vehicles and commercial trailers shall not be parked or stored on any lot occupied by a dwelling or on any lot in any residential district except in accordance with the following provisions: 
1.  Not more than one commercial vehicle, which does not exceed a class 3 rating or gross vehicle weight rating of 14,000 pounds, per family living on the premises, shall be permitted; and in no case shall a commercial vehicle used for hauling explosives, gasoline or liquefied petroleum products be permitted. 
2.  A camping or travel trailer shall not be occupied either temporarily or permanently while it is parked or stored in any area except in a mobile home park or designated camping area. 
    4-6.10. General requirements for off-street loading and unloading requirements. In all districts, and on the same premises with every building, structure, or part thereof, erected and occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehouse goods, display, a department store, a wholesale store, a market, a hotel, a hospital, or other uses similarly involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for standing, loading and unloading services adjacent to the opening used for loading and unloading in order to avoid undue interference with public use of the streets or alleys. 
    Off-street loading and unloading space shall be provided as follows: 
1.  One off-street loading and unloading space shall be provided for buildings up to and including 20,000 square feet of floor area, plus one additional off-street loading and unloading space for each additional 20,000 square feet of floor area up to and including 100,000 square feet. 
2.  There shall be provided an additional off-street loading and unloading space for each additional 40,000 square feet of floor area in excess of 100,000 square feet. 
3.  Where trailer trucks are involved such loading and unloading space shall be an area 12 feet by 45 feet with a 14-foot height clearance and shall be designed with appropriate means of truck access to a street or alley as well as adequate maneuvering area. 
4.  All areas devoted to permanent off-street loading and unloading as required under this section shall be of a sealed-surface construction and maintained in such a manner that no dust will result from continuous use. 
    4-6.11. Handicapped parking requirements. 
1.  Any land use offering parking for the general public shall provide specially designed and marked motor vehicle parking spaces for the exclusive use of physically disabled persons. 
2.  Angles or perpendicular parking spaces shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide. 
3.  Parallel parking spaces shall be located either at the beginning or end of a block or adjacent to driveway entrances. 
4.  Each parking space shall be conspicuously outlined in blue paint and shall be posted and maintained with a permanent, above-grade sign bearing the international symbol of handicapped accessibility and the caption "Parking by Disabled Permit Only." 
5.  All spaces shall have an adjacent access aisle five feet wide minimum. 
6.  All spaces shall be accessible to a curb ramp when necessary. 
7.  The minimum number of special parking spaces shall be one per 25 total spaces up to 100 spaces. Above 100 spaces total add one additional space per 50 total spaces. 
Sec. 4-7. - Subdivision standards. 
    4-7.1. Purpose. The procedures and standards for the development and subdivision of real estate and for the surveying and platting thereof are necessary and appropriate in order to provide for economical and sufficient streets with adequate widths and with proper alignment and grades designed to promote the public safety, health and general welfare, to provide for the harmonious development of the City, for suitable residential neighborhoods with adequate and appropriate building sites, to save unnecessary expenditure of public funds by initial, proper, coordinated construction of streets and to secure adequate provision for water, drainage, sewers and other utilities and to provide proper land records for the convenience of the public and for better identification and permanent location of real estate boundaries. 
    4-7.2. Applicability. Any owner of land lying within the area of jurisdiction who wishes to divide such land into three or more lots, sites, or divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development, or who wishes to resubdivide for this purpose, shall submit a plan of such proposed subdivision to the Director for approval and shall obtain the approval of the City Commission prior to the filing of his subdivision plat for record. Any such plat of subdivision shall conform to the minimum standards set forth in this section and shall be presented in the manner specified in the following subsections. No plat of a subdivision of land within the area of jurisdiction shall be filed or recorded by the clerk of the circuit court without the approval of the City Commission as specified herein. 
    4-7.3. General requirements. 
1.  The following documentation shall accompany the plat: 
a.  A title opinion of an attorney licensed in the State of Florida or a certification by an abstractor or a title company stating that the public records identify that the title to the land as described and shown on the plat is in the name of the person, persons, or corporation executing the dedication. In addition, a document entitled "consent to platting of lands and partial release of mortgage" shall be filed together with the final plat for each person or corporation holding a mortgage on all land included on the plat where such person or corporation has not signed the final plat. 
b.  Certification by a registered land surveyor that the plat represents a survey made by that individual and, further, that all the necessary survey monuments, lot sizes, and lot dimensions are correctly shown thereon. Impressed thereon, and affixed thereto, shall be the personal seal and signature of the registered land surveyor by whom or under whose authority and direction the plat was prepared. 
c.  Certification that all real estate taxes have been paid. 
2.  Guarantee in lieu of completed improvements. No final subdivision plat shall be approved by the Planning and Zoning Board or the City Commission or accepted for record by the county clerk until one of the following conditions has been met: 
a.  All required improvements have been constructed in a satisfactory manner and approved by the City Manager or his authorized representative. 
b.  The City Commission has accepted a surety bond in an amount equal to the estimated cost of installation of the required improvements upon an estimate made by the Director and approved by the Planning and Zoning Board whereby improvements may be made and utilities installed without cost to the City of Marianna in the event of default of the subdivider. 
3.  If a homeowners association is to be used, it shall be identified on the plat. A copy of the bylaws and proof of recording shall be provided after review by the City Attorney. 
    4-7.4. Preliminary plat. 
1.  Any developer of any subdivision shall, prior to any land clearing, construction, or improvements, submit to the Director a preliminary plat. The preliminary plat review procedure is established to provide sufficient information regarding a proposed subdivision plat in order that the Department can evaluate the site development concept as it relates to the City's Comprehensive Plan in general, and for the property being subdivided in particular, and decide on the merits of the proposed subdivision. Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the Director, the Planning and Zoning Board, and the City Commission, the developer may proceed with the final plat and any other documents required pursuant to this Article. 
2.  All concurrency management requirements as set forth in Article III of this Code must be met. 
3.  At least 45 days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered, the subdivider shall submit to the Director three copies of a complete preliminary plat package of the proposed subdivision. 
4.  The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a surveyor or engineer, drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet, and shall include the following: 
a.  Every subdivision shall be given a name by which it shall be legally known. Such name shall not be the same or in any way so similar to any name appearing on any recorded plat in the same county as to confuse the records or to mislead the public as to the identity of the subdivision, except when the subdivision is subdivided as an additional unit or section by the same developer or his successors in title. Every subdivision's name shall have legible lettering of the same size and type, including the words "section," "unit," "replat," "amended," etc. The name of the subdivision shall be shown in the dedication and shall coincide exactly with the subdivision name. 
b.  The proposed subdivision's location, the name(s) and address(es) of the owner or owners, and the name of the designer of the plat. 
c.  Date, approximate north point, and graphic scale. 
d.  Identification clearly stating that the drawing is a preliminary plat. 
e.  The location of existing and platted property lines, existing streets, buildings, watercourses, railroads, sewers, bridges, culverts, drain pipes, water mains, and any public utility easements or lines, the zoning designation on the land to be subdivided and on the adjoining land, and the names of adjoining property owners or subdivisions. 
f.  Plans of public utility layouts showing feasible connections to the existing or any proposed utility systems. All utilities shall be placed underground unless, at the Planning and Zoning Board's discretion, such installation is not feasible. When water and sewer connections are not practicable, any proposed individual water supply and/or sewage disposal system must be approved by the appropriate state agencies. 
g.  All easements or rights-of-way provided for public services or utilities and any limitations of such easements. 
h.  The proposed street names and the locations and dimensions of proposed streets, alleys, easements, parks, and other open spaces, reservations, lot lines, building setback lines and utilities. 
i.  Contours at vertical intervals of not more than one foot except when specifically not required by the Planning and Zoning Board. 
j.  The acreage of the land to be subdivided. 
k.  Location map showing relationship of subdivision site to area. 
l.  All rights-of-way centerlines shall be shown with distances, angles, bearings or azimuth, points of curvature, arc distance, central angles, tangents, radii, chord, and chord bearing or azimuth or both. 
m.  All lot numbers and lines. Lot lines shall be marked with accurate dimensions in feet and hundredths of feet and bearings or angles to street lines. 
n.  Accurate descriptions of any area to be dedicated or reserved for public use with the purpose indicated thereon. 
o.  Title, date of survey, graphic scale of map, and north arrow. The bearing of azimuth reference shall be clearly stated on the face of the plat in the notes or legend. 
p.  Permanent reference monuments shall be placed in accordance with requirements of the county. 
q.  Each plat shall show a description of the lands platted and the description shall be the same in the title certification. The description shall be so complete that from it, without reference to the plat, the starting point and boundary can be determined. 
r.  The clerk of the circuit court's certificate and the land surveyor's certificate and seal. 
s.  All section lines and quarters section lines occurring in the map or plat shall be indicated by lines drawn upon the map or plat with appropriate words and figures. If the description is by metes and bounds, the point of beginning shall be indicated together with all bearings and distances of the boundary lines. If the platted lands are in a land grant or are not included in the subdivision of government surveys, then the boundaries are to be defined by metes and bounds and courses. The point of beginning in the description shall be tied to the nearest government corner or other recorded and well-established corner. 
t.  All contiguous properties shall be identified by plat title, plat book and page number, or as unplatted land. If the area platted is a replatting of a part of the whole of a previously recorded plat, sufficient ties shall be shown to controlling lines appearing on the earlier plat to permit an overlay to be made and reference to the replatting shall be stated as a subtitle following the name of the plat wherever it appears on the plat. 
u.  All lots shall be numbered either by progressive numbers or, if in blocks, progressively numbered or lettered in each block, except that blocks in numbered additions bearing the same name may be numbered consecutively throughout the several additions. 
v.  Park and recreation parcels shall be so designated. 
w.  All interior excepted parcels shall be clearly indicated and labeled "Not a part of this plat." 
x.  The purpose and ownership of all areas dedicated must be clearly indicated or stated on the plat. 
y.  When it is not possible to show curve detail information on the map, a tabular form may be used. 
5.  One copy of the preliminary plat will be retained in the Planning and Zoning Board files; one copy shall be returned to the subdivider with any notations at the time of approval or disapproval and the specific changes, if any, required; and one copy shall be filed with the Director. 
6.  The approval of the preliminary plat by the Planning and Zoning Board will not constitute acceptance of the final plat and will not be indicated on the preliminary plat. 
7.  The approval of the preliminary plat shall lapse unless a final plat based thereon is submitted within eighteen months from the date of such approval unless a one-time eighteen month extension of time is applied for and granted by the Planning and Zoning Board. 
8.  Every subdivision shall be required to construct or install all improvements including streets, utilities, drainage, etc., before the final plat is filed. All improvements shall be constructed to established City and State standards. 
    4-7.5. Final plat. 
1.  The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved; and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which he proposes to record and develop at the time, provided however, that such portion conforms to all requirements of these standards. 
2.  Every plat of a subdivision offered for recording shall conform to the following: 
a.  An original drawing made with black permanent drawing ink or varitype process on a good grade linen tracing cloth or with a suitable permanent black drawing ink on a stable base film, a minimum of 0.003 inches thick, coated upon completion with a suitable plastic material to prevent flaking and to assure permanent legibility; or 
b.  A nonadhered scaled print on a stable base film made by photographic processes from a film scribing tested for residual hypo testing solution to assure permanency. 
Marginal lines, standard certificates and approval forms shall be printed on the plat with a permanent black drawing ink. A reproducible copy of the original drawing shall be submitted with the original drawing. 
3.  Information required on the final plat in a form satisfactory to the City shall include: 
a.  All blocks, lots, streets, crosswalks, easements and waterways within and adjacent to the plat, all of which shall have all angular and linear dimensions given and all radii, internal angles, bearings, points of curvature, tangents and lengths of all curves, so that no dimensions or data are missing which are required for the future location of any of the corners or boundaries of blocks, lots, or streets, as listed above. When any lot or portion of the plat is bounded by an irregular line, the major portion of that lot or plat shall be enclosed by a witness line showing complete data with distances along such lines extended beyond the enclosure to the irregular boundary shown with as much certainty as can be determined or as "more or less" if variable. All dimensions shall be given to the nearest hundredth of a foot. True angles and distances shall be drawn to the nearest established official monuments, not less than three (3) of which shall be accurately described on the plat. The intended use of all easements shall be clearly stated. 
b.  Curvilinear lots shall show arc distances and radii, chord and chord bearing. Radial lines will be so designated. Direction of nonradial lines shall be so indicated. 
c.  Sufficient angles and bearings shall identify the direction of all lines and shall be shown to the nearest second. 
4.  The Planning and Zoning Board and Director shall approve or disapprove the final plat within 60 days after its submission. Failure of the Planning and Zoning Board to act on the final plat within such 60-day period shall be deemed approval of it. If the plat is disapproved, the grounds for disapproval shall be stated upon the records of the Planning and Zoning Board. 
Upon approval of the final plat by the Planning and Zoning Board and Director, or if no action is taken by the board within 50 days of the submission of the plat, it shall be referred to the City Commission with recommendations of final action. When the plat has been approved by the City Commission, one copy will be returned to the subdivider with the approval of the City Commission certified thereon for filing with the clerk of circuit court, as the official plat of record. The original tracing containing all required certifications will be returned to the subdivider for his records and the third copy will be retained in the records of the City. If the plat is disapproved, the grounds for disapproval shall be stated upon the records of the City Commission. 
5.  Before a plat is offered for recording, it shall be approved by the City Commission and evidence of such approval shall be placed on such plat. If not approved, the City Commission shall return the plat to the land surveyor. Approval of the final plat by the City Commission shall constitute the acceptance by the public of the dedication of any public streets or other public way or ground. 
6.  After the approval by the City Commission, the plat shall be recorded by the circuit court clerk or other recording officer upon submission thereto of such approved plat. Two copies of the recorded plat must be provided to the Municipal Development Department by the applicant. 
7.  Dedication and approval. 
a.  Every plat of a subdivision filed for record must contain a dedication by the developer. The dedication shall be executed by all developers having a record interest in the lands subdivided, in the same manner in which deeds are required to be executed. All mortgagees having a record interest in the lands subdivided shall execute, in the same manner in which deeds are required to be executed, either the dedication contained on the plat or a separate instrument joining in and ratifying the plat and all dedications and reservations thereon. 
b.  When a tract or parcel of land has been subdivided and a plat thereof bearing the dedication executed by the developers and mortgagees having a record interest in the lands subdivided and the approval of the City Commission has been secured and recorded in compliance with this section, all streets, alleys, easements, rights-of-way, and public areas shown on such plat, unless otherwise stated, shall be deemed to have been dedicated to the public for the uses and purposes thereon stated. However, nothing herein shall be construed as creating an obligation upon the City to perform any act of construction or maintenance within such dedicated areas except when the obligation is voluntarily assumed by the City. 
8.  The following certificates shall be presented with the final plat: 
a.  Certification showing that applicant is the landowner and dedicates streets, rights-of-way and any sites for public use and that all taxes due on the land shall have been paid prior to the time of filing the plat. 
b.  Certification by surveyor or engineer to accuracy of survey and plat and placement of monuments. 
c.  Certification by appropriate state agencies approving planned sewage disposal and water system which are to be installed and dedicated to the City. 
d.  Certification of approval to be signed by the mayor, City Clerk and City Manager. 
    4-7.6. Minimum design standards. 
1.  Supervision of work. All work shall be constructed under the supervision of the developer's engineer, who shall be authorized to require and who shall require that it be constructed in accordance with the development plan and the requirements of this section. He shall have authority to make minor changes in the development plan consistent with these requirements, but major changes shall not be made without the prior approval of the Director and City Manager. All necessary certificates indicating the satisfactory installation of the water distribution system and quality of the water as well as the certificates indicating the approval of the sanitary sewer systems by appropriate state agencies are the responsibility of the subdivider's engineer. 
2.  Measurements and tests required. During construction the developer's engineer shall cause to be made such field and laboratory tests as are needed to assure that the work and materials conform with the development plan and the requirements of this section. The results of these tests shall be submitted to the City Manager and Director in duplicate. 
3.  Streets and public ways. Location and construction of all streets shall be as specified in section 4-6 of this Code. The proposed street system shall extend existing streets or projects. They shall be extended at a width no less than the required minimum width. 
Subdivisions that adjoin existing streets shall dedicate additional right-of-way to meet minimum street width requirements. 
a.  The entire right-of-way shall be provided where any part of the subdivision is on both sides of the existing street. 
b.  When the subdivision is located on only one side of an existing street, one-half of the required right-of-way, measured from the centerline of the existing roadway, shall be provided. 
All subdivisions shall be designed and constructed so that driveways or vehicular access for each lot do not directly connect onto any arterial or collector roadway. Where possible, lots should be arranged so that front lot lines do not abut any arterial or collector roadway. 
Where possible a grid network shall be provided and cul-de-sacs shall be avoided. If unavoidable, minor terminal streets or courts designed to have one end permanently closed shall be no more than 500 feet long unless necessitated by topography. They shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least 80 feet and a street right-of-way diameter of at least 100 feet or the Planning and Zoning Board may approve an alternate design. 
Where, in the opinion of the Planning and Zoning Board, it is desirable to provide for street access to adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of such property. Such dead-end streets shall be provided with a temporary turnaround having a roadway diameter of at least 80 feet. 
c.  Traffic calming measures shall be provided by the applicant when deemed appropriate by the Director. 
d.  Street lighting and landscaping shall be required within the public ways. 
i.  Street lighting shall be installed on both sides of the street a maximum of 100 feet apart. The general preference shall be for smaller, but more frequent light fixtures rather than fewer high-intensity lights. All fixtures, whether wall mounted or freestanding, shall be total cutoff and directed downward to reduce glare on adjacent properties. 
ii.  Drought tolerant plants shall be used in all common areas, stormwater areas, and entryways. Invasive species shall be prohibited. A landscape plan shall be submitted as part of the development review process. 
4.  Blocks. 
a.  Length. Blocks shall not be less than 500 feet nor more than 1,200 feet in length, except as the Planning and Zoning Board considers necessary to secure efficient use of land or desired features of street pattern. In blocks over 800 feet in length the Planning and Zoning Board may require one or more public crosswalks of not less than ten feet in width to extend entirely across the block and at locations deemed necessary. 
b.  Width. Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two rows of lots, except where reverse frontage on major streets is provided or where prevented by topographical conditions or size of the property, in which case the Planning and Zoning Board may approve a single row of lots of a minimum depth not less than 150 feet. 
5.  Lots. 
a.  Adequate building sites. Each lot shall contain a building site outside the limits of any existing easement or building setback lines required in section 4-1. 
b.  Arrangement. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines. Each lot must front upon a public street or road which is not less than 60 feet in width. 
c.  Minimum size. The size, shape, and orientation of lots shall be as the Planning and Zoning Board deems appropriate for the type of development and use contemplated. Where public water and sanitary sewer systems are reasonably accessible, the subdivider shall connect with such systems and provide a connection or connections to each lot. Where a public sewer is not accessible, an alternate method of sewage disposal may be used, if it meets all applicable public health regulations. Where possible, septic tanks should be placed in front yards to facilitate future connection onto the central sewer system. 
Residential lots not served by public water and sanitary sewer systems shall not be less than 100 feet wide at the building setback line nor less than 21,780 square feet in area; provided, however, greater area may be required by the Planning and Zoning Board as indicated by data from percolation tests and investigations or as determined by the City, or state agencies. 
d.  Corner lots. Corner lots shall have sufficient width to conform to the side yard and setback requirements specified in section 4-1. 
6.  Public use and service areas. Due consideration shall be given to the allocation of areas suitably located and of adequate size for playgrounds and parks for local or neighborhood use as well as for use as public service areas. 
a.  Public open space. In the same manner as the subdivider shall dedicate necessary rights-of-way and easements the subdivider shall also be required to dedicate land for recreational purposes for the inhabitants of the subdivision. 
All sites designated in subdivision plats for public parks and recreation areas shall be dedicated in the plat and also deeded to the City for this purpose. When a subdivision covers an area within which a park or recreation site is shown in the Comprehensive Plan of the City, provision shall be made for the reservation of the site in the plat for a period of one year to enable the City to purchase or make satisfactory arrangements for acquisition of said site. If the City fails to act within one year, the subdivider may replat the reserved site. 
Developers of residential subdivisions consisting of over ten residential lots shall provide land area to be dedicated for public or private recreation use. Land area dedicated for residential use shall be at least equal to the size of one residential lot for each ten lots shown on the plat, and shall be located on upland property with the same site characteristics as the subdivision as a whole. Upon approval of the City Commission, developers may provide funds in lieu of property dedication if such funds are at least equal to the market value of the total lots required for recreation purposes. 
If agreement cannot be reached as to a land value, the value shall be determined by arbitration. The City Commission shall appoint a professional land appraiser, the subdivider shall appoint a professional land appraiser, and these two shall appoint a third. 
b.  Easements for utilities. Except where alleys are permitted for the purpose, the Planning and Zoning Board may require easements not less than 20 feet in width, for poles, wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water or other utility lines along all rear lot lines, along side lot lines if necessary, or if advisable, in the opinion of the Planning and Zoning Board. Easements of the same or greater width may be required along the lines of or across lots, where necessary for the extension of existing or planned utilities. 
c.  Community assets. In all subdivisions due regard shall be shown for all natural features such as large trees and watercourses, and for historical spots and similar community assets which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the property. 
7.  Suitability of the land. Neither the Planning and Zoning Board nor the City Commission shall approve the subdivision of land, if, from adequate investigations conducted by all public agencies concerned, it has been determined that in the best interest of the public, the site is not suitable for platting and development purposes of the kind proposed. 
Land subject to flooding and land deemed to be topographically unsuitable shall not be platted for residential occupancy, or for any other uses that may increase flood hazard, endanger health, life or property, or aggravate erosion. Such land within the plat shall be set aside for such uses as shall not be endangered by periodic or occasional inundation or shall not produce unsatisfactory living conditions. 
Fill may not be used to raise land in areas subject to flood unless the fill proposed does not restrict the flow of water and unduly increase flood heights. 
8.  Large tracts or parcels. When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged so as to allow for the opening of streets in the future and for logical further resubdivision. 
9.  Group housing development. A comprehensive group housing development, including the large scale construction of housing units together with necessary drives and ways of access, may be approved by the City Commission although the design of the project does not include standard streets, lot and subdivision arrangements, if departure from the foregoing standards can be made without destroying their intent. 
10.  Utilities. All utilities including electric, telephone, water, sewer, gas, etc., shall be installed and maintained as specified in section 4-5 of this Code. Where feasible, all utilities shall be placed underground. 
11.  Other required improvements. Other improvements such as curb and gutter, sidewalks, bicycle paths or other similar features may be required as considered necessary by the City. For sidewalk and bicycle path standards, refer to section 4-6.7 of this Code. 
    4-7.7. Development prerequisite to final approval. Every subdivision developer shall be required to construct or install all improvements including streets, utilities, drainage, etc., before offering any lots or parcels for sale. All improvements shall be constructed to established City standards. 
    4-7.8. Restrictions. 
1.  No person who is the owner or agent of the owner of any subdivision shall transfer, sell, agree to sell, or negotiate to sell, such subdivided land without first having obtained approval of a plat of such subdivision and having recorded the same as is required by this section. 
2.  No person who is the owner or agent of the owner of any land shall transfer, sell, agree to sell or negotiate to sell such land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat of subdivision of such land without having submitted a plan and plat of such subdivision for approval as required by this section and recorded the approved subdivision plat as required. 
3.  No person shall file or record or attempt to file or record a plat of a subdivision within the City without the approval of such plat as required by this section. 
4.  No clerk of circuit court or other public official shall receive, file, or record a plat of a subdivision within the City without the approval of such plat as required by this section. 
5.  It shall be the duty of the Director to enforce the provisions of this section. He shall refuse to grant a permit for the use of premises for the construction of or alteration of any building if the same will be in violation of any of the provisions of this section. Any misstatement or inaccuracy on the application for a permit or any violation of the provisions of this section will be sufficient grounds for the denial or revocation of a permit by the Director. 
Sec. 4-8. - Manufactured homes and manufactured home parks. 
    4-8.1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide standards for the location and placement of individual manufactured homes, manufactured home parks or manufactured home subdivisions. 
    4-8.2. Applicability. Manufactured homes to be placed or otherwise located within the City shall comply with requirements specified herein. Manufactured homes shall be used for residential purposes only. 
    4-8.3. Individual manufactured homes on individual lots (not part of a manufactured home park or subdivision). 
1.  Residential design manufactured homes. 
a.  Intent. It is the intent of this regulation to encourage the provision of affordable housing in a general residential environment by permitting the use of residential design manufactured housing, RDMH as defined herein, in residential districts in which similar dwellings constructed onsite are permitted, subject to the requirements and procedures set forth herein to assure similarity in exterior appearance between such residential design manufactured housing and dwellings which have been constructed under these and other applicable regulations on contiguous or other lots in the same district. 
Manufactured homes approved by RDMH, either individually or by specific model, shall be permitted in specific zoning districts as set forth in this Article in which similar residential occupancy is permitted as defined in subsection 2.(b) below, subject to all requirements and limitations applying generally to such residential use in such zoning districts, including but not limited to minimum lot, yard and building spacing, percentage of lot coverage, off-street parking requirements and approved foundations as described herein. 
b.  Standards for determination of similarity in exterior appearance, RDMH. The following standards shall be used in determinations of similarity in appearance between RDMH homes, with foundations approved as provided in this subsection and site built homes. 
i.  Minimum width of main body. Minimum width of the main body of the RDMH as located on the site shall not be less than twenty feet, as measured across the narrowest portion. This is not intended to prohibit the offsetting of portions of the home. 
ii.  Minimum roof pitch, minimum roof overhang, roofing materials. Minimum pitch of the main roof shall be not less than one foot of rise for four feet of horizontal and minimum roof overhang shall be six inches. In cases where site built housing generally has been constructed in adjacent or nearby locations with roof pitches less than 3:12 and/or roof overhangs are less than six inches, then the RDMH may have less roof pitch and overhang similar to the site built houses. In general, any roofing material may be used which is generally used for site built houses. 
iii.  Exterior finish; light reflection. Any material may be used for exterior finish which is generally acceptable for housing provided, however, that reflection for such exterior shall not be greater than from siding coated with clean white gloss exterior enamel. 
iv.  Foundation. RDMH shall be placed upon a permanent foundation. Permanent foundation shall mean: 
(a)  Installation of the home according to Chapter 15C-1, Florida Administrative Code; and 
(b)  Construction of a permanent, perimeter stem wall designed and constructed to comply with the standard building Code specifications for exterior non-load bearing walls, extending at a minimum from the ground surface to the bottom starter of the exterior wall surfaces of the home as approved by the Director and building official. 
(c)  The Director may predetermine and establish general approval for specific types, varieties or designs of foundations and veneer or screening materials to be used in connection with future installation of a RDMH. 
c.  Procedures for approval of RDMH. Approval for RDMH shall be authorized by the Director. 
i.  Applications for RDMH approval. Applications for approval of manufactured homes as RDMH shall be submitted to the Director in such form as may be required to make determinations. In particular, in addition to such information as is generally required for permits and as is necessary for administrative purposes, such applications shall include all information necessary to make determinations as to conformity with the standards herein, including elevations or photographs of all sides of the RDMH, exterior dimensions, roof pitch, exterior finish, and the like. 
ii.  Foundation specifications. Where there has been prior general approval of foundations proposed to be used, as provided in the standards herein, detailed specifications or descriptions of such foundations shall not be required. Where it is proposed to use foundations not previously approved, specifications or descriptions shall be supplied in sufficient detail for determinations as provided in the standards herein. 
Where type of foundation to be used is unknown at the time of application for RDMH determinations for models or individual manufactured homes, approval as RDMH may be granted if otherwise appropriate, but locations and use for residential purposes shall be subject to the limitations in section 1.b.iv. 
2.  Standard design manufactured homes. 
a.  SDMH placement. Standard design manufactured homes (SDMH) shall be placed only in manufactured home parks or manufactured home subdivisions. 
b.  Private temporary use. A SDMH may be used in any zoning district as a temporary office or shelter for materials or tools (but not for residential purposes except in cases where it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Director that for security reasons such occupancy is necessary and essential and except as provided otherwise herein) incidental to construction on or development of the premises upon which the manufactured home is located; such use shall be strictly limited to the time construction or development is actively underway. In no event shall the use continue more than six months without further approval of the Director, and he/she shall give such further approval only upon finding that actual construction is continuing. 
c.  Government temporary use. Any agency of local, state or federal government may utilize a SDMH for temporary public purposes in any zoning district. 
3.  Mobile homes. 
a.  Due to the lack of comprehensive implementation of federal building and safety standards for transportable structures manufactured prior to June 15, 1976, no mobile homes manufactured before June 15, 1976, shall be permitted in any zoning district of the City. The sale, resale, installation or transportation of a mobile home that was imported in violation of this subsection is strictly prohibited. The Director may grant limited waivers for the sole purpose of transporting a substandard mobile home out of the City or to a permitted site for demolition and disposal. 
b.  Except where expressly preempted by the requirements of the Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles, a mobile home owner or the park owner shall be allowed to site any size new or used mobile home and appurtenances on a mobile home lot in accordance with the lot sizes, separation and setback distances, and other requirements in effect at the time of the approval of the mobile home park in accordance with F.S. § 723.041. 
c.  No person shall park or store an unoccupied mobile home in a residential zoning district except in a completely enclosed structure, unless otherwise provided for herein. 
d.  Mobile homes may be used as a temporary residence incidental to construction on or development of property for a residential use on which the mobile home is located only during the time in which construction or development is actively underway, and in no case for more than six months, subject to renewal. Such use is subject to the approval of the Director. 
    4-8.4. Manufactured home parks. 
1.  Zoning districts. Manufactured home parks may be allowed as a conditional use in the R-2 district and as an allowable use in the R-3 and mixed use districts. 
2.  Development standards. The following property development standards shall apply for all manufactured home parks: 
a.  No parcel of land containing less than five manufactured home spaces, available at the time of first occupancy, shall be used for a manufactured home park. However, the plans submitted for approval as required in paragraph 5, "Application for approval," shall be designed for a minimum of 25 manufactured home units. 
b.  The manufactured home park shall be subject to the density provisions of the district in which it is located, provided, however, there shall be not less than 5,000 square feet of lot area for each space provided on the site. This space ratio shall include access roads, automobile parking, accessory building space, and recreational area. 
c.  The manufactured home park shall be located on a well-drained site, properly graded to ensure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water. 
d.  Yards. 
i.  Each manufactured home park shall have a front yard of 25 feet extending for the full width of the parcel devoted to said use. 
ii.  Each manufactured home park shall have a rear yard and a side yard on both sides of the parcel devoted to said use of not less than ten feet. 
iii.  Where a side or rear yard abuts a street, the yard shall be not less than 25 feet and all yards shall be landscaped and maintained. 
e.  No building or structure erected or stationed in this park shall have a height greater than one story or 15 feet. 
f.  A manufactured home park shall be entirely enclosed, exclusive of driveways, at its external boundaries by a solid wall, fence, or evergreen hedge not less than seven feet in height. Such wall, fence, or hedge shall not be constructed or planted within the required front yard setback. 
g.  Each manufactured home park shall be permitted to display on each street frontage one identifying sign of a maximum size of nine square feet. Said sign shall contain thereon only the name and address of the manufactured home park and may be lighted by indirect lighting only. 
3.  Manufactured home space requirements. Each manufactured home space shall be of sufficient size that, in addition to the home, the following areas shall be provided: 
a.  Each manufactured home space shall be at least 30 feet wide and such space shall be clearly defined by permanent markers. 
b.  There shall be a front yard setback of ten feet from all access roads within the manufactured home park. 
c.  Manufactured homes shall be so harbored on each space so that there shall be at least a 20-foot clearance between mobile homes, and their accessory structures such as carports, patio covers or storage areas, provided, however, with respect to manufactured homes parked end-to-end, the end-to-end clearance of the manufactured home and its accessory structures shall be not less than ten feet. No manufactured home shall be located closer than 20 feet from any building within the manufactured home park. 
d.  There shall be at least one paved, off-street parking space for each manufactured home space which shall be on the same site as the manufactured home served, and may be located in the rear or side yard of said manufactured home space. 
e.  Each manufactured home space shall be provided with a paved patio of at least 200 square feet. 
4.  General provisions. 
a.  There shall be established and maintained within each park an automobile parking area for the use of guests. The number of spaces within this area shall be equal to one for every four manufactured home sites. 
b.  Access roads within a manufactured home park shall be paved to a width of not less than 24 feet. Where access roads are paved to a width of 32 feet or more, the required guest parking area shall be waived. 
c.  Manufactured home spaces may abut upon a driveway of not less than 20 feet in width, which shall have unobstructed access to the access road within the manufactured home park. The sole vehicular access shall not be by alley, and all dead-end driveways shall include adequate vehicular turning space or cul-de-sac. 
d.  A minimum of six inches of compacted gravel, or other suitable pavement material, shall be installed for each manufactured home space. Size of pads shall be as follows: 
Five percent: Ten feet by 40 feet or larger. 
Ninety percent: Ten feet by 50 feet or larger. 
Five percent: Ten feet by 60 feet or larger. 
e.  Walkways not less than two feet wide shall be provided from the manufactured home spaces to service buildings. 
f.  Each manufactured home space shall be provided with a connection to a sanitary sewer line or to a sewer system approved by state agencies. 
g.  There shall be provided a park and recreation area having a minimum of 150 square feet for each manufactured home space. Areas shall be consolidated into usable areas with minimum dimensions of not less than 30 feet. 
h.  Each manufactured home park shall be provided with a management office and such service buildings as are necessary to provide facilities for mail distribution, storage space for supplies, maintenance materials and equipment, and laundry facilities equipped with washing machines and dryers. Outside drying yards shall be enclosed with a six-foot-high solid fence. 
i.  Manufactured homes, with or without toilet facilities, that cannot be connected to a sanitary sewer line shall not be permitted in a manufactured home park. 
j.  Cabanas and other similar enclosed structures are prohibited. 
k.  Manufactured homes shall not be used for commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential uses within the manufactured home parks. 
5.  Application for approval. Applications for approval of manufactured home parks shall be filed with the Director. A development order may be issued by the Director after review and approval by the Planning and Zoning Board and the City Commission. Each application for approval shall be accompanied by three copies of a site plan drawn to an acceptable scale and certified by a professional engineer or architect licensed in the state. For each site plan the following information shall be shown: 
a.  The location and legal description of the proposed manufactured home park. 
b.  Plans and specifications of all buildings, improvements and facilities constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home park. 
c.  The proposed use of buildings shown on the site. 
d.  The location and size of all manufactured home spaces. 
e.  The location of all points of entry and exit for motor vehicles and internal circulation pattern. 
f.  The location of all landscaping to be provided. 
g.  The location of all lighting standards to be provided. 
h.  The location of all walls and fences and the indication of their height and the materials of their construction. 
i.  The location of all off-street parking facilities. 
j.  The name and address of the applicant. 
k.  Such other architectural and engineering data as may be required to permit the Director and Planning and Zoning Board to determine if the provisions of this section are being complied with. 
A time schedule for development shall be prepared, which shall demonstrate the applicant's readiness and ability to provide the proposed services. Said time shall be for a period of not more than one year. 
Sec. 4-9. - Transfer of development rights. 
    4-9.1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish a transfer of development rights (TDR) program to permanently preserve sensitive natural resources and important agricultural lands within the City of Marianna. 
    4-9.2. Applicability. This section shall apply within the City of Marianna and shall regulate the transfer of development rights from a specific TDR sending area to a specific TDR receiving site. 
    4-9.3. Definitions. 
1.  Development Rights. The quantity of residential density that may be transferred from a TDR sending area to a receiving area. 
2.  TDR Receiving Area. A parcel on which development rights may be received from a TDR Sending Area in accordance with this section. 
3.  TDR sending area. A parcel on which development rights may be severed and transferred to a TDR receiving area in accordance with this section. 
4.  Sever or severance. The removal, termination, or separation of all development rights from a TDR Sending Area pursuant to a deed that assures the TDR Sending Area will remain undeveloped in perpetuity. 
    4-9.4. Transfer of development rights regulations. 
1.  TDR sending areas. Lands within the Conservation zoning categories on the City of Marianna Zoning Map shall be designated sending areas. 
2.  TDR receiving areas. Receiving areas shall be the Residential-3, Mixed Use, and Commercial zoning designations on the City of Marianna Zoning Map. 
3.  Calculation of development rights. A transfer of units shall be allowed on a 1 to 1 basis to any other parcel within the designated receiving area in the City, outside of the sending area. 
4.  Development activities. In order to utilize the additional development rights an applicant must complete the development review process as outlined in Section 2-4. 
    4-9.5. Application to transfer development rights. 
1.  The applicant for a transfer of development rights shall submit to the City of Marianna Municipal Development Department an application to transfer development rights containing the following information: 
a.  An affidavit that the applicant is the owner(s) of the TDR receiving area or is the owner's authorize representative, in which event the affidavit will also be signed by the owner(s) of the TDR receiving area authorizing such representation and stating that the affidavit is submitted pursuant to this article. 
b.  An affidavit by the owner(s) of the TDR sending area or the owner's authorized representative in which event the affidavit will also be signed by the owner(s) of the TDR sending area authorizing such representation and stating that the affidavit is submitted pursuant to this section. 
c.  Legal description and survey of the lot(s) or parcel(s) in the TDR sending area from which the transfer of development rights will be severed. 
d.  Legal description and survey of the parcel(s) in the TDR receiving area that will receive the transferred development rights. 
e.  A title commitment demonstrating that clear title is held by the owner(s) of the TDR sending area, free and clear of mortgages, liens, or other encumbrances. 
f.  A narrative describing the resources and public benefit to be preserved on the TDR sending area following the transfer of development rights, accompanied by an existing conditions plan of the TDR sending area showing the boundaries of the TDR sending area, existing dwelling units and structures, submerged lands, any area already in a conservation easement or other similar encumbrance. 
g.  Data supporting the computation of the amount of transferable development rights of the TDR sending area to be transferred to the TDR receiving area. 
h.  Data supporting the ability of the proposed TDR receiving area to accommodate the transfer of development rights, including data which demonstrates that adequate public facilities and services, including roads, drainage, potable water, sanitary sewer, and police and fire protection, will exist to serve the development of the TDR receiving area at the time of development, and that the TDR receiving area is otherwise suitable for development, and does not contain regionally or locally significant resources or environmentally sensitive areas that will be adversely affected by the transfer of development rights. 
i.  Map of the TDR sending area and the TDR receiving area. 
j.  A statement of intent signed by the owner(s) of the TDR sending area acknowledging severance of development rights for the subject parcel. 
k.  A proposed Deed of Transfer of Development Rights in a form acceptable to the City Attorney to be executed by the owner(s) of the TDR sending area as grantor stating that all development rights have been severed from the TDR sending area and transferred to the owner(s) of the TDR receiving area as grantee. 
l.  The application fee, which shall include funds sufficient to fully satisfy fees and other costs necessary to conclude the transfer of the TDR sending area. 
2.  An application to transfer development rights may accompany an application for a development order. 
    4-9.6. Administrative Review and Approval of the Application to Transfer Development Rights. 
1.  The Municipal Development Director or its designee shall review the application and deem the application complete or incomplete with ten (10) working days after the application is received. Applicants with incomplete applications will be notified as to deficiencies and the fact that the application will not be processed further until the deficiencies are corrected. 
2.  Upon receipt of a complete application, the Municipal Development Director shall review and approve the application after determining that the application is be consistent with the criteria listed below. 
a.  The transfer of development rights shall be consistent with all applicable provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, Land Development Regulations, and this Section. 
b.  The transfer of development rights shall not adversely affect adjacent properties in terms of creating a nuisance, reduction in property values, or other quantifiable measure. 
c.  The TDR sending area and the TDR receiving area have been adequately described by legal description and location map. 
d.  The total amount of development rights proposed to be transferred is accurate, fully identified, and authorized by this Article. 
e.  The TDR sending area has not previously transferred available development rights. 
f.  The TDR sending area shall be maintained in a natural state. 
g.  Data demonstrates that adequate public facilities and services, including roads, drainage, potable water, sanitary sewer, and police and fire protection, will exist to serve the development of the TDR receiving area at the time of development. 
h.  The TDR receiving area is suitable for development; it does not contain regionally or locally significant resources, important agricultural lands, or environmentally sensitive areas that will be adversely affected by the transfer of development rights; and that concurrency management requirements be not be exceeded. 
i.  There will be no adverse effects on regionally or locally significant resources, important agricultural lands, or environmentally sensitive areas resulting from the transfer of development rights. 
j.  Ensure that the appropriate application fees have been paid. 
3.  The Municipal Development Director shall approve or deny the application to transfer development rights in writing within thirty (30) days after receipt of the application, which shall describe the type and amount of development rights severed from the TDR sending area and transferred to the TDR receiving area. A copy of the decision shall be provided to the applicant by certified mail. 
4.  Appeals of the Development Services Director's decision shall be as set forth in Section 2-6.5. 
    4-9.7. Transfer of Development Rights Monitoring. 
1.  The City shall maintain a tracking system to record and monitor the transfer of development rights, which shall be maintained by the Municipal Development Department. 
2.  Each parcel included within a Deed of Transfer of Development Rights shall have an individual record. Each record shall at a minimum include the following information: 
a.  Name and address of the property owner of the TDR sending area and the TDR receiving area. 
b.  Address and legal description of the TDR sending area and the TDR receiving area. 
c.  Zoning classification and land use designation on the future land use map of the TDR sending area and the TDR receiving area. 
d.  Number of and type of development rights transferred to or from the TDR sending area from the TDR receiving area. 
e.  Date of approval of the application for transfer of development rights. 
f.  Book and page number and date the Deed of Transfer of Development Rights; and 
g.  Date of development order for the TDR receiving area utilizing the transferred development rights. 
3.  The Municipal Development Department shall maintain a map identifying TDR sending areas that have transferred development rights as well as TDR receiving areas that acquired development rights. 
Article V - SIGN REGULATIONS 

Sec. 5-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this Article shall be to coordinate the type, placement, and physical dimensions of signs within the City; to recognize the commercial communication requirements of all sectors of the business community; to encourage the innovative use of design; to promote both renovation and proper maintenance; and to guarantee equal treatment under the law through accurate record keeping and consistent enforcement. These shall be accomplished by regulation of the display, erection, use, and maintenance of signs. The placement and physical dimensions of signs are regulated primarily by type and length of street frontage. No sign shall be permitted as a principal or accessory use except in accordance with the provisions of this Article. 
Sec. 5-2. - Scope. 
    This Article shall not relate to building design. Nor shall this Article regulate official traffic control or governmental signs; the copy and message of signs; window displays; product dispensers and point of purchase displays; scoreboards on athletic fields; flags of any nation, government, or noncommercial organization; gravestones; barber poles; religious symbols; commemorative plaques; the display of street numbers: or any display or construction not defined herein as a sign. 
Sec. 5-3. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to this Article in addition to those set forth in section 1-5 of this Code. 
    Abandoned sign. A sign which no longer identifies or advertises a bona fide business, lessor, service, owner, product, or activity, and/or for which no legal owner can be found. 
    Animated sign. Any sign which uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or to create a special effect, scrolling message display, or scene (compare flashing sign ). 
    Awning. A shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building constructed of nonrigid materials on a supporting framework (compare marquee ). 
    Awning sign. A sign painted on, printed on, or attached flat against the surface of an awning. 
    Bandit sign. Any sign placed on wooden stakes or wire supports that are driven into the ground. 
    Banner sign. A sign made of fabric or any nonrigid material with no enclosing framework. 
    Beacon light. Any light with one or more beams, which flash or have a strobe effect and are capable of being directed in any direction in any or all directions or revolve automatically. 
    Bench sign. Shall mean a sign located on any part of a bench or seat placed on or adjacent to the public right-of-way. 
    Billboard. Any freestanding on- or off-premises sign with at least one large panel designed to carry outdoor advertising that is erected on a parcel whose surface is typically rented or sold to advertise a use, establishment, product, activity or service, produced, manufactured, located, provided or furnished. (See also off-premise sign or stacked billboard ). 
    Changeable copy sign (automatic). A sign on which the copy changes automatically on a lamp bank or through mechanical means, e.g. electrical or electronic time and temperature units. Each message displayed shall remain fixed for at least eight seconds. When a message is changed, it must be accomplished within an interval of two seconds or less. 
    Changeable copy sign (manual). A sign on which copy is changed manually in the field, e.g., reader boards with changeable letters. 
    Changeable message signs (CMS). An off-premise advertising sign, display, or device which changes the message or copy on the sign by means of electronic rotation or panels or slats. CMS's are considered outdoor advertising signs and must comply with all requirements applicable to outdoor advertising signs. CMS's may not include lighting devices forming part of the message or border, video or scrolling messages. Each message displayed shall remain fixed for at least eight seconds. When a message is changed, it must be accomplished within an interval of two seconds or less. CMS must contain a default design that will freeze the sign in one position if a malfunction occurs. 
    Clearance (of a sign). The smallest vertical distance between the surface grade beneath the sign and the lowest point of the sign, including framework, embellishments, poles and supports, extending over that grade. 
    Construction sign. A temporary sign identifying an architect, a contractor, a subcontractor, materials supplier and/or the lending institutions participating in the construction on the site where the sign is placed. 
    Copy. The wording on a sign surface in either permanent or removable letter form. 
    Digital billboard. A sign displaying static images controlled by electronic communications. Each image/message displayed shall remain fixed for at least eight seconds. When an image/message is changed, it must be accomplished within an interval of two seconds or less. 
    Directional/information sign. An on-premise sign giving directions, instructions, or facility information and which may not contain the name or logo of an establishment or any advertising copy, e.g., parking or exit and entrance signs. Directional/Informational signs are exempt from setback requirements, provided sign locations are approved by the planning Director to not be a safety or traffic concern. 
    Directory. A sign which lists businesses within a multiple occupancy building. 
    Dissolve. A transition between static message displays that is achieved with varying light intensity and where the first message gradually appears to dissipate and lose legibility simultaneous to the gradual appearance and legibility of the subsequent message. 
    Double-faced sign. A sign with two faces. 
    Electrical sign. A sign or sign structure in which electrical wiring, connections, or fixtures are used. 
    Electronic message center. (See changeable copy sign, automatic ). 
    Erect. To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix and shall also include the painting of wall/building signs. 
    Facade. The entire building front including the parapet. 
    Face of sign. The area of the sign in which the copy is placed. 
    Fade. A transition between static message displays that is achieved with varying light intensity and where the first message gradually loses light intensity to the point of not being legible and the subsequent message gradually increases intensity to the point of legibility. 
    Festoons. A string of ribbons, tinsel, small flags, or pinwheels. 
    Flashing. A pattern of changing light illumination where the sign illumination alternates suddenly between fully illuminated and fully non-illuminated in a time frame of less than four seconds. (Static "dwell" time is typically four-ten seconds.) 
    Flashing portable or on-premises sign. A sign which contains an intermittent, sequential, or rotating light source or which, through reflection or other means, creates an illusion of flashing, intermittent, or rotation light. Does not include changeable copy signs. 
    Freestanding sign. A sign supported upon the ground by poles or braces and not attached to any building. This definition does not include banners affixed to a building, awning, or sign structure. 
    Frontage. The full length of the property line of any one premise measured along a public right-of-way on which it borders. A property may have more than one frontage if it borders more than one right-of-way (i.e. corner lots). 
    Frontage, building. The full length of an outside building wall facing a public right-of-way measured along the wall which faces the right-of-way. A building may have more than one frontage (i.e. buildings located on corner lots). There cannot be any other structures between the building wall and the right-of-way to count the building frontage. 
    Governmental sign. Any temporary or permanent sign erected and maintained by the City, county, state, or federal government or any agency thereof including boards, districts, etc. 
    Height (of a sign). The vertical distance measured from the highest point of the sign, including embellishments, to the grade of the adjacent street or the surface grade beneath the sign, whichever is greater. 
    High-rise sign. An on premise mono pole sign used for the purpose of intrastate highway advertising which cannot be higher than 150 feet. 
    Identification sign. A sign whose copy is limited to the name and address of a building, institution, or person and/or to the activity or occupation being identified. 
    Illegal sign. A sign which does not meet the requirements of this Article and which has not received legal nonconforming status. 
    Illuminated sign. A sign with an artificial light source incorporated internally or externally for the purpose of illuminating the sign. 
    Incidental sign. A small sign, emblem, or decal, located on the window or wall of the building, informing the public of goods, facilities, or services available on the premises, e.g., a credit card sign or sign indicating hours of business. 
    Institutional sign. One sign per street front, setting forth or denoting the name of any public, charitable, or religious institution, when located on the premises of such an establishment. 
    Integral sign. Shall mean memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings, and date of the erection of the building, when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible materials mounted on the face of a building, i.e. a corner stone. 
    Intermittent. A pattern of changing light intensity, other than that achieved with immediate, fade or dissolve transitions, where any message remains static at least four seconds. 
    Interstate highway. Means the existing, unbuilt or unopened system of highways or portions thereof designated as part of the national system of intrastate and defense highways by the department of transportation. 
    Location. Shall mean any lot; premises, building, structure, wall or any place whatsoever upon where a sign is located. 
    Maintenance. For the purposes of this Article, the cleaning, painting, repair, or replacement of defective parts of a sign in a manner that does not alter the basic copy, design, or structure of the sign. 
    Mansard. A sloped roof or roof-like facade architecturally comparable to a building wall. 
    Marquee. A permanent roof like structure or canopy of rigid materials supported by and extending from the facade of a building (compare awning ). 
    Marquee sign. Any sign attached to or supported by a marquee structure. 
    Moving light. The physical change in position of any visible illumination source while lighted or the simulation of movement achieved with a pattern of sequentially illuminating visible illumination sources within close proximity to each other. (Static "dwell" time is typically four-ten seconds.) 
    Multiple occupancy. A building with more than one business, each of which has a separate entrance, either on the inside or outside of the building, shall be deemed as a multiple occupancy building. 
    Nameplate. A non-electric on-premise identification sign giving only the name, address, and/or occupation of an occupant or group of occupants. 
    Nonconforming sign. 
(1)  A sign which was erected legally but which does not comply with subsequently enacted sign restrictions and regulations. 
(2)  A sign which does not conform to the requirements provided herein but for which a variance has been issued. 
    Occupancy. The portion of a building or premise owned, leased, rented, or otherwise occupied for a given use. 
    Off-premise sign. A sign structure advertising an establishment, merchandise, service, or entertainment, which is not sold, produced, manufactured, or furnished at the property on which said sign is located, e.g., "billboards" or "outdoor advertising." 
    On-premise sign. A sign which pertains to the use of the premises on which it is located. 
    Owner. A person recorded as such on official records. For the purposes of this Article, the owner of property on which a sign is located is presumed to be the owner of the sign unless facts to the contrary are officially recorded or otherwise brought to the attention of the Director, e.g., a sign leased from a sign company. 
    Painted wall sign. Any sign which is applied with paint or similar substance on the face of a wall. 
    Parapet. The extension of a false front or wall above a roofline. 
    Permanent sign. Any permitted monument, freestanding or building sign installed to be used in excess of 12 months from the date of installation, designed to be permanently affixed to the ground or building and meets windload requirements set forth in the Florida Building Code. 
    Point of purchase display. Advertising of a retail item accompanying its display, e.g., an advertisement on a product dispenser. 
    Political sign. For the purposes of this Code, a: temporary sign used in connection with a local, state, or national election or referendum. 
    Portable sign. Any sign designed to be moved easily, which does not meet windload requirements as set forth in the Florida Building Code, and/or is nor permanently affixed to the ground, a structure or building or which is attachable to a vehicle and is designed to be transported from one place to another whether on its own trailer, wheels or otherwise. Characteristically a portable sign will have removable lettering and symbols and requires an external source of power. 
    Premises. A parcel of land with its appurtenances and buildings which, because of its unity of use, may be regarded as the smallest conveyable unit of real estate. 
    Projecting sign. A sign, other than a flat wall sign, which is attached to and projects more than six inches from a building wall or other structure not specifically designed to support the sign. 
    Public signs. Signs which are of a public or noncommercial nature, which shall include government community service information signs, public transit service, public utility informational or location signs, safety or danger signs, trespassing signs, signs which indicate scenic or historic points of interest and all signs erected by a public officer in the performance of a public duty. 
    Real estate sign. A temporary sign advertising the real estate upon which the sign is located as being for rent, lease, or sale. 
    Roof sign. Any sign erected over or on the roof of a building (compare mansard, wall sign ). 
    Roofline. The top edge of a roof or building parapet, whichever is higher, excluding any cupolas, pylons, chimneys, or minor projections. 
    Rotating sign. A sign in which the sign itself or any portion of the sign moves in a revolving or similar manner. Such motion does not refer to methods of changing copy. 
    Sandwich board sign. A freestanding temporary sign, with no moving parts or lights, no larger than seven square feet total sign size; displayed outside a business, during business hours, to advertise the business, hours of operation, an event, a promotion, etc. 
    Setback. The distance between the lot line or public right-of-way and the leading edge of the sign. In no case may a sign extend over the right-of-way line of any public way. 
    Sign. Any device, structure, fixture, or placard using graphics, symbols, and/or written copy designed specifically for the purpose of advertising or identifying any establishment, product, goods, or services. 
    Sign, area of. 
(1)  Projecting and freestanding. The area of a freestanding or projecting sign may have two sign faces each of which may be up to the same square footage on each side as allowed herein. The area of the sign shall be measured as follows if the sign is composed of one or more individual cabinets: 
The area around and enclosing the perimeter of each cabinet or module shall be summed and then totaled to determine total area. The perimeter of measurable area shall not include embellishments such as pole covers, framing, decorative roofing, etc., provided that there is not written advertising copy on such embellishments. 
(2)  Wall signs. The area shall be within a single, continuous perimeter composed of any straight line geometric figure which encloses the extreme limits of the advertising message. The combined areas of the individual figures shall be considered the total sign area. 
    Smartboards. An off-premise advertising sign, display, or device that changes the message or copy on the sign by means of a liquid crystal display. Smartboards may not incorporate animation in the copy or change of copy. Smartboard signs must contain a default design that will freeze the sign in one position if a malfunction occurs. Each image/message displayed shall remain fixed for at least eight seconds. When an image/message is changed, it must be accomplished within an interval of two seconds or less. 
    Snipe sign. A temporary sign or poster affixed to a tree, fence, etc. 
    Stacked billboard(s). A billboard style design located adjacent to the interstate which has two facings on each side for a total allowable amount of four facings. 
    Street banner sign. Shall mean any temporary banner which is stretched across and hung over a public right-of-way. 
    Subdivision or tract name sign. An externally or internally illuminated freestanding or wall sign which may not exceed 32 square feet in area and is a recognized subdivision, condominium complex, or residential development. 
    Temporary sign. A sign not constructed or intended for long-term use, includes but is not limited to portable signs, banners, streamers, pennants, festoons, snipe signs and other similar non-permanent signs. 
    Under-canopy sign. A sign suspended beneath a canopy, ceiling, roof, or marquee. 
    Under-marquee sign. A sign suspended beneath a marquee. 
    Use. The purpose for which a building, lot, sign, or structure is intended, designed, occupied, or maintained. 
    Vehicle sign. A sign erected or placed on a vehicle, including automobiles, trucks, boats, campers, and trailers, which are parked on or otherwise utilizing the public right-of-way, or on private property so as to be viewed from the vehicular right-of-way for the basic purpose of providing advertisement or products, services or directions to a business. This definition is not to be construed to include those signs which are adhered to a vehicle for the purpose of identifying a company and used to traverse public highways or devices attached which are customarily attached to a vehicle of mass transit. 
    Wall sign. Shall mean a sign painted on or erected parallel to and extending not more than six inches from the wall of a building. This definition includes painted, individual letter(s), cabinet signs, and signs on a mansard, or parapet. This definition does not include banners affixed to a building, awning, or sign structure. These signs will be confined within the limits of the outside wall or building and will have one face. 
    Window sign. A sign installed inside a window and intended to be viewed from the outside. 
Sec. 5-4. - Applicability. 
    No person shall erect, place or maintain a sign within the City except in accordance with the provisions of this Article. 
Sec. 5-5. - Prohibited signs. 
    The following signs are prohibited in all areas of the City: 
1.  Abandoned signs; 
2.  Any non-governmental sign located within a dedicated City street right-of-way unless specifically authorized by the City; 
3.  Flashing, fluttering, undulating, swinging, rotating, or otherwise moving or animated signs; except for City approved under-marquee and under-canopy signs in the Main Street District; 
4.  Any sign which blocks or restricts the sight distance of a motor vehicle operator at any driveway or intersection; 
5.  Any sign for which any part of the sign extends over, across, or above any public way, including roadways and sidewalks, except governmental signs and City approved under-canopy and under-marquee signs in the Main Street District; 
6.  Any sign using the words "Stop", "danger", "detour" or any comparable word phrase and symbols which would normally be associated with traffic directions, in a manner that tends to mislead, confuse or distract the driver of a vehicle, shall be prohibited; 
7.  Portable signs. The use of portable signs as defined in this Code is prohibited, except as permitted in section 5-11.1 of this Code; 
8.  Vehicle signs. The use of vehicle signs as defined in section 5-3 of this Code is prohibited; 
9.  Beacon lighting as defined in this Code is prohibited; 
10.  Bench signs as defined by this Code are prohibited within the corporate City limits of the City of Marianna; 
11.  Banners, pennants, streamers, balloons, flags, or flying paraphernalia, with the exception of official federal, state, county, or educational institution flags, and one symbolic flag for each institution or business, except as permitted in section 5-11.1 of this Code; 
12.  Signs erected or maintained upon trees or painted or drawn upon rocks or other natural features with the exception of "posted property" signs; 
13.  Tethered inflatable signs, whether on-site or off-site; 
14.  Bandit signs, either on-site or off-site, except for real estate signs and as allowed in section 5-11.1(12); 
15.  Towers or other structures erected for advertising purposes, which do not meet windload requirements as set forth in the Florida Building Code and/or are determined by the planning Director to be a public safety concern; 
16.  Snipe signs, except as allowed in section 5-7.11; and 
17.  Signs that are of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or impair the vision of any motorist, cyclist, or pedestrian using or entering the public way, or that are a hazard or a nuisance to occupants of any property because of glare or other characteristics. 
Sec. 5-6. - Permits required. 
    No person shall erect, place or construct any sign without first obtaining a permit from the City except as specified in section 5-7. No permit is required for the maintenance of a sign or for a change of copy on, printed or changeable copy signs. 
Sec. 5-7. - Signs not requiring permits. 
    The following types of signs are exempted from permit requirements but must be in conformance with all other requirements of this Article. 
1.  Construction signs of 32 square feet or less, including bandit signs. 
2.  Directional/information signs of four square feet or less located behind the applicable setbacks. 
3.  Holiday or special events decorations. 
4.  Name plates of two square feet or less. 
5.  Political signs. 
6.  Public signs or notices, or any sign relating to an emergency. 
7.  Real estate signs. 
8.  Non-permanent window signs. 
9.  Incidental signs. 
10.  "For sale" signs of two square feet or less. 
11.  Snipe signs for garage sales, yard sales or similar events in residential and mixed use districts provided that the sign is not in the City or state right-of-way, the owner has permission from the property owner for placement of the sign and the sign is removed by the installer within 24 hours of the sale or event. 
12.  Bandit signs and banners at public events on City recreational property provided they are removed after the event. 
13.  Signs located at City or school recreational areas provided by sponsors. 
14.  Integral signs as defined in this Code. 
Sec. 5-8. - Maintenance. 
    All signs shall be properly maintained. Exposed surfaces shall be clean and painted if paint is required. Defective parts shall be replaced. The City Commission shall have the authority under subsection 5-16.5 to order the repair or removal of any sign which is defective, damaged, or substantially deteriorated. 
Sec. 5-9. - Changeable copy, changeable message signs and smartboards. 
    Unless otherwise specified by this Article, any sign herein allowed may use manual or automatic changeable copy. Changeable message signs and smartboards are also allowed, unless otherwise specified by this Article. No display or device shall be illuminated by any rapid flashing light or lights. Dissolve and fade are allowed, provided the lighting does not flash. Animation is prohibited. No advertising sign shall be erected or maintained which involves rapid motion or rotation of the structure. 
Sec. 5-10. - Lighting/illumination. 
    Unless otherwise specified by this Article, all signs may be lighted or illuminated consistent with the following provisions: 
1.  Sign lighting shall not be installed or located so as to cause confusion with traffic control lights. 
2.  Illumination by spotlights or floodlights or other signs that are of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or impair vision are not allowed if the light emitted shines onto an adjoining property or into the eyes of persons driving, cycling, or walking upon any roadway or sidewalk. 
3.  Exposed incandescent lights shall not be used for lighting outdoor signs. 
4.  Revolving beacons and flashing lights are prohibited. 
Sec. 5-11. - Allowable on-premises signs-Zoning districts. 
    5-11.1. Allowable signs in all districts. The following signs are allowed in all districts: 
1.  All signs not requiring permits. 
2.  One construction sign for each street frontage of construction project, not to exceed 32 square feet in sign area. Such signs may be erected 120 days prior to beginning of construction and shall be removed 30 days following completion of construction. 
3.  One non-illuminated real estate sign per lot or premises, per street front will be allowed. They are not to exceed six square feet in sign area in residential districts and 32 square feet in the mixed use and commercial districts. Such signs must be removed ten days following sale, rental, or lease. 
4.  One attached nameplate per occupancy, not to exceed four square feet in sign, area. 
5.  Political signs not to exceed six square feet in residential districts and 32 square feet in nonresidential district. All political signs shall be removed within 14 days after the election or runoff. 
6.  Four directional/information signs per business, not to exceed four square feet in area, provided that the directional/information sign does not contain any name or logo, and provided that the location of any such directional information signs is approved by the municipal development Director. 
7.  One temporary special events sign and decoration per premises for special public events, grand openings, closings, going-out-of-business, or holidays. Such signs and decorations may be erected 30 days prior to a special event or holiday and shall be removed ten days following the event or holiday. For grand openings such signs may be used for no more than 14 days. 
8.  Temporary banners for civic events or events of general public good extending across the public right-of-way at locations specified by the planning board. Such banners shall be up no more than 14 days. 
9.  "For sale" signs advertising vehicles, boats or other similar items for sale by owner provided such sign does not exceed two square feet of sign area. 
10.  Temporary banners, balloons and streamers for special sales events are allowed once each quarter for 16 days. The business owner must apply for a permit a minimum of five business days prior to the event. The permitted banners, balloons and streamers must not be located in the public right-of-way. The permitted banners, balloons and streamers must not endanger the health and/or safety of the public. 
11.  During the hours of business operation one non-illuminated/non-powered A-frame or T-frame menu/sandwich sign may be displayed per business frontage. The sign may be a maximum of three and one-half feet tall by three feet wide. The sign must allow a minimum of four feet of clearance on the sidewalk and cannot impede pedestrian traffic. Under no circumstances may the sign be displayed when the business is closed. The sign must be constructed of wood, metal or a similar sturdy and attractive material as approved by the municipal development Director. Under no circumstances will cardboard construction be allowed. 
12.  Nonprofit 501(c)(3) or similarly designated organizations may erect bandit signs for a period not to exceed five days quarterly. The sign owner shall be responsible for removal of the sign within two days after the five-day period expires. 
    5-11.2. Permitted signs in residential district. The following signs shall be permitted in residential zoning districts; all other signs are prohibited. 
1.  All signs permitted in subsection 5-11.1. 
2.  Two subdivision or apartment identification signs per residential development, not to exceed 32 square feet of sign area. 
3.  Signs describing a home occupation or home office of convenience provided signs are mounted flat against the wall of the building; there are no more than one sign per residence; and, the sign does not exceed four square feet of sign area. 
4.  For churches, synagogues or similar institutional uses one freestanding sign not to exceed 32 square feet in sign area, and one wall sign not to exceed 24 square feet in sign area. 
5.  All allowed freestanding signs in residential districts shall have a height limit of seven feet and shall have a setback of ten feet from all lot lines and any public right-of-way. 
6.  All freestanding signs in the residential district must be constructed so that the minimum lowest point ground clearance is less than three feet, so as to either prevent persons from walking under or through the sign or sign structure. 
    5-11.3. Permitted signs in mixed use (MU) districts. The following signs shall be permitted in MU districts; all other signs are prohibited. 
1.  All signs permitted in subsection 5-11.2. 
2.  Two identification signs per apartment, townhouse, condominium or other multifamily residential development, not to exceed 32 square feet of sign area. 
3.  For commercial development allowed in MU districts, one freestanding sign per premises not to exceed 24 square feet of sign area and one wall sign not to exceed 24 square feet of sign area. 
4.  All allowed freestanding signs in MU districts shall have a height limit of ten feet and shall have a setback of ten feet from all lot lines and any public right-of-way except for electrified signs in areas subject to vehicular traffic which shall have a height limit of 16 feet. Electrified signs in areas subject to vehicular traffic shall have a height limit of 16 feet and shall have a setback of ten feet from all lot lines and any public right-of-way. In no case may a sign extend over the right-of-way line or any public way. 
5.  All free standing signs in the MU district must be constructed so that the minimum lowest point ground clearance is either less than three or more than seven feet so as to either prevent or allow persons to walk under or through the sign or sign structure. 
    5-11.4. Permitted signs in commercial and industrial districts. The following signs shall be permitted in commercial and industrial districts; all others are prohibited. 
1.  All signs permitted in subsection 5-11.3. 
2.  One freestanding sign per premises and street front is allowed. This sign may not exceed one square foot in sign area for each linear foot of main street frontage. If the property is a shopping center only one freestanding sign is allowed per street front. Where the premises is located on a corner or has more than one public street frontage, one additional freestanding sign will be allowed on the additional frontage, not to exceed the size of other allowed freestanding signs. If linear footage exceeds 300 feet a second pylon is allowed as long as total square footage of all signage does not exceed one square foot per linear foot. 
3.  All freestanding signs shall be located at least ten feet from all lot lines and public right-of-way lines. In no case may a sign extend over the right-of-way line or any public way. In the case of electrified signs, the bottom of the sign and the outline lighting enclosure shall not be less than 16 feet above grade in areas accessible by on-site vehicular traffic. 
4.  No part of any sign shall be located within a 25-foot radius of the intersection of the improved surface of any two streets or the improved surface of any street and railroad unless any part of the sign extending over or into this radius has at least ten feet of clearance. 
5.  No part of any sign shall be located within a 15-foot radius of the intersection of any driveway and the improved surface of any street unless any part of the sign extending over or into this radius has at least ten feet of clearance. 
6.  Wall signs shall not exceed an aggregate area of one square foot in sign area for each linear foot of that occupancy's building frontage. 
7.  Awning and marquee signs are measured by copy area only. 
8.  One under-canopy sign per occupancy, not to exceed eight square feet in sign area. 
9.  Incidental signs not to exceed four square feet in aggregate sign area per occupancy. 
10.  The maximum permitted height for any on-premise sign in a nonresidential district shall be 50 feet above the surface grade beneath the sign. 
11.  Projecting signs shall conform to the requirements of the Florida Building Code and shall be permitted only where a public sidewalk abuts the side of the building on which the projecting sign is affixed. 
12.  All free standing signs in commercial and industrial districts must be constructed so that the minimum lowest point ground clearance is either less than three or more than seven feet so as to either prevent or allow persons to walk under or through the sign or sign structure. 
13.  Temporary banners for announcements that are of general public good (excluding sales events, grand openings, closings and similar events) are allowed in ISTA and DPSTA with the posting time to be determined by the Director or City Manager. 
    5-11.5. Permitted signs in public/institutional (P/I) and recreation (REC) districts. The following signs shall be permitted in P/I and REC districts; all others are prohibited. 
1.  All government signs. 
2.  For any non-government use, one freestanding sign not to exceed 32 square feet of sign area, and one wall sign not to exceed 24 square feet of wall area. 
3.  All allowed freestanding signs in P/I or recreation districts shall have a height limit of 11 feet and shall have a setback of ten feet from all lot lines and any public rights-of-way. Electrified signs in areas subject to on-site vehicular traffic shall have a height limit of 16 feet and shall have a setback of ten feet from all lot lines and any public rights-of-way. In no case may a sign extend over the right-of-way line or any public way. 
4.  All free standing signs in P/I and recreation districts must be constructed so that the minimum lowest point ground clearance is either less than three or more than seven feet, so as to either prevent or allow persons to walk under or through the sign or sign structure. 
    5-11.6 DISTA sign regulations. The following regulations shall apply to all signs which are permitted in existing and future DISTA areas. All others shall be prohibited. Realizing that sign appearances have a proven impact on business patronage, the following requirements shall be fulfilled. 
1.  The total building allowable signage is 35 percent of the primary-entry building frontage (i.e. wall facing public right-of-way where the front door is located). One sign from each of the two following categories may be chosen for each individual frontage: 
a.  Vehicle category. A sign which is designated or placed with the intent of being seen by customers driving by. One of the following: 
i.  Projecting above the awning. 
ii.  Awning. 
iii.  Flush mounted on the wall above the awning. 
b.  Pedestrian category. A sign which is intended to draw in customers who are walking by the location. One of the following: 
i.  Window. 
ii.  Projecting under the awning. 
iii.  Hanging under the awning. 
2.  Flush mounted signs are permitted on the exterior of the buildings and above the awnings in the DISTA and shall not be more than two feet six inches high, four inches deep and the allowable length shall be three-fourths foot by every linear foot of store frontage with a maximum length of 30 feet. Placement below the awnings is allowed as long as it conforms to the size and shape of the wall where it is to be placed. 
3.  Flush mounted back lit signs, consisting of only logs and letters, are permitted on the exterior of the buildings and above the awnings in the DISTA and shall not be more than 18 inches high and the allowable length shall be three-fourths foot for every linear foot of store frontage with a maximum length of 15 feet. Placement below the awning is not allowed. Boxed back lit signs are not allowed. 
4.  Projecting signs are permitted in the DISTA subject to the following requirements 
a.  Shall be signs which project more than six inches from the wall. 
b.  Shall show engineered certification of meeting the applicable wind load requirements. 
c.  Shall be limited to the overall size of 30 square feet. 
5.  Window signs may not obscure the display area. Not more than 30 percent of the total window space per frontage can be used for signage. 
6.  Menu signs are permitted in the DISTA subject to the following requirements: 
a.  One Menu Sign per restaurant shall be permitted when contained within a display box mounted on the building where the restaurant is located or on a display located near the front of the building where the restaurant is located. 
b.  The face area of menu signs shall be a maximum of six (6) square feet in size. 
c.  Menu signs shall be located so as to not interfere with outward opening doors or windows, or to impede traffic on sidewalks. 
d.  Menu signs must architecturally compliment and coordinate with the building where the business is located. 
e.  Menu signs are only allowed during the restaurant's hours of operation. After hours the signs must be stored inside. 
f.  Menu signs must be secured to prevent the sign from being blown by the wind into the street or pedestrian traffic. 
7.  City provided signs. 
a.  One A-frame or T-frame menu/sandwich sign shall be provided by the City of Marianna when new businesses open within the limits of the DISTA for temporary display in the front of the business. The sign may be a maximum of three and one-half feet tall by three feet wide. The sign must allow a minimum of four feet of clearance on the sidewalk and cannot impede pedestrian traffic. Under no circumstances may the sign be displayed when the business is closed. The sign must be constructed of wood, metal or a similar sturdy and attractive material as approved by the municipal development Director. 
b.  One under-canopy sign per occupancy, not to exceed eight square feet in sign area shall be provided by the City of Marianna when new businesses open within the limits of the DISTA. 
c.  Existing businesses will be provided standardized sandwich board and under-canopy signs on a phased basis over a period of five years beginning in 2014. 
d.  Upon closure of business within the DISTA, signage shall be returned to the City of Marianna. 
8.  Signs shall not cover existing architectural features, such as windows or cornices. Where the upper portion of the building facade is occupied by decorative features, an alternate location for signs must be found. Awnings and store front windows may be used as alternatives provided that they meet other sign and life safety Code regulations. 
9.  Buildings with divided suites may have flush mounted Directories. These Directories will count as part of the total 35 percent sign area allowed. 
10.  All relief lettering and numbering which are original to the building and are deemed to be historic, must remain in place and be maintained. The historic architectural elements may not be covered or altered. 
11.  Neon signs are allowed in the DISTA as long as they meet other applicable sign requirements. 
12.  Materials which will be allowed in the DISTA for signs include: wood, masonry, metal, opaque or translucent material, glass, or man made products which are designed to closely reflect the look of such materials. 
13.  Existing establishments with signage, in operation and open to the public on the effective date of this ordinance, shall be considered permitted nonconforming signs. All DISTA signs which are nonconforming at the effective date of this ordinance, shall have the following incentive plan for coming into compliance within three years: 
a.  Applications received within the first year from the effective date of this ordinance will have development order fees waived. 
b.  Applications received within the second year will receive 75 percent discount of the development order fee in effect at that time. 
c.  Applications received in the third year will receive a 50 percent discount of the development order fee in effect at the time. All DISTA signs which do not come into compliance utilizing the three year incentive plan will be subject to the full development order fee that is in effect at that time. 
14.  Once an existing nonconforming sign is removed for more than 180 days, the sign must be brought into compliance and future signs must meet the requirements of Article 5 of this Code. 
15.  All abandoned signs and sign poles must be taken down within one year of the effective date of this ordinance, or the property owner will be charged with the cost to contract to have the work done in accordance with section 5-16.5 of this Code. 
Sec. 5-12. - Portable signs. 
    Portable signs as defined by this Code are prohibited within the corporate City limits of Marianna. 
Sec. 5-13. - On- and off-premises signs (billboards and high rise signs). 
    In addition to any regulations applying to signs in general, the following regulations shall apply to off-premises signs and billboards. 
    5-13.1. Location. 
1.  Off-premises signs and billboards shall only be located, installed or constructed on Penn Avenue (Hwy. 276) and 1-10 within a one half mile radius of the SR276/I-10 interchange measured from the middle of the median between the two lanes. 
2.  No off-premises sign or billboard shall be located closer than 1,000 feet to any other off premises sign on the same side on any street, on the route of travel. The distance shall be measured along the nearest edge of the pavement at points directly opposite the center of the sign and located on the same side of the same street. 
3.  Unless otherwise provided for in this Article, off-premises signs and billboards shall comply with the same heights, setback and sight distance requirements as all other signs. 
4.  No off-premises signs or billboards shall be located closer than 100 feet to any residential district or any property used for residential purposes, unless separated from it by a street or building. Must meet Florida Building Code height. 
5.  All off-premises signs and billboards located adjacent to state roads shall be subject to the provisions of F.S. ch. 479, in addition to this Article. 
6.  Billboard signs may be stacked one on top of the other as long as they can meet all other applicable Codes. They can have two faces on each side for a total of four facings. The height limit shall be 65 feet. 
7.  Off-premise signs shall be permitted within the COM, MU, IND, REC zoning designations provided they are 32 square feet or less, have a maximum height of 10 feet, a maximum width of 4 feet, and do not obstruct traffic vision. 
8.  Off-premise signs are prohibited within the DISTA. 
    5-13.2. Development standards. 
1.  The lowest portion of any billboard must be at least 16 feet above the surface grade beneath the sign. 
2.  No billboard shall be illuminated by or contain flashing intermittent, rotating or moving light or lights used primarily to attract attention, excluding electronic message centers or time and temperature. 
3.  All billboards shall be all-metal single-pole construction except for the skirt which may be of other durable materials. 
4.  The maximum permitted height for any off-premise sign or billboard shall be 65 feet above the surface grade beneath the sign or the maximum height permitted in the district within which the sign is located. 
    5-13.3 All billboards, whether on- or off-premises signs, shall conform to the provisions of the signage regulations, including section 5-13. Any lawful nonconforming billboards existing after February 2, 1999, shall be brought into conformance with the requirements of Article 5 of this Code as follows: 
1.  Any modification, except for sign maintenance and repair, of an existing nonconforming sign, requiring a sign permit (e.g. change of sign face, structure modifications, etc.) shall be in compliance with the sign standards; 
2.  All nonconforming billboards shall be removed or otherwise made to comply with the sign standards by December 1, 2015. 
    5-13.4 On-premise signs (high-rise signs). 
1.  High-rise signs will be allowed to be erected at businesses which are located within one quarter mile of Interstate 10. For the purpose of this Code, high-rise signs shall be considered as on-premise signs. These signs shall be allowed in addition to the total amount of signage otherwise allowed for the zone in which the land is located. 
2.  High-rise signage shall not exceed 150 feet in height. 
3.  High-rise signage shall not exceed 500 square feet in frontage, per face, with a total of four facings to be allowed. 
4.  High-rise signs cannot be located any closer than 500 feet apart. 
5.  When located in a parking lot or traffic way, the base of these signs must have protective barriers capable of stopping vehicular traffic in a safe manner included in the site plan drawings. 
6.  Animation will be allowed on high-rise signs. 
Sec. 5-14. - Nonconforming signs. 
    Existing, permanent signs which do not conform to the provisions of this Article shall be legally nonconforming provided that: 
1.  The Director determines that such signs are properly maintained and do not in any way endanger the public. 
2.  Such signs are not located on any public right-of-way. 
    5-14.1. Loss of legally nonconforming status. A legal nonconforming sign shall lose this designation if: 
1.  The sign is relocated or replaced; 
2.  The structure or size of the sign is altered in any way except towards compliance with this Article (this does not refer to normal maintenance); 
3.  The sign is a billboard sign that meets the requirements set forth in 5-13. 
    5-14.2. Maintenance and repair of nonconforming signs. The legal nonconforming sign is subject to all requirements of this Article regarding safety, maintenance, and repair. However, if the sign suffers more than 50 percent appraised damage or deterioration; it must be brought into conformance with this Code or removed. 
Sec. 5-15. - Construction standards. 
    All permanent signs shall be constructed and erected in accordance with the requirements of the Florida Building Code and the National Electrical. Code, and as specified in this section. 
    5-15.1. Anchoring. 
1.  No sign shall be suspended by nonrigid attachments that will allow the sign to swing in a wind, except for under-canopy and under-marquee signs. 
2.  All freestanding signs shall have self-supporting structures erected on or permanently attached to concrete foundations. 
    5-15.2. Wind loads. All signs shall be designed and constructed to meet the wind loading requirements as set forth in the Florida Building Code. In addition, on all signs 30 feet or greater in overall height, the drawings and structural specifications submitted for permitting shall bear the seal and signature of a Florida registered engineer. 
    5-15.3. Additional construction specifications. 
1.  No signs shall be erected, constructed, or maintained so as to obstruct any fire escape, required exit, window or door opening used as a means of egress. 
2.  No sign shall be attached in any form, shape or manner which will interfere with any opening required for ventilation. 
3.  Signs shall be located in such a way as to maintain horizontal and vertical clearance of all overhead electrical conductors in accordance with National Electrical Code specifications, depending on voltages concerned. 
4.  All signs containing electrical components shall be constructed or located according to the specifications of the Florida Building Code, the National Electrical Code as well as the specifications of Underwriters Laboratories or other approved testing agency. All such signs shall have a clearly visible testing agency label permanently affixed. 
5.  Any freestanding sign, whether for on or off-premises use, which has a sign area of 100 square feet or more shall be all-metal single-pole construction except for the skirt which may be of other durable materials. 
6.  All exposed metals, unless galvanized or non-corrosive materials, shall be painted. 
Sec. 5-16. - Administration. 
    5-16.1. Administration. The Director shall be authorized to process applications for permits and variances, schedule public hearings as required, and enforce and carry out all provisions of this Article, both in letter and in spirit. 
    The Director is empowered, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter or inspect any building, structure, or premises in the City for the purpose of inspecting a sign and its structural and electrical connections to ensure compliance with all applicable Codes and ordinances. The Director may be accompanied by other appropriate inspectors or officials necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of applicable Codes and ordinances. Such inspections shall be carried out during business hours unless an emergency exists. 
    5-16.2. Application for permits. Application for a permit for the erection, alteration, location or relocation of a sign shall be made to the Director upon a form provided by the City and shall include the following information: 
1.  Name and address of the owner of the sign. 
2.  Street address or location of the property on which the sign is to be located, along with the name and address of the property owner. 
3.  The type of sign structure as defined in this Article. 
4.  A site plan showing the proposed location of the sign along with the locations and square footage areas of all existing on the same premises. 
5.  Specifications and scale drawings showing the materials, design, dimensions, structural supports, and electrical components of the proposed sign. 
    5-16.3. Issuance and denial. The Director or the staff designee will approve all signs which do not require a variance, or modification of the Code. If a sign should need a variance or other decisions beyond staff level authority, a variance request shall be submitted in writing and the applicable administrative procedure(s), including proper public notice, shall be followed. 
    5-16.4. Permit conditions. A sign permit issued by the Director and/or City Commission shall remain valid for a period of six months from the date of issuance. 
    If any sign is installed or placed on any property prior to the receipt of a permit, the sign, including any embellishments, poles, and supporting structures, shall be removed. If any alteration, addition, or enlargement requiring a permit is made to a sign prior to the receipt of a permit, such-alteration, addition, or enlargement shall be removed. No variance from these provisions shall be granted. 
    5-16.5. Removal of signs. It shall be unlawful for any person or company to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this Article. Violation of the provisions of this Article shall constitute a misdemeanor and the defendant shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $500.00. Companies applying for permits, installing signs, or otherwise acting on behalf of individuals, businesses, and/or groups found in violation of this Article shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000.00. Each day's violation of any provision of this Article shall constitute a separate offense. Failure to adhere to the provisions of this Article as a result of not contacting the City Municipal Development Department does not constitute or create a situation where a variance can be requested. 
    The Director, upon approval by the City Commission, may cause the removal of an illegal or unsafe sign when the owner fails to comply with the orders of removal, relocation or repair, or upon determination that the sign has been abandoned for a period of 90 days. After removal or demolition of the sign, a notice shall be mailed to the sign owner stating the nature of the work and the date on which it was performed and demanding payment on the costs as certified by the City Clerk together with an additional 15 percent for inspection and incidental costs. For the purposes of this subsection, removal of a sign shall include the removal of any embellishments, poles, and supporting structures. 
    Temporary signs not meeting the requirements of Article 5 of this Code may be removed by the Director or his/her designee at the Director's discretion. In cases where unsafe signs may cause an emergency, the City Manager may approve the Director to remove the sign. 
    If the amount specified in the notice is not paid within 30 days of the notice, it shall become an assessment upon a lien against the property of the sign owner, and will be certified as an assessment against the property with a ten percent penalty for connection in the same manner as the real estate taxes. 
    The owner of the property upon which the sign is located shall be presumed to be the owner of all signs thereon unless facts to the contrary are brought to the attention of the City, as in the case of a leased sign. 






CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1986 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1986 Code, as updated through October 3, 1990, which are included herein. Sections of the 1986 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1986 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1, 1-2 1-1, 1-2 1-3(a) 1-3 1-3(b) 1-4, 1-5 1-3(c) 1-6 1-4 1-7 1-5 1-13 1-6 1-10 1-7 1-12 1-8 1-14 1-9 1-8 2-1 2-61 2-16, 2-17 2-36, 2-37 3-26-3-33 14-36-14-43 3-46-3-48 14-56-14-58 3-61 14-81 3-76, 3-77 14-111, 14-112 3-91-3-94 14-126-14-129 3-106-3-112 14-91-14-97 4-1-4-4 6-1-6-4 5-1 10-1 5-2, 5-3 10-56, 10-57 5-4-5-6 10-9 5-7, 5-8 10-2 5-9-5-11 10-3 5-12-5-14 10-4-10-6 5-43(a) 10-7 5-43(b), (c) 10-8 5-51 10-32 5-52(a), 5-52(b) 10-33, 10-34 5-52(c) 10-31 5-52(d) 10-35 5-53(a), 5-53(b) 10-33, 10-34 6-1 18-26 6-3 58-26 6-4 58-29 6-5 58-30, 58-31 6-6-6-8 58-51-58-53 6-9 18-27 6-21 18-1 6-36-6-38 18-51-18-53 6-51, 6-52 18-76, 18-77 6-53-6-58 58-76-58-81 6-71 18-101 6-86 18-121 6-101, 6-102 18-142 6-103 18-141 6-104 18-144 6-110 18-143 6-126-6-138 18-156-18-168 6-151-6-159 18-181-18-189 6-176-6-181 18-201-18-206 7-1 26-2 7-2 26-4 7-3 26-3 7-4-7-9 26-5-26-10 7-10(a) 26-11 7-10(b)(1)-(3) 26-11 7-10(b)(4), 7-10(b)(5) 26-12, 26-13 7-11, 7-12 26-14, 26-15 7-13 26-1 8-1-8-11 30-31-30-41 8-26-8-29 30-56-30-59 8-46-8-50 30-76-30-80 9-1 54-3 9-21-9-23 54-56-54-58 9-32 54-1 9-33(a)-9-33(c) 54-31-54-33 9-34, 9-35 54-4, 54-5 9-36 54-2 10-16 34-27 10-17 34-26 10-31-10-35 34-61-34-65 10-46-10-52 34-41-34-47 11-1 22-26 11-2, 11-3 22-28 11-4 22-32 11-5 22-38 11-6 22-37 11-36 22-71 
22-73 11-37 22-73 11-39 22-74 11-56 22-106 11-57, 11-58 22-108, 22-109 11-59 22-107 12-1 38-1 12-2-12-4 38-3-38-5 13-16-13-18 42-26-42-28 14-1-14-5 46-26-46-30 14-21 46-51 14-22-14-34 46-66-46-78 14-35 46-52 15-16-15-21 50-26-50-31 15-23 50-32 15-36, 15-37 50-56, 50-57 15-39-15-41 50-58-50-60 16-1 58-111 16-16-16-18 58-26-58-28 16-19 58-31 16-32 58-54 16-34 58-55 17-1-17-3 62-36-62-38 17-4-17-6 62-51-62-53 17-21-17-26 62-77-62-82 17-27 62-76 17-50 62-115 17-51 62-117 17-52 62-116 17-55(a), 17-55(b) 62-107, 62-108 17-61-17-65 62-142-62-146 17-66 62-141 17-67 62-147 18-1, 18-2 66-1, 66-2 18-4-18-6 66-3-66-5 18-8 66-6 18-10 66-7 18-36(c) 66-30 18-38-18-42 66-32-66-36 18-44-18-47 66-37-66-40 20-2 70-1 20-3 70-26 20-4 70-2 20-5 70-61 20-21 70-36 20-22 70-62 20-23-20-31 70-37-70-45 20-32 70-60 20-33-20-36 70-63-70-66 20-56 70-91 20-57-20-81 70-93-70-117 20-82 70-92 20-96-20-99 70-131-70-134 20-100-20-122 70-137-70-159 20-123, 20-124 70-135, 70-136 20-128-20-133 70-76-70-81 20-136-20-150 70-181-70-195  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1986 Code, as updated through October 3, 1990, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1986 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede October 3, 1990, but which were never included in the 1986 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since October 3, 1990, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 811  2- 5-91 1-6 18-226-18-231 823  8- 5-93 1 66-31 828  6- 7-94 1 70-60 1(II) 70-46 1(III) 70-56 1(IV), 1(V) 70-58, 70-59 1(VI) 70-57 829  8- 2-94 1(a), 1(b) 42-53, 42-54 1(c) 42-52 1(d)-1(o) 42-55-42-66 2 42-67 3 42-51 830  9- 6-94 2(11-1(b)) 22-28 2(11-1) 22-26 2(11-2), 2(11-3) 22-28, 22-29 2(11-4)-2(11-12) 22-32-22-40 2(11-13), 2(11-14) 22-30, 22-31 2(11-15) 22-27 2(11-32)-2(11-46) 22-71-22-85 2(11-66) 22-106 2(11-67), 2(11-68) 22-108, 22-109 2(11-69) 22-107 831  8- 2-94 1 70-227 2 70-226 3(A-C) 70-228 3(D-F) 70-229 3(G)-3(I) 70-230-70-232 3(J-L) 70-233 4-10 70-234-70-240 835  2- 7-95 1 74-26 2-6 74-41-74-45 7-15 74-66-74-74 16 74-56 17 74-46 18 74-75 19 74-27 840  9-26-95 II(17-41) 62-106 II(17-42)-II(17-50) 62-112-62-120 II(17-51) 62-111 II(17-52), II(17-53) 62-121, 62-122 II(17-54) 62-107 841  1- 9-96 1 18-26 2 18-76 3 18-101 4 18-121 5 18-142 851 11- 6-96 1 42-29-42-33 853 12- 3-96 3 70-60(b) 854  2- 4-97       Rpld 10-1-10-9, 10-31-10-35, 10-56, 10-57       Added 10-31-10-47 859 11- 4-97 3 70-60(b) 863  2- 2-99 2 LDC §§ 5-1-5-16 864  5- 4-99 2 62-106-62-122 865  6-15-99 1 LDC § 1-5 2 LDC §§ 2-4, 2-5 3 LDC §§ 4-1, 4-2, 4-8 872  1-11-00 1 LDC § 2-5.5 886  4- 3-01 42-29, 42-30       Dltd 42-31       Rnbd 42-32, 42-33       As 42-31, 42-32       Added 42-68 893  4- 2-02 2 LDC §§ 5-5, 5-11.3-5-11.6 896  6- 4-02 1 70-56 2 70-60 899  9- 3-02 2 LDC §§ 5-3, 5-5, 5-7, 5-11.2-5-11.5, 5-15.2 900  9- 3-02 2 46-66-46-78       Added 46-79-46-97 901  9- 3-02 1 10-40 902  9- 3-02 1, 2       Added 2-62 905  9- 2-03 1 LDC, § 4.6.6 906  8- 5-03 2 46-68, 46-69 46-71 46-87, 46-89(b)(7) 46-90(b)       Dltd 46-90(c)       Rnbd 46-90(d)       as 46-90(c) 46-97 907  1- 6-04 2 30-31 941  9- 5-06 1, 2 2-62 942  5- 1-07 2 LDC, §§ 3-1-3-6 LDC, §§ 3-1-3-9 953 12- 4-07 2 LDC, §§ 3-3.3, 3-6.2 955  8- 5-08 2 22-28(a)(9)(14)       Added 22-110-22-118 956  7- 9-08 2 10-34       Added 10-48 959 10- 7-08 2 LDC, § 5-5 LDC, §§ 5-11.1, 5-11.6 LDC, § 5-14.1 LDC, § 5-15 LDC, § 5-16.3 973 11- 4-08 2 70-182 974  3- 3-09 2 18-26       Dltd 18-27 18-76       Dltd 18-77 18-101, 18-121 975  4- 7-09 2 6-1 976  3- 3-09 2 70-56, 70-63 983 10- 6-09 2 70-60 988  6- 1-10 1 6-1-6-4 990  9- 7-10 2 LDC §§ 5-1-5-16 994 11- 2-10 2 LDC §§ 4.5.1-4.5.3 995  2- 1-11 2 30-31-30-42, 30-56-30-59, 30-76-30-80 1021 11- 5-13 1(Exh. A) LDC Arts. I-V 1022 11- 5-13 2       Added 62-167, 62-169-62-186 1030  2- 3-15 1 22-26-22-40 1031  2- 3-15 1       Added 23-1-23-31 1032  2- 3-15 1 18-141-18-143, 18-156-18-168, 18-201-18-206, 70-1, 70-2, 70-26, 70-36-70-46, 70-56-70-58, 70-61-70-66, 70-76-70-81, 70-91-70-117, 70-131-70-159, 70-181-70-195, 70-226-70-240 1036  7- 5-16 I 70-2       Added 70-3-70-9       Rpld 70-61 1049 12- 6-16 2       Rpld Ch. 30, 30-31-30-42 30-56-30-59 30-76-30-80       Added Ch. 30, 30-1-30-6 30-31-30-37 30-61-30-69 30-91-30-98 30-121-30-124 30-151-30-156 30-181-30-188 30-211-30-213 30-241-30-243 30-271 30-301 30-331, 30-332 30-361-30-365 30-391-30-399 30-431, 30-432 30-461-30-464 30-491-30-494  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Florida Statutes. 
F.S. 
Section Section  
this Code 1.01 et seq. 1-2 7.32 1-2 23.011 et seq. Ch. 50 60.05 Ch. 22, Art. II chs. 97-106 Char. § Art. VI 
Ch. 2, Art. III 
2-61 97.011 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II ch. 101 Char. § 6.03 101.67 2-62 112.044 Ch. 2, Art. II 112.08 2-36 112.311 et seq. Char. Art. III Ch. 2, Art. II Ch. 2, Art. II, 
Div. 2 ch. 119 Ch. 2, Art. II ch. 120 LDC § 3-5 161.055 30-98 162.09(3) 22-115 162.22 1-14 ch. 163 50-32 ch. 163, pt. II 50-26 163.3161 et seq. Ch. 50 50-60 163.3161-163.3215 LDC § 1-2 163.3167(6) Ch. 50, Art. III 163.3171 et seq. 50-57 163.3174 50-56 163.3179 LDC § 3-5 163.3180 LDC § 3-7 163.3180(1)(f)3 LDC § 3-6 163.3180(5) LDC § 3-6 LDC § 3-7 163.3180(5)(g) LDC § 3-6 LDC § 3-7 163.3180(5)(h)1 LDC § 3-7 163.3180(5)(h)3 LDC § 3-7 163.3180(5)(h)3.c.(II) LDC § 3-7 163.3180(5)(h)3.c.(II)(B) LDC § 3-7 163.3180(5)(h)3.e. LDC § 3-7 163.3180(6) LDC § 3-5 163.3184 LDC § 2-6 163.3187 LDC § 2-6 163.3194 Ch. 18 Ch. 50 163.3202(2)(g) LDC § 3-3 163.3215 LDC § 2-6 163.3220-163.3243 LDC § 2-5 LDC § 4-4 ch. 166 Char. § Pt. I Char. § 1.06 LDC § 1-2 166.021 1-8 166.031 Char. Art. VIII 166.031(6) Char. § 3.05 166.041 Ch. 2 Char. § 7.05 LDC § 2-6 166.201 et seq. Ch. 62 166.211 Ch. 62 166.231 Ch. 62, Art. III 166.231(9)(a)2 62-143 ch. 173 22-37 22-115 173.15 22-37 ch. 175 62-52, 62-53 175.101 Ch. 62, Art. II, 
Div. 3 ch. 180 70-3-70-6 180.02 70-3 180.06 70-3, 70-4 ch. 185 62-37 185.08 Ch. 62, Art. II, 
Div. 2 ch. 192 et seq. Ch. 62 193.116 Ch. 62 197.3632 23-1 197.3635 23-1 205.042 Ch. 62, Art. IV 62-110 205.043 Ch. 62, Art. IV 205.043(2), (3) 62-117 205.053 62-115 205.053(1) 62-116 205.053(2), 205.053(3) 62-108, 62-109 205.064 46-30 218.32 2-36 286.011 Char. § 3.06 Ch. 2, Art. II 50-31 50-59 ch. 316 22-71 Ch. 66 316.003 66-1 316.008(c) 66-5 316.008(u) 66-4 316.077 18-227 316.1945(1) 66-35 316.1967 66-34 ch. 320 LDC § 1-5 320.01 LDC § 1-5 30-271 320.8249 30-391 330.36 Ch. 14, Art. II, 
Div. 2 332.01 et seq. 14-58 ch. 333 Ch. 14, Art. II, 
Div. 2 333.11 14-96 335.141(4) 66-6 336.045 58-31 336.045(3) LDC § 4-6 339.241 Ch. 22, Art. IV 351.03 66-6 ch. 366, ch. 367 Ch. 70 366.02 30-93 ch. 367 Ch. 70, Art. II ch. 372 Ch. 10 372.922 10-3 ch. 373 Ch. 30, Art. II Ch. 70, Art. II 373.036 30-98 380.04 LDC § 1-5 LDC § 2-2 ch. 380.065(14) LDC § 3-8 ch. 381 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. II 381.0065 30-98 381.101 Ch. 22, Art. II 381.261 Ch. 70 Ch. 70, Art. II 381.272 70-98 ch. 386 Ch. 22, Art. II 397.701 Ch. 6 ch. 400 LDC § 1-5 ch. 400, pt. II LDC § 1-5 400.021 LDC § 1-5 400.602 LDC § 1-5 403.413 Ch. 54 403.701 et seq. Ch. 54 Ch. 54, Art. III 403.703(21) Ch. 54, Art. III ch. 418 Ch. 42 Ch. 42, Art. II ch. 419 LDC § 1-5 420.004 LDC § 1-5 ch. 440 Ch. 2, Art. II ch. 443 Ch. 2, Art. II ch. 445 62-169 ch. 464, pt. I LDC § 1-5 ch. 474 10-3 ch. 479 LDC § 5-13 ch. 489 Ch. 18 496.01 et seq. Ch. 46 496.132 Ch. 46 ch. 527 Ch. 18 ch. 552 Ch. 26 ch. 553 Ch. 18 Ch. 18, Art. II ch. 553, pt. I LDC § 1-5 553.60 et seq. Ch. 58, Art. II 553.70 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. VI 553.73 22-117 553.73(5) 30-181 553.73(10)(k) 30-93 553.79 22-117 553.80 22-117 553.900 Ch. 18 ch. 561 et seq. Ch. 6 561.01(4)(a), (5) 6-1 562.14(1) 6-2 562.45(2) 6-2, 6-3 563.02(1)(a) 6-3 588.011 38-5 588.12 et seq. 10-56 590.12 Ch. 26 604.50 30-93 ch. 633 Ch. 26 633.121 Ch. 26 ch. 650 Ch. 2, Art. II 704.01 LDC § 1-5 705.101 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. III ch. 707 10-56 723.041 LDC § 4-8 ch. 760 Ch. 34 760.01 et seq. Ch. 34 760.20 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. II ch. 767 Ch. 10 Ch. 10, Art. II 10-17 775.082 10-17 22-116 Ch. 38 38-1 775.083 22-116 Ch. 38 38-1 775.084 10-17 790.15 Ch. 38 ch. 791 Ch. 26 26-15 812.14 Ch. 70, Art. II ch. 823 Ch. 22, Art. II 823.04 Ch. 10 ch. 828 Ch. 10 Ch. 10, Art. II 871.03 Ch. 46 933.20 et seq. Ch. 18 943.25(13) 38-2  
