CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF PAHOKEE, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Originally Published by 
Order of the City Commission in 1984 
____________ 
Republished in 1999, 2007, 2013 
____________ 
Adopted October 8, 1991 
Effective October 8, 1991 

____________ 
Clark Hull Wilkinson 
Mayor 
____________ 
Ramon Horta, Jr., Vice-Mayor 
John Norman 
Roy Singletary 
Carlene Walker 
City Commission 
____________ 
Kenneth N. Schenck 
City Manager 
____________ 
Michael H. Satuder 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Debra Palmer 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Alvis Davis 
Mayor 
____________ 
Roy Singletary, Vice-Mayor 
Keith W. Babb, Jr. 
W. Pete Moore 
Henry Crawford, Jr. 
City Commission 
____________ 
Kenneth N. Schenck 
City Manager 
____________ 
Michael H. Satuder 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Debra Palmer 
City Clerk 
____________ 
James P. Sasser 
Mayor 
____________ 
Keith W. Babb, Jr. 
Vice-Mayor 
____________ Allie H. Biggs 
Gary McEntire 
Henry Crawford, Jr. 
Commissioners 
____________ 
Lillie J. Latimore 
City Manager 
____________ 
V. Lynn Whitfield 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Patricia McLean 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Colin O. Walkes 
Mayor 
____________ 
Felisia C. Hill, Vice-Mayor 
Keith W. Babb, Jr. 
Allie H. Biggs 
Diane L. Walker 
City Commission 
____________ 
Derrek A. Moore 
City Manager 
____________ 
Gary M. Brandenburg 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Anika C. Sinclair 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Keith W. Babb, Jr. 
Mayor 
____________ 
Felisia C. Hill, Vice-Mayor 
Nathaniel Holmes 
Clara Murvin 
Diane L. Walker 
City Commission 
____________ 
Chandler F. Williamson 
City Manager 
____________ 
Gary M. Brandenburg 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Tijauna L. Warner 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Code Enforcement Advisory Board 
____________ 
Community Relations Advisory Board 
____________ 
Nuisance Abatement Board 
____________ 
Pahokee Housing Authority 
____________ 
Zoning Adjustment and Planning Board 
____________ 
Beautification Advisory Board 
____________ 
Education Advisory Board 
____________ 
Parks and Recreation Advisory Board 
    This Code is a republication of the 1999 Code of Ordinances, and was prepared under the supervision of A. Lawton Langford, Corporate President, and Linda Davis, Editor, with the able assistance of the MCC staff. Ordinances were added in this republication through Ordinance No. 2005-01, adopted February 22, 2005. 
    The page numbering system used in this republication is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. 
CHARTER CHT:1   CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1   CODE CD1:1   CODE APPENDIX CDA:1   CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE CCT:1   STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1   CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1   CODE INDEX CDi:1    
    This 2013 republication includes all amendatory legislation through Ordinance No. 2013-02, adopted May 14, 2013, and was accomplished under the supervision of Howard George, Editor. The preface as it appears in the 1993 Code of Ordinances is reprinted herein as follows: 
    This Code constitutes a complete republication of the ordinances of the City of Pahokee, Florida, of a general and permanent nature. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1984 Code, as supplemented through October 28, 1986, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Commission. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1984 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-2 and the first section of Chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within each index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Successfully keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This republication was under the direct supervision of John Dombroski, Vice President, Supervising Editor, and Brian Taylor, Code Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to the officials of the city, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida  
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature and ordinances that amend subject matter not found in the Code are not codified and are considered "Omitted." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Included/Omitted Supp. No. 2013-04 Omitted 1 2013-05 Omitted 1 2013-06 Omitted 1 2013-07 Omitted 1 2014-01 Omitted 1 2015-01 Omitted 1 2015-02 Omitted 1 2015-03 Omitted 1 2015-05 Included 1 2015-04 Included 1 1990-7 Included 2 1992-1 Included 2 1996-9 Omitted 2 1997-3 Omitted 2 1999-1 Included 2 1999-7 Included 2 1999-17 Included 2 2004-05 Omitted 2 2007-08 Omitted 2 2010-04 Omitted 2 2011-03 Included 2 2011-04 Omitted 2 2012-02 Omitted 2 2012-09 Included 2 2013-04 Included 2 2013-07 Included 2 2014-01 Omitted 2 2015-02 Included 2 2015-06 Omitted 2 2016-01 Included 2 2016-02 Included 2 2016-03 Included 2 2016-04 Included 2 2016-06 Included 2 2016-07 Included 2 2016-08 Included 2 2016-09 Included 2 2016-10 Included 2 2016-11 Included 2 2016-12 Included 2 2016-14 Included 2 2017-01 Omitted 2 2017-02 Included 2 2017-03 Included 2 2017-04 Included 3 2017-05 Included 3 2017-06 Included 3 2017-07 Included 3 2017-08 Included 3 2017-09 Included 3  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Set out in Part I is the Home Rule Charter of the city as adopted by Ordinance No. 88-1 on January 12, 1988, and ratified by an election held on February 9, 1988. Obvious typographical errors and misspellings have been corrected. Other changes made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - CORPORATE EXISTENCE, FORM OF GOVERNMENT, BOUNDARY, AND POWER 

Section 1.01. - Corporate existence, form of government, and Charter. 
    The City of Pahokee in Palm Beach County, Florida, which was created by the Florida Legislature, shall continue as a municipal corporation with a commission-manager form of government and with this document as the Charter for the city. 
Section 1.02. - Description of corporate boundary. 
    The area described in appendix A of this Charter [to this Code] shall constitute the corporate boundary of the City of Pahokee, Florida. 
(Ord. No. 2003-6, §§ 1, 2, 6-24-2003) 
Section 1.03. - General powers of the city. 
    The city has all governmental, corporate, and proprietary powers to enable it to conduct municipal government, perform municipal functions, and render municipal services, and may exercise any power for municipal purposes except as expressly prohibited by law or this Charter. 
Section 1.04. - Construction. 
    The powers of the city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city, limited only by the constitution, general and special law, and specific limitations in this Charter. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COMMISSION 

Section 2.01. - Composition. 
    There shall be a city commission consisting of a mayor-commissioner and four (4) commissioners. All members shall be elected at large by the electors of the city. Only qualified electors of the city shall be eligible to be members of the city commission. 
Section 2.02. - Terms. 
    The terms of all members of the city commission are three (3) years. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, § 1, 11-4-2008) 
Section 2.03. - Compensation. 
    The salary and other compensation of the mayor-commissioner and the other commissioners shall be set by ordinance; however, no increase in salary may benefit any incumbent mayor-commissioner or commissioner during his current term of office. 
Section 2.04. - Mayor-commissioner and vice-mayor. 
(a)  Duties. The mayor-commissioner shall preside at meetings of the commission and shall be recognized as the head of the city government for service of process, ceremonial matters, and execution of contracts, deeds, and other documents. The mayor-commissioner may be referred to as the "mayor." The mayor shall have no administrative duties. The mayor has the right to vote on all matters coming before the commission. 
(b)  Selection of vice-mayor. At the first regular meeting in April each year the city commission shall appoint from the sitting commissioners a vice-mayor. 
(c)  Absences. The vice-mayor shall act as mayor during the absence or disability of the mayor. If a vacancy occurs or exists in the office of mayor the vice-mayor shall become mayor for the completion of the unexpired term of the former mayor and shall also serve his regular term as a commissioner. In the temporary absence of the mayor and vice-mayor the remaining commissioners shall select a mayor pro tempore. In the event that there is neither a mayor nor a vice-mayor sitting on the commission, the commissioners shall select a mayor to serve in that capacity until the next election. A vice-mayor designate may refuse such office or once in office may resign from such office and remain on the commission as a member during his term. 
(Ord. No. 2017-09 , § 1, 12-12-2017) 
Section 2.05. - General powers of the city. 
    All powers of the city shall be vested in the city commission except those powers specifically given to the Charter officers or specifically reserved by this Charter to the electors of the city. 
Section 2.06. - Commission-employee relationship. 
    Neither the city commission nor any of its members shall in any manner dictate the appointment or removal of any city employee except Charter officers nor shall the commission or any of its members give orders to any employee other than commission orders to a Charter officer. The commission or its members shall deal on all matters through the appropriate Charter officer. 
Section 2.07. - Vacancies, filling of vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of commissioner or mayor shall become vacant in accordance with general law or if the individual holding the office is absent from four (4) consecutive regular commission meetings without being excused by the commission prior to the fourth consecutive absence. 
(b)  Filling of vacancies. A vacancy on the commission shall be filled by a majority vote of the remaining members of the commission within thirty (30) days following the date of the vacancy. Any person appointed by the commission to fill a vacancy shall hold office until the next regular annual election in the city. If at any time the membership of the commission is reduced to less than a quorum, the remaining member or members may by a majority vote appoint additional members in conformity with this section to serve until the next regular election, at which time the vacancy will be filled for the remainder of the original term. In the event that all seats on the commission become vacant, the governor shall appoint an interim commission which shall serve until the next regular election. 
(Ord. No. 2008-03, § 1, 11-4-2008) 
Section 2.08. - Meetings. 
(a)  Time and Place. The city commission shall meet regularly at least once a month at such time and places as the commission may prescribe by rule. Special meetings may be held at the call of the mayor or at the request of a majority of the commissioners. Whenever practicable, there shall be not less than twelve (12) hours notice to each member and the public of a special meeting. The first meeting of each newly elected commissioner for induction into office shall be at the next regularly scheduled commission meeting. 
(b)  Quorum. A majority of the members of the city commission shall constitute a quorum. No ordinance shall be valid unless adopted by the affirmative vote of at least three (3) members of the commission. 
(c)  Voting. Voting on ordinances and resolutions shall be by roll call and shall be recorded by the city clerk in the journal. 
(d)  Rules. The commission shall determine its own rules and order of business. 
(Ord. No. 2004-11, § 1, 8-24-2004; Ord. No. 2008-04, § 1, 11-4-2008) 
ARTICLE III. - CHARTER OFFICERS 

Section 3.01. - Designation. 
    The city manager and city clerk are designated as Charter officers. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, § 1, 11-4-2008) 
Section 3.02. - Appointment. 
    Charter officers shall be appointed by the city commission and shall serve at the pleasure of the commission subject to the provisions of section 3.03 of this article. 
Section 3.03. - Removal. 
    To remove a Charter officer, the city commission shall adopt a preliminary resolution stating reasons for the intended removal and shall offer the Charter officer an opportunity for public hearing before the commission on the matters raised by the resolution. This preliminary resolution may also suspend the Charter officer from duty immediately with pay. The Charter officer must accept the offer of public hearing or file a written response within ten (10) days of the adoption of the preliminary resolution or the resolution becomes final at the expiration of this ten-day period and the Charter officer is terminated on that date. If the public hearing is requested it shall be held not earlier than twenty (20) days or later than thirty (30) days after the adoption of the preliminary resolution. After such public hearing, or after consideration of any written response, the commission shall adopt a final resolution of removal or let the preliminary resolution lapse. 
Section 3.04. - City manager; powers and duties. 
    The city manager when necessary shall appoint, suspend, demote, or dismiss any city employee under his jurisdiction in accordance with law and the personnel rules, and may authorize any department head to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates. The city manager shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments of the city and shall attend all city commission meetings unless excused by the commission and shall have the right to take part in discussions, but not to vote. He shall see that all laws, Charter provisions, ordinances, resolutions, and other acts of the commission subject to enforcement by him are faithfully executed. The city manager shall prepare and submit the annual budget, budget message, and capital program to the commission, shall keep the commission fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city, and shall make such recommendations to the commission concerning the affairs of the city as he deems desirable. The city manager shall designate a qualified city employee to exercise the powers and perform the duties of city manager during any temporary absence or disability of the city manager. The commission may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another eligible person, other than a currently sitting commissioner, to serve as acting city manager. 
Code cross reference- City manager, § 2-91 et seq. 
Section 3.05. - City clerk; powers and duties. 
    The city clerk's duties shall be prescribed by ordinance or resolution. 
Code cross reference- City clerk, § 2-61 et seq. 
Section 3.06. - City attorney; powers and duties. 
    The city attorney shall be hired by the commission and shall serve at the pleasure of the commission. The city attorney's duties shall be prescribed by contract. 
(Ord. No. 2008-05, § 1, 11-4-2008) 
Code cross reference- City attorney, § 2-81 et seq. 
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTIONS 

Section 4.01. - Nonpartisan elections. 
    All elections for office on the city commission shall be conducted on a nonpartisan basis without any designation of political party affiliation. 
Section 4.02. - Qualifying. 
    Candidates for the city commission shall qualify by filing a written notice of candidacy with the city clerk at such time and in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance. 
Section 4.03. - Form of ballots. 
    The city commission shall prescribe the form of ballot by ordinance including the method of listing the candidates for city commission election. A Charter or ordinance amendment to be voted on by the electors of the city shall be presented for voting by ballot title. The ballot title of a measure may differ from its legal title and shall be a clear, concise statement describing the substance of the measure without argument or prejudice and shall be styled in such a manner that a "yes" vote will indicate approval of the proposal and a "No" vote will indicate rejection. Below the ballot title shall appear the following question: "Shall the above (Charter amendment) (ordinance) be adopted?" Immediately below such question shall appear in the following order, the words "Yes for Approval" and also the words "No for Rejection" with a sufficient blank space thereafter for the placing of the symbol "X" to indicate the voter's choice, if voting machines are not used. 
Section 4.04. - Conduct of elections. 
(a)  Regular. The regular election of all commissioners shall be held on the second Tuesday in March. The mayor-commissioner shall be elected in 1988. The election of the other commissioners shall be conducted so that two (2) members shall be elected in 1988 and two (2) members shall be elected in 1989. No election is required for any office if there is only one (1) candidate for such office. 
(b)  Designation of candidates for mayor. The election ballot shall designate the candidates for the office of mayor. Each individual seeking election to the office of mayor shall, when qualifying, designate that he intends to run for such office. 
(c)  Grouping of candidates. In the election of commissioners other than the mayor, where two (2) or more commissioners other than the mayor are to be balloted on and elected in the same election, they shall be divided into groups. Each individual seeking election to an office as a commissioner shall, when qualifying, designate the group in which he elects to run. The election ballot shall divide the candidates into separate groups so that the voter may designate his choice as commissioner. 
(d)  Run-off elections. Where no candidate for a particular group or for the office of mayor receives a majority of the votes cast, a run-off election shall be held two (2) weeks after the general election between the two (2) candidates receiving the highest number of votes for the office at the regular election. The person receiving the greatest number of votes at the run-off election for a particular office shall be declared elected to such office. If there is a tie vote, the city commission shall, at its next meeting, determine the manner in which the winner is to be selected. 
(e)  Regular unexpired term. An election to fill an unexpired term shall be held at the same time as the regular annual election in accordance with subsection (a) of this section. 
(f)  Special. Special municipal elections shall be held in the same manner as the regular annual election except that the city commission, by resolution, shall fix the time of holding such special elections. 
(g)  Public notice. Notice of all elections shall be given by publication in a local newspaper. The publication shall be made at least twice, once in the fifth week and once in the third week prior to the week in which the election or referendum is to be held. 
(Ord. No. 2004-09, § 1, 8-24-2004; Ord. No. 2012-10, § 1, 11-6-2012) 
Section 4.05. - City canvassing board. 
    The city canvassing board shall be established by ordinance. 
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 5.01. - Charter review. 
    In January 1993 and at least every five (5) years thereafter, the commission shall appoint a Charter review board consisting of five (5) electors of the city holding no other office, appointment or employment in the government of the city, except on advisory bodies of the city. Such board shall review the Charter, and within ninety (90) days after such appointment, recommend to the commission such alterations, revisions, and amendments, if any, to this Charter, as in its judgment are desirable. 
Section 5.02. - Oath of officers; taking office. 
    After election or appointment and before taking office each commissioner or Charter officer of the city shall take the oath of office as prescribed by ordinance. Newly elected officials shall be sworn in and take office the day following the election, provided that the election results have been certified to the City by the Palm Beach County Supervisor of Elections. 
(Ord. No. 2008-06, § 1, 11-4-2008) 
Section 5.03. - Limitation on employment of commissioners. 
    No commissioner shall be employed by the city nor shall a former commissioner be employed by the city until after the expiration of one (1) year from the time of leaving office. 
ARTICLE VI. - TRANSITION SCHEDULE 

Section 6.01. - Repeal of former Charter provisions. 
    All Charter provisions in effect prior to the effective date of this Charter, including but not limited to, those contained in Chapter 18759, Special Acts, Laws of Florida 1937, as amended, are repealed except those provisions which established the municipal corporation known as the City of Pahokee. 
Section 6.02. - Ordinances preserved. 
    All ordinances in force on the effective date of this Charter, to the extent not inconsistent with it, shall remain in force until repealed or amended. 
Section 6.03. - Continuation in office. 
(a)  Commissioners. All present elected city officials shall continue to hold their offices for the term to which they were elected or appointed and to discharge their duties until their successors are elected and take office. 
Section 6.04. - Pending matters. 
    No rights, claims, actions, contracts, or legal or administrative proceedings existing on the effective date of this Charter and involving the city shall be affected by the adoption of this Charter. 
[Section 6.05. - Reserved.] 
Section 6.06. - Effective date. 
    This Charter shall become effective upon its approval by a majority of the electors voting in a referendum upon such amendment and filing same as required by Chapter 166, Florida Statutes, or its successor. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
    This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section Section 
this Charter 88-1  1-12-1988 Char. (note)  2- 9-1988(Ratif.) Char. (note) 2003-6  6-24-2003 1, 2 1.02 2004-09  8-24-2004 1 4.04 2004-11  8-24-2004 1 2.08 2008-02 11- 4-2008 1 2.02 2008-03 11- 4-2008 1 2.07 2008-04 11- 4-2008 1 2.08 2008-05 11- 4-2008 1 3.01 3.06 2008-06 11- 4-2008 1 5.02 2012-10 11- 6-2012 1 4.04 2017-09 12-12-2017 i 2.04(b)  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Ordinances, City of Pahokee, Florida," and may be so cited. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city commission: 
    Charter. The term "Charter" shall mean the Charter of Pahokee, Florida, as printed in Part I of this volume. 
    City. The terms "the city" and "this city" shall be construed as if the words "of Pahokee, Florida," followed them. 
    City commission. Whenever the term "city commission" is used, it shall be construed to mean the city commission of the City of Pahokee. 
    Code. Reference to "this Code" and "the Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances of the City of Pahokee, Florida, as designated in section 1-1. 
    County. The terms "county" and "this county" shall mean the County of Palm Beach. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or officer of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
    F.S. The abbreviation "F.S." shall mean the latest edition or supplement of the Florida Statutes. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
    Keeper, proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or a servant, agent or employee. 
    Name of officer, department, board, etc. The naming of an officer, department, board, etc., shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Pahokee." 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one (1) person and thing. 
    Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as defined in this section. 
    Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The term "property" shall include real and personal property. 
    Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent thereto and any lake or stream. 
    Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
    Signature, subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The terms "the state" and "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Florida. 
    Street. The term "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public ways in the city. 
    Tenant[, occupant]. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies the whole or a part of such buildings or lands, either alone or with others. 
    Time. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Written, in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
(Code 1984, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Construction of statutes, F.S. § 1.01 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1984, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - History notes. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. 
(Code 1984, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - References. 
    The various references (e.g., Charter references, cross references, state law references, editor's notes, etc.) appearing throughout the Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to assist the user of the Code. 
(Code 1984, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1984, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Ordinances saved from repeal. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(2)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(3)  Any administrative ordinance; 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by the city; 
(5)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(6)  Any ordinance relating to municipal street maintenance agreements with individuals or the state; 
(7)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades for streets in the city; 
(8)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or for an annual budget; 
(9)  Any zoning ordinance or any amendment to the zoning map; 
(10)  Any ordinance relating to local improvements and assessments therefor; 
(11)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or discontinuing territory as a part of the city; 
(12)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(13)  Any ordinance regulating the salaries and compensation of city officers and city employees; 
(14)  Any ordinance or code or parts thereof adopted by reference by any section of such code not included in this Code; 
(15)  Any ordinance prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations; 
and all such provisions shall continue in effect as if fully set forth in this Code. 
(Code 1984, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, article, division, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Pahokee, Florida, is hereby amended to read as follows: ..." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances of the City of Pahokee, Florida, is hereby amended by adding a section to be numbered ____________ , which section reads as follows: ..." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1984, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city commission. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city commission or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ through ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1984, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-10. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city commission that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of the court of jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1984, § 1-10) 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
    Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1984, § 1-11) 
State Law reference- Fines and forfeitures in county court payable to municipality, F.S. § 34.191; punishment for misdemeanors, F.S. §§ 775.082, 775.083. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administrative ordinances saved from repeal, § 1-7(3); civil emergencies, Ch. 7; elections, Ch. 8; administration of flood damage prevention, § 10-31 et seq.; occupational license and business regulations, Ch. 16; planning, Ch. 19; public improvements, Ch. 20; taxation, Ch. 24; utilities, Ch. 26. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Legal holidays; closing of city hall. 
(a)  The following are legal and public holidays of the city: 
(1)  New Year's Day, January 1; 
(2)  Martin Luther King, Jr. Day, third Monday in January; 
(3)  Washington's Birthday, third Monday in February; 
(4)  Memorial Day, last Monday in May; 
(5)  Independence Day, July 4; 
(6)  Labor Day, first Monday in September; 
(7)  Up to two days, to be selected by the city commission at budget approval each year; 
(8)  Veteran's Day, November 11; 
(9)  Thanksgiving Day, fourth Thursday in November; 
(10)  Day after Thanksgiving Day; 
(11)  Christmas Day, December 25. 
(b)  Whenever any legal holiday shall fall upon a Sunday, the Monday next following shall be deemed a public holiday for all and any of the purposes stated in this section. Whenever any legal holiday shall fall upon a Saturday, the Friday next preceding shall be deemed a public holiday. 
(c)  The city clerk's office shall be closed on all such holidays for the transaction of business. All city employees shall be entitled to observe such holidays, except those necessary for the protection of life and property and public services department, which shall be as scheduled by the department supervisor, with compensatory time off at some other scheduled date, or by payment of extra compensation when authorized by the city commission in lieu thereof for all employees on duty on any such holidays. 
(d)  In addition, the mayor may declare by proclamation additional legal holidays for such closing of the city hall in the event of an emergency involving danger to life, persons or property or to observe a period of mourning of not more than one (1) day in the event of the death of any President or Vice President of the United States, any U.S. senator from this state or U.S. congressman representing this district, any governor of the state or any elected official of the city. 
(Code 1984, § 2-1; Ord. No. 87-2, § 1, 3-10-1987; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 2-2. - Sale of any city real estate property. 
    The following requirements must be met for the sale of any city real estate property: 
(1)  An ad will be placed in the local paper describing the property, its location and details of the sale. 
(2)  The term "real estate" means real property. Any property sold pursuant to this section shall be sold by requesting sealed bids, except as otherwise provided in this Code. 
(3)  A minimum four-foot by four-foot sign will be placed on property for sale which is more than five (5) acres. Smaller properties will have signs placed which are appropriate for their size and location and which are sufficient to place the public on notice regarding the bidding process and time frame. 
(4)  The ad and sign will be placed at the site of sale at least thirty (30) days prior to the sale date. 
(5)  The bids will be sealed and opened at a public meeting. 
(6)  This section does not require the sale of any city-owned real estate, if the City determines that it is in the City's best interest to dispose of the property by lease, donation or in another manner, except as required or prohibited by state or federal law. 
(7)  Beginning July 1, 2007 and every three years thereafter, the City shall, as required by Florida Statute section 166.0451, prepare an inventory list of all City-owned real estate that is appropriate for use as affordable housing. Such property shall be sold with a restriction that requires the development of the property as permanent affordable housing. Such property may also be donated to a non-profit housing organization for the construction of permanent affordable housing. Alternatively, the City may otherwise make the property available for use for the production and preservation of permanent affordable housing, as defined in Florida Statute section 420.0004(3). 
(Ord. No. 98-6, 8-25-1998; Ord. No. 2006-07, § 2, 1-9-2007; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009; Ord. No. 2016-03 , § 2, 5-10-2016)) 
Secs. 2-3-2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- City commission, art. II. 
Cross reference- City clerk to attend and keep minutes of city commission meetings, § 2-63(2); city clerk to provide clerical assistance to city commission, § 2-63(6); city commission designated board of appeals for certain boards, § 2-126; city commission to hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of the flood damage prevention chapter, § 10-35. 

Sec. 2-26. - Rules of procedure. 
    The following rules of procedure shall be applicable to all city commission meetings: 
(1)  Rule 1. The following order of business shall be observed: 
a.  Invocation and Pledge of Allegiance; 
b.  Roll call; 
c.  Additions, deletions, and approval of agenda items; 
d.  Citizen comments/agenda items only; 
e.  Public service announcements (fill out public comment card); 
f.  Approval of minutes; 
g.  Consent agenda; 
h.  Ordinance(s); 
i.  Public hearings; 
j.  Proclamation(s); 
k.  Presentation(s); 
l.  Report of the mayor; 
m.  Report of the city manager; 
n.  Report of the city attorney; 
o.  Old business; 
p.  New business; 
q.  Citizen comments/general concerns; 
r.  Correspondence/comments and concerns of the city commissioners; 
s.  Adjourn. 
At special meetings the regular order shall be dispensed with after the roll call. The order set out in this subsection may be waived or altered at any time upon order of the presiding officer unless a majority of the city commissioners present and voting object. 
(2)  Rule 2. The presiding officer shall decide all questions of order or procedure not in conflict with this section, but his ruling may be appealed to the city commission upon the motion of any city commissioner and its decision shall be final. 
(3)  Rule 3. Any city commissioner may instruct the city clerk to record his vote upon any question. A roll call vote shall be taken on any question considered. The city clerk shall call the roll in the following order: (a) the commissioner making the motion; (b) the commissioner who seconds the motion; (c) the remaining commissioners in alphabetical order; (d) the mayor. 
(4)  Rule 4. No member of the city commission who is present at any such meeting at which an official decision, ruling or other official act is to be taken or adopted may abstain from voting in regards to any such decision, ruling or act, and a vote shall be recorded or counted for each such member present, except with respect to any such member, if there is or appears to be a possible conflict of interest under the provisions of F.S. § 112.311, 112.313, or 112.3143. In such cases such city commissioner shall comply with the disclosure requirements of that law. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 286.012. 
(5)  Rule 5. The city commission may require that any communication to it upon a question be in writing. Debate and discussion upon any question may be limited at any time by action of the city commission. 
(Code 1984, § 2-19; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009; Ord. No. 2012-08, 6-26-2012; Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 2, 6-13-2017) 
Sec. 2-27. - City commissioners' votes recorded on ordinances and resolutions. 
    Each city commissioner's vote shall be recorded on all ordinances and resolutions presented to the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 88-4, § 1, 5-24-1988; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 2-28. - Votes required to pass resolutions. 
    A minimum of three (3) votes in favor of a resolution is required to effect passage of the resolution. 
(Ord. No. 88-4, § 2, 5-24-1988; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 2-29. - Forfeiture of city commissioner's salary for absence from meetings. 
    Any city commissioner who is absent from two (2) consecutive regular meetings of the city commission shall forfeit or not be entitled to receive the equivalent of one (1) month's compensation, which is four hundred dollars ($400.00), and a like sum for each subsequent absence from two (2) consecutive such meetings. Upon a finding by the city commission that any such absence was due to illness, death in the immediate family of any city commissioner or for the purpose of conducting city business or city related business; such absence may be excused and this forfeiture waived. 
(Code 1984, § 2-36; Ord. No. 87-13, § 1(b), 1-12-1988; Ord. No. 94-1, § 1, 7-12-1994; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 2-30. - Attendance of meetings by telephone or other electronic means. 
(a)  Any city commissioner, who is unable to attend any regular or special city commission meeting in person shall be afforded the opportunity to appear at said meeting via telephone or other electronic means; however, in no event shall any meeting be held unless a minimum of two (2) commissioners are present in person at said meeting. 
(b)  It is not the intent of this section to allow city commission members to attend city commission meetings via telephone or other electronic means, simply for their convenience, but only for those circumstances where it is not possible for said city commission member to attend the regular or special city commission meeting in person. 
(Ord. No. 96-1, §§ 1, 2, 2-27-1996; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 2-31. - Regulations for petitions submitted to the city commission requiring a referendum vote. 
    The following procedure must be followed to submit a petition which will require a referendum vote by the city's residents: 
(1)  Any five (5) registered voters of the city may commence referendum proceedings by filing with the city commission an affidavit stating they will constitute the petitioner's committee and be responsible for circulating the petition and filing it in proper form, stating their names and addresses and specifying the address to which all notices to the committee are to be sent, and setting out in full the proposed initiative language or citing the ordinance sought to be reconsidered and the reason for reconsideration. 
(2)  Number of signatures. Referendum petitions must be signed by qualified registered voters of the city equal in number to at least ten (10) percent of the total number of qualified voters registered to vote at the last regular city election. 
(3)  Form and content. All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be assembled as one instrument for filing. Each signature shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil and shall be followed by the address of the person signing. Petitions shall contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of the proposed language and a copy of the ordinance sought to be reconsidered if applicable. The signature forms will be supplied by the city clerk. See exhibit A attached to Ord. No. 97-14 for example. 
(4)  Affidavit of circulator. Each paper of a petition shall have attached to it when filed an affidavit executed by the circulator thereof stating that he personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that all the signatures were affixed in his presence, that he believes them to be the genuine signature of the persons whose names they purport to be and that each signer had an opportunity before signing to read the full text of the petition proposed or ordinance sought to be reconsidered. 
(5)  Time for filing referendum petitions. Referendum petitions must be filed within sixty (60) days after presented to the commission. 
(6)  Upon the submission of the petitions to the city commission the commission will forward the petitions to the Palm Beach County supervisor of elections for verification of the signatures. The petition committee will be responsible for any fees associated with the certification. 
(7)  The city commission will review the supervisor of elections response and consult the city attorney for further action required. 
(Ord. No. 97-14, §§ 1-7, 11-25-1997; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Secs. 2-32-2-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Charter officers, art. III. 
Cross reference- Ordinances regulating the salaries and compensations of city officers saved from repeal, § 1-7(13); finance director, § 2-291 et seq. 
State Law reference- Code of ethics for public officers and employees, F.S. § 112.311 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-46. - Salaries, travel expenses, benefits, other compensation. 
(a)  The following shall be the annual salaries for the respective elective offices of the city: 
(1)  Mayor, nine thousand dollars ($9,000.00); 
(2)  City commissioner, four thousand eight hundred dollars ($4,800.00). 
(b)  In addition to the compensation, each such officer shall be entitled to receive the following: 
(1)  Reimbursement and payment for reasonable out-of-town authorized travel expenses while on city business; 
(2)  Any compensation they may be entitled to as a member of the volunteer fire department or auxiliary police as applicable to the other members thereof; 
(3)  The regular city's share and contribution toward the cost of any premium or payment for any authorized general employees' pension plan, health and accident insurance program, life insurance program, and medical insurance program as applicable to all regular city employees. 
(Code 1984, § 2-36; Ord. No. 87-13, § 1(a), (c), 1-12-1988; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Secs. 2-47-2-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY CLERK 

Sec. 2-61. - Appointment. 
    The city clerk shall be appointed in the manner set forth in the Charter by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 88-6, § 1, 5-24-1988; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 2-62. - Office hours. 
(a)  The city clerk shall keep open to the public the city clerk's office during the hours set by the city commission. 
(b)  If under the terms of any other ordinances of this city, including but not limited to those pertaining to qualifying for public office, any special hours are provided other than those established above, the city clerk shall be available for such additional hours to those provided above for the performance of such duties, but the office of the city clerk shall not be required to be opened to the public for any other purpose during such special periods of time. 
(Code 1984, § 2-52; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009; Ord. No. 2012-11, § 2, 12-11-2012) 
Sec. 2-63. - Powers and duties generally. 
    The city clerk shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  Seal, custody. To have custody of the city seal; 
(2)  Attendance of commission meetings; minutes. To attend the meetings of the city commission and to keep regular minutes thereon; 
(3)  Ordinances; attesting, filing and indexing. To attest all city ordinances and file all ordinances and resolutions and keep a proper index to all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the city commission; 
(4)  Notices, giving. To give all notices required by the various city ordinances, such as notice of elections, notice of applications for bids, and also advertise other matters required by ordinance not specifically delegated to some other city official; 
(5)  Recommendations as to operation of office. To make recommendations from time to time, as to any suggested improvements in the operation of the office of city clerk; 
(6)  Clerical assistance. To provide clerical assistance to the city commission and commissioners; 
(7)  Administer oaths and issue subpoenas. To administer any oath or affirmation necessary or expedient in any proceeding, matter, or thing of a municipal nature. To take affidavits for the issuance of warrants for any person or corporation charged with a violation of any city ordinance and issue under the city seal any warrants, subpoena, or other writs or other process, necessary or expedient in any suit, cause, hearing, investigation, or other matter pending or about to be commenced before the city commission or any agency of the city; 
(8)  Appointment of deputy clerks. To appoint deputy clerks as needed. Such appointments shall be approved by the city commission by resolution; 
(9)  Supervision. The clerk shall serve under the direct supervision of the city commission, and both the city manager and the city commission shall evaluate the clerk; 
(10)  Supervisor of elections. The city clerk shall be the supervisor of elections for all municipal elections. The city clerk shall appoint all election officials other than the canvassing board; 
(11)  Perform other duties prescribed. To perform such other duties as from time to time may be delegated by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 88-6, § 1, 5-24-1988; Ord. No. 89-9, § 1, 8-8-1989; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009; Ord. No. 2017-08 , § 2, 11-28-2017) 
Cross reference- City elections to be conducted under supervision of city clerk, § 8-3. 
Sec. 2-64. - Keeping, destruction of records. 
    The city clerk shall carefully preserve all records of any kind entrusted to him as city clerk or when acting under the other duties delegated to him by this Code. No record of any kind shall be destroyed by the city clerk except upon written resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1984, § 2-53; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
State Law reference- Destruction of public records, F.S. §§ 119.041, 267.051. 
Secs. 2-65-2-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY ATTORNEY 

Sec. 2-81. - Qualifications. 
    The city attorney shall be a qualified attorney-at-law, admitted and currently eligible to practice before all of the courts of the state and the appropriate U.S. District Court, and shall be a member in good standing of the Florida Bar. 
(Ord. No. 88-5, § 1(a), 5-24-1988; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 2-82. - Appointment. 
    The city attorney shall be appointed by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 88-5, § 1(b), 5-24-1988; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 2-83. - Duties. 
(a)  The city attorney shall act as the legal adviser to the city commission, the city manager and all departments, offices, and agencies of the city. The city attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the city commission. 
(b)  When required to do so by the city commission, the city attorney shall prosecute or defend, on behalf of the city, all complaints, suits and controversies in which the city is a party; shall prepare or review all contracts, bonds, and other instruments in which the city is concerned, and shall endorse thereon approval or disapproval of the legal sufficiency of the form. No contract with the city shall take effect until it has been so endorsed as approved by the city attorney. The city attorney shall perform such other duties as may be directed by the city commission or the laws of this state. 
(Ord. No. 88-5, § 1(c), 5-24-1988; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 2-84. - Assistant city attorneys and special counsels. 
    The city attorney may appoint assistant city attorneys. Such appointments shall be approved by the city commission by resolution. The city commission, when it shall deem appropriate, may employ special counsel other than the city attorney who shall conduct such investigations and perform such other services as requested. 
(Ord. No. 88-5, § 1(d), 5-24-1988; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 2-85. - Compensation. 
    The city commission shall fix and provide for the compensation to be paid to the city attorney, assistant city attorneys, and special counsels. 
(Ord. No. 88-5, § 1(e), 5-24-1988; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Secs. 2-86-2-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CITY MANAGER 

Sec. 2-91. - Qualifications. 
    The city manager shall be appointed by the city commission on the basis of administrative qualifications and training. The city manager shall not be required to be a resident of the city. Under no circumstances shall the city manager be related by blood or marriage to any member of the city commission. No city commissioner shall be eligible to serve in the position of city manager until the expiration of one (1) year from the date that the party last served as city commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 89-4, § 1, 3-28-1989; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 2-92. - Appointment. 
    The city commission shall appoint a city manager by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 89-4, § 2, 3-28-1989; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 2-93. - Employee status. 
    The city manager is an "at-will" employee, as are all other Charter officers and employees of the city. 
(Ord. No. 89-4, § 4, 3-28-1989; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 2-94. - Compensation. 
    The compensation of the city manager shall be established by a vote of a minimum of three (3) members of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 89-4, § 5, 3-28-1989; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 2-95. - Bond. 
    The city manager shall be required to have a bond in such sum as prescribed by the city commission, conditioned for the faithful and honest performance of the duties of office. The cost of the bond shall be paid by the city. 
(Ord. No. 89-4, § 7, 3-28-1989; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 2-96. - Powers and duties. 
    In addition to all powers and duties set forth in the Charter and as a further clarification of those powers and duties as set forth in the Charter, the city manager shall hold the powers and perform the duties set forth as follows: 
(1)  With city commission approval, the city manager may combine the supervision and administration of two (2) or more departments of the city. 
(2)  The interim city manager shall have the same authority, responsibility and duties of the city manager, except as modified in this division. 
(3)  The interim city manager may be removed at any time prior to the hiring of the new city manager by a majority vote of the city commission and in accordance with the Charter. No severance pay or notice requirements other than as set forth in the Charter shall apply to the interim city manager. If the interim city manager was an employee of the city prior to his appointment as interim city manager, he shall remain and be immediately reinstated in the same position that he held prior to appointment as interim city manager. 
(4)  The appointment of an interim city manager is temporary and shall automatically terminate upon the appointment of a permanent city manager by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 89-4, § 3, 3-28-1989; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 2-97. - Termination and severance pay. 
(a)  The city manager shall be removed in the manner as set forth in the Charter. However, in addition to the requirements set forth in the Charter, the additional terms and conditions where not inconsistent with the Charter shall further apply. 
(b)  Upon removal from office, the city manager shall immediately surrender to the city clerk all city property within his possession and control. In the event of the city manager's failure to surrender city property to the city, he shall forfeit all benefits to which he may be entitled under this section. Upon receipt of all city property, if any, from the city manager, the city shall pay to the city manager, at the next regular pay period, a severance pay as provided in this division. 
(c)  The city manager shall be the authorized purchasing agent/procurement officer of the city, subject to the limitations of the city's purchasing policies and ordinances. 
(d)  The city manager shall make such other reports as the city commission may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices, and agencies, subject to his direction and supervision. 
(Ord. No. 89-4, § 6, 3-28-1989; Ord. No. 2008-01, § 1, 5-13-2008; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 2-98. - Interim city manager. 
(a)  During the period after the date that the city manager's position is vacated for any reason and prior to the date that the city commission has appointed a new city manager, by vote of the city commission, to fill the vacancy of the position, the city commission shall appoint an interim city manager. 
(b)  The interim city manager shall be appointed by a majority vote of the city commission, and no resolution shall be required. 
(c)  Severance pay for the interim city manager shall be based on the following: 
Time of Service 
as Manager City Severance Pay 0-180 days   none 181 days-1 year   1 month greater than 1 year   3 months  
(d)  In order to be eligible for the severance pay described in subsection (c) of this section, in addition to complying with all of the other requirements as set forth in this section, the city manager shall provide a minimum of one (1) month's notice of his intention to terminate employment as city manager if he has held the position for a total of one (1) year or less and shall provide three (3) months' notice if he has held the position for more than one (1) year. Inasmuch as no severance pay is awarded for service of one hundred eighty (180) days or less, only one (1) week's notice shall be required. The city may waive the notice requirement with a minimum of three (3) votes of the city commission. In addition to any severance pay and/or pay earned through the date of resignation, the city shall also pay the city manager for all accrued unused annual leave. 
(e)  If the city manager is removed from office by the city commission in the manner set forth in the Charter, the notice requirements for entitlement to severance pay shall not apply. 
(Ord. No. 89-4, § 3, 3-28-1989; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Secs. 2-99, 2-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 2-101. - Executive department. 
    The city manager shall serve as head of the executive department and shall oversee the operation of all other departments of the city. All matters of city operations shall come under the jurisdiction of the city manager and the executive department. All department heads within the city shall be responsible for the managerial duties and operation of their respective departments and shall answer to the city manager. The city manager may, with commission approval, reorganize the administration, operation, and supervision of the departments. 
(Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 2-102. - Financial administration department. 
    The finance director shall serve as head of the financial administration department. The financial administration department shall be responsible for the financial matters of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Cross reference- Finance generally, § 2-271 et seq. 
Sec. 2-103. - Sheriff department. 
    The Palm Beach County Sheriff's Office shall provide law enforcement services under contract with the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 2-104. - Community development department. 
    The community development department shall include the following divisions: 
(1)  Planning and zoning division. The city shall contract for a consultant to provide master planning and development programs for the city, and shall be responsible for updating city zoning as needed. 
(2)  Code enforcement division. The code enforcement officer shall serve as head of the code enforcement division. The code enforcement division shall provide inspection services relevant to the issuance of a license, permit, or certificate, where such inspections are primarily for public safety purposes. This division shall also issue building permits and prepare code violation notices. 
(Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Cross reference- Code enforcement special master, § 2-141 et seq.; land development code, Ch. 14; planning, Ch. 19. 
Sec. 2-105. - Fire department. 
    All of the territory lying within the municipal boundaries of the City will be incorporated into Palm Beach County's Fire/Rescue MSTU for fire-rescue and related services beginning October 1, 2006, and continuing for a term of ten years through December 31, 2015, to fund fire-rescue services by the County through September 30, 2016. 
(Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 2-106. - Public services department. 
    The public services director shall serve as head of the public services department. The public services department shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Public works. Public works shall provide services that include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Street maintenance; 
b.  Trash and litter collection and disposal; 
c.  Garbage collection and disposal by contract with the city; 
d.  Motor pool operations; 
e.  Municipal buildings maintenance. 
(2)  Public utilities. The city, in cooperation with Palm Beach County, South Bay, and Belle Glade, has created the Glades Utility Authority, which will be responsible for: 
a.  Water production; 
b.  Water distribution; 
c.  Wastewater treatment; 
d.  Wastewater collection. 
e.  All other water and sewer related services. 
(Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22; garbage and trash, Ch. 11; utilities, Ch. 26. 
Sec. 2-107. - Parks and recreation department. 
    The parks and recreation department shall provide services that include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Maintenance of city parks and recreational facilities; 
(2)  Mowing of city-owned properties; 
(3)  Providing after school, weekend and summer recreation programs for children and adults. 
(Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Secs. 2-108-2-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- City planning board, § 19-26. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-126. - City commission designated board of appeals for certain boards. 
    The city commission is hereby designated as the board of appeals for any board created by the commission where no specific board of appeals is designated by the ordinance or resolution creating such a board. 
(Code 1984, § 2-86; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Secs. 2-127-2-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CODE ENFORCEMENT SPECIAL MASTER[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2003-3, § 1, April 8, 2003, repealed the former Div. 2, §§ 2-141-2-149, and §§ 2-10 of said ordinance enacted a new Div. 2 as set out herein. The former Div. 2 pertained to similar subject matter the code enforcement board and was derived from Code 1984, §§ 2-96-2-104. 
Cross reference- Code enforcement division, § 2-104(2). 
State Law reference- Municipal code enforcement, F.S. Ch. 162. 

Sec. 2-141. - Special master; qualifications, appointment, removal, and term. 
    The special master process is designed as an enforcement process pertaining to homeowners and businesses of building, structural, zoning, licensing, and life safety type cases for which corrective action has not been taken. It is an expeditious and inexpensive method to resolve violations which have not been corrected after notice has been provided by the city. There is hereby established a special master, appointed pursuant to F.S. Ch. 162, who shall be designated by the city commission according to the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Appointments shall be made by the city commission for a term of one (1) year. Special masters may be reappointed or removed at the discretion of the mayor, subject to ratification by the city commission. 
(2)  Special masters shall not be residents of the city and shall possess outstanding reputations for civic pride, interest, integrity, responsibility and business or professional ability. 
(3)  A special master shall be a member of the Florida Bar with five (5) years as an attorney at law. 
(4)  A special master shall be compensated at a rate to be determined by the city commission for time spent. 
(5)  If a special master is removed from a case, the case may be assigned to another special master. 
(6)  The special master shall preside over code enforcement matters once a month, or more often if necessary. 
(7)  Minutes shall be maintained at all hearings presided over by the special master; all hearings shall be open to the public. The city shall provide clerical and administrative personnel as may be required by the special master for the proper performance of his duties. 
(8)  The city attorney, city manager or designee shall represent the city by presenting cases before the special master. 
(Ord. No. 2003-3, § 2, 4-8-2003; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 2-142. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  The jurisdiction of the special master shall extend to the enforcement of technical codes of the city governed by the following codes: building, electrical, plumbing, fire, health and sanitation, licensed occupations, water and sewer, zoning, garbage and trash disposal, special sales, and such other activities as the city commission by ordinance, shall specify. 
(b)  The special master jurisdiction shall be limited to enforcement of designated codes and shall not conflict or encroach upon the jurisdiction or authority of advisory boards, the board of adjustment, or the planning board. 
(c)  The jurisdiction of the special master shall not be exclusive. Any alleged violation of any of the codes and ordinances may be pursued by any other appropriate remedy allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 2003-3, § 3, 4-8-2003; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 2-143. - Enforcement procedures. 
    The special master shall use the following enforcement procedures: 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the code inspector to initiate enforcement proceedings of the various codes of which the special master has enforcement jurisdiction; however, no special master shall have the power to initiate such enforcement proceedings. 
(2)  If a code violation is found, the code inspector shall notify the violator, unless subsection (3) of this section applies, and give such violator a reasonable time, not to exceed sixty (60) days, to correct the violation. Should the violation continue beyond the time specified for correction, the code inspector shall notify the special master and request a hearing. The special master, through its clerical staff, shall schedule a hearing, and written notice of such hearing shall be hand delivered or mailed as provided in section 2-149 to the violator. At the option of the special master, notice may additionally be served by publication or posting as provided in section 2-149. If the violation is corrected and then recurs or if the violation is not corrected by the time specified for correction by the code inspector, the case may be presented to the special master even if the violation has been corrected prior to the hearing, and the notice shall so state. 
(3)  If the code inspector has reason to believe a violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare, or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible in nature, the code inspector shall make a reasonable effort to notify the violator and may proceed directly to hearing without need to comply with subsection (2) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2003-3, § 4, 4-8-2003; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 2-144. - Conduct of hearing. 
(a)  Upon request of the code inspector, or at such other times as may be necessary, the special master may schedule a hearing. 
(b)  A hearing date shall not be considered postponed or continued unless a request for continuance, showing good cause for such continuance, is received in writing and approved by the special master at least five (5) calendar days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(c)  Each case before the special master shall be presented by the Code Enforcement Officer. 
(d)  The special master shall proceed to hear the cases on the agenda for that day. All testimony shall be under oath and shall be recorded. Each party shall have the right to call and examine witnesses; to introduce exhibits; to cross examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues, even though that matter was not covered in the direct examination; to impeach any witnesses regardless of which party first called that witness to testify; to offer rebuttal of the evidence. 
(e)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the special master shall make findings of fact and conclusions of law based on evidence of record. In order to make a finding upholding the code inspector's decision, the special master must find that a preponderance of the evidence indicates that the named violator was responsible for the violation of the relevant section of the Code. The initial burden of proof shall be with the city to show by the greater weight of evidence that a code violation exists and that the alleged violator committed, or was responsible for maintaining or permitting the violation to continue. Once this burden has been met, it shall be the responsibility of the violator to rebut the evidence submitted by the city. 
(f)  After all the evidence has been submitted and all testimony heard, the special master's finding of fact and conclusions of law shall be stated orally at the hearing, and shall be reduced to writing in a written order affording the proper relief consistent with the powers granted in this chapter. Such order may command the violator to take whatever steps are necessary to bring a violation into compliance by the date announced orally at the meeting and, within ten (10) working days subsequent to the hearing mailed to the violator. A certified copy of such order may be recorded in the public records of the county and shall constitute notice to any subsequent purchasers, successors in interest, or assigns if the violation concerns real property, and the findings therein shall be binding upon the violator and, if the violation concerns real property, any subsequent purchasers, successors in interest, or assigns. The violator may enter a stipulation admitting the existence of a violation, establish a date for compliance and a fine, which shall be announced at the hearing and an order shall be entered incorporating the stipulation. 
(g)  If an order is recorded in the public records pursuant to this section and the order is complied with by the date specified in the order, the special master shall issue an order acknowledging compliance that shall be recorded in the public records. A hearing is not required to issue such an order acknowledging compliance. 
(h)  The order of the special master may require the violator to pay a fine of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for a violation that is irreparable, or a fine up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day (five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for repeat violations) for each day the violation continues past the date set in the order for compliance or for each time the violation has been repeated. A hearing shall not be necessary for issuance of the order for the repeat violation. 
(i)  If the city prevails in prosecuting the case before the special master, it shall be entitled to recover all costs incurred in prosecuting the case before the special master and such costs may be included in the lien authorized under F.S. § 162.09(3). 
(j)  The special master may not reduce and/or waive any fines imposed for failure of the violator to timely comply with the order to correct the violation. However, the special master may forward to the city manager for review any requests for waiver and/or reduction of fines that do not exceed five (5) days of fines for failure to comply. 
(k)  If the owner of property which is subject to an enforcement proceeding before the special master transfers ownership of such property between the time the initial pleading was served and the time of the hearing, such owner shall: 
(1)  Disclose in writing the existence and the nature of the proceeding to the prospective transferee. 
(2)  Deliver to the prospective transferee a copy of the pleadings, notices, and other materials relating to the code enforcement proceeding received by the transferor. 
(3)  Disclose, in writing to the prospective transferee that the new owner will be responsible for compliance with the applicable code and with orders issued in the code enforcement proceeding. 
(4)  File a notice with the code enforcement official of the transfer of the property, with the identity and address of the new owner and copies of the disclosure made to the new owner, within five (5) days after the date of the transfer. 
A failure to make the disclosure described in subsections (k)(1), (2), and (3) of this section before the transfer creates a rebuttal presumption of fraud. If the property is transferred before the hearing, the proceeding shall not be dismissed but the new owner shall be provided a reasonable period of time to correct the violation before the hearing is held. 
(l)  Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the city from enforcing this Code by any other means. The enforcement procedures outlined in this article are cumulative to all others and shall not be deemed to be prerequisites to filing suit for the enforcement of any section of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2003-3, § 5, 4-8-2003; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009; Ord. No. 2010-05, 6-22-2010) 
Sec. 2-145. - Powers. 
    The special master shall have all powers created by F.S. Ch. 162. Additionally, the special master shall have all powers delegated by the city commission relating to the exercise of its police powers pursuant to F.S. Ch. 166. The special master shall have the express power to: 
(1)  Adopt rules for the conduct of the hearings; 
(2)  Subpoena alleged violators and witnesses to its hearings; subpoenas may be served by the police department; 
(3)  Subpoena evidence as necessary for hearings, including but not limited to physical and documentary evidence, such as records, surveys, plats and photographs; 
(4)  Take testimony under oath; 
(5)  Issue orders having the force of law to command whatever steps are necessary to bring a violation into compliance; 
(6)  Establish and enforce fines pursuant to section 2-146; 
(7)  Authorize the city attorney to foreclose on liens imposed pursuant to section 2-146 which remain unpaid after a period of three (3) months; and 
(8)  Grant and issue stays, or continuances, or expedite matters properly before him or her. 
(Ord. No. 2003-3, § 6, 4-8-2003; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 2-146. - Administrative fines; liens. 
(a)  The special master, upon notification by the code inspector that an order of the special master has not been complied with by the set time or upon finding that the same violation has been repeated by the same violator, may order the violator to pay a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each day the violation continues past the date set for compliance for a first violation and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each day for a repeat violation and a hearing shall not be necessary for issuance of the order. 
(b)  In determining the amount of the fine, if any, the special master shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  The gravity of the violation; 
(2)  Any actions taken by the violator to correct the violation; and 
(3)  Any previous violations committed by the violator. 
(c)  A certified copy of an order imposing a fine, or a fine plus repair costs may be recorded in the public records and thereafter shall constitute a lien against the land on which the violation exists and upon any other real or personal property owned by the violator. Upon petition to the circuit court, such order shall be enforceable in the same manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of Palm Beach County, including execution and levy against the personal property of the violator, but such order shall not be deemed to be a court judgment, except for enforcement purposes. A lien arising from a fine imposed pursuant to this division shall continue to accrue until the violator comes into compliance or until judgment is rendered in a suit filed pursuant to this division, whichever shall occur first. 
(d)  After three (3) months from the filing of any such lien which remains unpaid the special master may authorize the city attorney to foreclose on the lien. Such lien shall bear interest at a rate allowable by law from the date of compliance set forth in the recorded order acknowledging compliance. The local government body shall be entitled to collect all costs incurred in recording and satisfying a valid lien. No lien created pursuant to the provisions of this division may be foreclosed on real property which is a homestead under section 4, article X of the Florida constitution. 
(Ord. No. 2003-3, § 7, 4-8-2003; Ord. No. 2004-13, § 1, 11-23-2004; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009; Ord. No. 2010-05, 6-22-2010) 
Sec. 2-146.1. - Mitigation of code enforcement liens. 
(a)  All requests for mitigation of code enforcement liens must be submitted in writing to the code enforcement division, within forty-five (45) days of the date of execution of the affidavit of compliance. Where the applicant owns more than one (1) property in the city which has received code enforcement violations, the request for lien reduction application must be submitted within forty-five (45) days of the date of the execution of the affidavit of compliance for the last property to come into compliance. The written mitigation request shall contain the applicable case number and a statement that the applicant is in compliance with the all applicable code sections. Complete compliance with code is required before the city will consider a mitigation request. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a written request for mitigation of code enforcement lien(s), the code enforcement inspector shall verify that the applicant's property is in compliance with the city codes. In the event that the inspector determines that the applicant has not complied with all applicable codes, the mitigation request shall not be submitted to the special master. If the inspector determines that the applicant has complied with all applicable code sections, the inspector shall make a specific monetary recommendation with regard to the amount to which the lien(s) should be mitigated. This recommended amount will consider all costs incurred by the city in prosecuting the subject code enforcement case. 
(c)  The applicant or its representatives must complete section 2 of the mitigation application review form upon notification that the property has been deemed to be in compliance. 
(d)  After the applicant has completed section 2 of the mitigation application review form, including, but not limited to, filling in the specific amount which the applicant requests that the code enforcement lien(s) be mitigated to, the code enforcement department shall complete section 3 of the form, which section shall contain the department's recommendation to either approve or deny the specific request made by the applicant with regard to the amount which the applicant has requested that the code enforcement lien(s) be mitigated. 
(e)  After completion of section 3 of the form by the code enforcement department, the application for mitigation and the recommendation of the code enforcement department shall be presented to the special master for consideration and a decision by issuance of an order. 
(f)  In the event a mitigation request is approved by the special master, the order shall contain appropriate language requiring the applicant to pay the mitigated amount within the time set by the special master. It shall further provide that in the event payment is not timely made, the lien will be enforced in the original amount and will accrue interest at a rate not to exceed the amount allowable by law. Upon approval of the applicant's request by the special master and timely payment of a mitigated code enforcement lien, the city clerk shall record a satisfaction or release of the code enforcement lien(s). 
(Ord. No. 2004-13, § 2, 11-23-2004; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 2-9-2010; Ord. No. 2010-05, 6-22-2010) 
Sec. 2-147. - Duration of lien. 
    No lien provided under this division shall continue for a period longer than twenty (20) years after the certified copy of an order imposing fine has been recorded, unless within that time an action to foreclose on the lien is commenced in a court of competent jurisdiction. The continuation of the lien effected by the commencement of the action shall not be good against creditors or subsequent purchasers for valuable consideration without notice, unless a notice of lis pendens is recorded. In an action to foreclose on a lien or for a money judgment, the prevailing party is entitled to recover all costs, including a reasonable attorney's fee, that it incurs in the action. The city shall be entitled to collect all costs incurred in recording and satisfying an valid lien. 
(Ord. No. 2003-3, § 8, 4-8-2003; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 2-148. - Appeal. 
    An aggrieved party, including the city commission, may appeal a final administrative order of the special master to the circuit court. Such an appeal shall not be a hearing de novo but shall be limited to a petition for certiorari review of the record before the special master. An appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days of the execution of the order to be appealed. 
(Ord. No. 2003-3, § 9, 4-8-2003; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009; Ord. No. 2010-05, 6-22-2010) 
Sec. 2-149. - Notices. 
(a)  All notices required by this division shall be provided to the alleged violator by certified mail, return receipt requested, by hand delivery by the sheriff or other law enforcement officer, code inspector, or other person designated by the city commission; or by leaving the notice at the violator's usual place of residence with some person of his family above fifteen (15) years of age and informing such person of the contents of the notice. 
(b)  At the option of the special master, notice may also be served by publication or posting, as follows: 
(1)  a.  Such notice shall be published once during each week for four (4) consecutive weeks (four (4) publications being sufficient) in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. The newspaper shall meet such requirements as are prescribed under F.S. ch. 50 for legal and official advertisements. 
b.  Proof of publication shall be made as provided in F.S. §§ 50.041 and 50.051. 
(2)  a.  In lieu of publication as described in paragraph (1)a., such notice may be posted at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing, or prior to the expiration of any deadline contained in the notice, in at least two (2) locations, one (1) of which shall be the property upon which the violation is alleged to exist and the other of which shall be at the primary city government office. 
b.  Proof of posting shall be by affidavit of the person posting the notice. 
(3)  a.  Notice by publication or posting may run concurrently with or may follow an attempt to provide notice by hand delivery or by mail as required under subsection (a). 
b.  Evidence that an attempt has been made to hand deliver or mail notice as provided in subsection (a), together with proof of publication or posting as provided in subsection (2), shall be sufficient to show that the notice requirements of this division have been met, without regard to whether or not the alleged violator actually received such notice. 
(Ord. No. 2003-3, § 10, 4-8-2003; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009; Ord. No. 2017-02 , § 2, 4-25-17) 
DIVISION 3. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT BOARD 

Sec. 2-150. - Creation. 
    The City Commission of the City of Pahokee, Florida, hereby creates and establishes a board to be known as the Economic Development Board. 
(Ord. No. 2003-8, § 2, 9-9-2003; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 2-151. - Duties and function. 
    The board shall review and make recommendations to the city commission with respect to: 
(1)  Existing and proposed economic development programs, projects and issues which potentially may have an important impact on the local economy, business community and the residents of the City of Pahokee; 
(2)  Methods of attracting and maintaining businesses in the City of Pahokee which will impact on the economic development of the community; 
(3)  Methods of soliciting businesses to locate and/or relocate into the City of Pahokee; 
(4)  Applications for state, federal and foundation grant funding that may assist with economic development and redevelopment of City of Pahokee; 
(5)  Potential changes to the City of Pahokee Comprehensive Plan which pertain to economic development; 
(6)  Matters which the city commission may periodically direct that the board review, and subsequently present the board's findings and recommendations for city commission consideration and action. 
(Ord. No. 2003-8, § 3, 9-9-2003; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 2-152. - Authority. 
    The board shall not have the authority to bind the City Commission or the City of Pahokee without prior consent of the city commission. The board may request information, advice or assistance from any department of the City of Pahokee in furtherance of its duties and functions. 
(Ord. No. 2003-8, § 4, 9-9-2003; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 2-153. - Membership. 
(a)  The board shall be comprised of seven (7) members. The mayor shall appoint two alternates who shall be approved by the city commission. Two of the seven members shall be professionals with expertise in either academia and/or economics. Each commissioner, including the mayor, shall have the right to appoint one member to the board. The mayor shall also appoint two professional members with ratification by the commission. The term of office shall be two (2) years with the option to be re-appointed for an additional two year term. There is no limit on the number of times that a member may be reappointed. 
(b)  Each member shall be allowed two unexcused absences per calendar year. After the second unexcused absence the member shall be notified that one more unexcused absence shall result in automatic termination of their term on the board. In the event that a member is terminated for nonattendance, the chairman of the board shall submit a request for a replacement be placed on the next available city commission agenda. 
(c)  A member is responsible for notifying the chairperson of the board prior to the time of the meeting of an anticipated absence and request that it be considered an excused absence. The board may determine which absences will be considered excused absences and which are unexcused. 
(d)  Any member removed from the board of nonattendance shall not be considered for committee or board appointment for a period of one year after the removal. 
(e)  An alternate may sit in on discussions of each and every meeting, however, shall not have voting powers unless at least one regular member is absent from the meeting. Both alternates may vote if two or more regular members are absent. 
(f)  Alternates present at the meeting may be considered in determining whether or not a quorum is present. 
(Ord. No. 2003-8, § 5, 9-9-2003; Ord. No. 2005-02, § 1, 8-23-2005; Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1, 7-11-2006; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 2-154. - Annual report. 
    The board shall submit an annual report to the City Commission of the City of Pahokee, by February of each year for the previous calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2003-8, § 6, 9-9-2003; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
Sec. 2-155. - Sunshine Law. 
    The board shall comply with Sunshine Law. Reasonable public notice of all board meetings shall be provided. All meetings of the board, and any of its subcommittees, shall be open to the public at all times, duly advertised and otherwise comply with all applicable requirements of the government-in-the-sunshine and public records laws of the State of Florida. Minutes shall be taken at each meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2003-8, § 7, 9-9-2003; Ord. No. 2009-10, § 2, 10-27-2009) 
DIVISION 4. - COMMUNITY RELATIONS BOARD 

Sec. 2-156. - Creation. 
    The City Commission of the City of Pahokee, Florida hereby creates and establishes a board to be known as the community relations board. 
(Ord. No. 2003-9, § 2, 9-9-2003) 
Sec. 2-157. - Duties and function. 
    The board shall review and make recommendations to the city commission with respect to: 
(1)  Issues which potentially may have an important impact on the relationship and ability of the local community to work together on projects which are beneficial to the residents of the City of Pahokee; 
(2)  Methods for the community to live, work and play together in harmony in the City of Pahokee; 
(3)  Methods of promoting the diversity of the residents of the City of Pahokee; 
(4)  Host an annual cultural festival which will highlight the diversity of the population of the City of Pahokee; 
(5)  Matters which the city commission may periodically direct that the board review, and subsequently present the board's findings and recommendations for city commission consideration and action. 
(Ord. No. 2003-9, § 3, 9-9-2003) 
Sec. 2-158. - Authority. 
    The board shall not have the authority to bind the city commission or the City of Pahokee without prior consent of the city commission. The board may request information, advice or assistance from any department of the City of Pahokee in furtherance of its duties and functions. 
(Ord. No. 2003-9, § 4, 9-9-2003) 
Sec. 2-159. - Membership. 
(a)  The board shall be comprised of seven (7) members who shall be appointed by the city commission. Each commissioner shall have the right to appoint one (1) member to the board with the mayor and vice mayor appointing two (2) members each. Six (6) members shall be residents of the City of Pahokee. One member may be a non-resident. The membership of this board shall reflect the diversity of the community in the City of Pahokee. The term of office shall be two (2) years with the option to reappoint for an additional two-year term. 
(b)  Each member shall be allowed two (2) unexcused absences per calendar year. After the second unexcused absence, the member shall be notified that one more unexcused absence shall result in automatic termination of their term on the board. In the event that a member is terminated for nonattendance. The chairperson of the board shall submit a request for a replacement be placed on the next available city commission agenda. 
(c)  A member is responsible for notifying the chairperson of the board prior to the time of the meeting of an anticipated absence and request that it be considered an excused absence. The board may determine which absences will be considered excused absences and which are unexcused. 
(d)  Any member removed from the board for nonattendance shall not be considered for committee or board appointment for a period of one year after the removal. 
(e)  An alternate may sit in on discussions of each and every meeting, however shall not have voting powers unless at least one regular member is absent from the meeting. Both alternates may vote if two (2) or more regular members are absent. 
(f)  Alternates present at the meeting may be considered in determining whether or not a quorum is present. 
(Ord. No. 2003-9, § 5, 9-9-2003; Ord. No. 2005-03, § 1, 8-23-2005; Ord. No. 2010-08, § 2, 8-10-2010) 
Sec. 2-160. - Annual report. 
    The board shall submit an annual report to the City Commission of the City of Pahokee, by February of each year for the previous calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2003-9, § 6, 9-9-2003) 
Sec. 2-161. - Sunshine Law. 
    The board shall comply with Sunshine Law. Reasonable public notice of all board meetings shall be provided. All meetings of the board, and any of its subcommittees, shall be open to the public at all times, duly advertised and otherwise comply with all applicable requirements of the government-in-the-sunshine and public records laws of the State of Florida. Minutes shall be taken at each meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2003-9, § 7, 9-9-2003) 
Sec. 2-162. - Parks and recreation advisory board. 
(a)  Creation of board. The City of Pahokee hereby creates the parks and recreation advisory board. 
(b)  Membership. The board shall consist of five members who are citizens of the city and who are appointed for two-year terms by the city commission. 
(c)  Advisory board liaison. One member of the city commission, appointed by the commission, shall serve as parks and recreation commission liaison. This liaison shall report to the city commission any recommendations of the advisory board. The commission liaison shall not be a voting member of the advisory board and shall not have any authority to direct the parks and recreation department. All input from the advisory board shall be reported by the liaison to the city commission. If the city commission determines to act on any advisory board recommendation, it shall discuss the recommendation at a public meeting and, based on the decision, direct the city manager on the commission's discussion with respect to the recommendation. 
(d)  Duties of advisory board. The advisory board shall assist in the planning for city recreational and playground sites, activities, plans, capital improvements, guidelines, programs, and any other matters at the request of the city commission or city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04, § 2, 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 2-163. - Education advisory board. 
(a)  Creation of board. The City of Pahokee hereby creates the education advisory board. 
(b)  Membership. The board shall consist of five members who are citizens of the city and who are appointed for two-year terms by the city commission. 
(c)  Advisory board liaison. One member of the city commission, appointed by the commission, shall serve as education commission liaison. This liaison shall report to the city commission any recommendations of the advisory board. The commission liaison shall not be a voting member of the advisory board. All input from the advisory board shall be reported by the liaison to the city commission. If the city commission determines to act on any advisory board recommendation, it shall discuss the recommendation at a public meeting and, based on the decision, direct the city manager on the commission's discussion with respect to the recommendation. 
(d)  Duties of advisory board. The advisory board shall make recommendations to the city commission on all matters related to improving the educational opportunities of the residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-05, § 2, 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 2-164. - Beautification advisory board. 
(a)  Creation of board. The City of Pahokee hereby creates the city beautification advisory board. 
(b)  Membership. The board shall consist of five members who are citizens of the city and who are appointed for two-year terms by the city commission. 
(c)  Advisory board liaison. One member of the city commission, appointed by the commission, shall serve as city beautification commission liaison. This liaison shall report to the city commission any recommendations of the advisory board. The commission liaison shall not be a voting member of the advisory board. All input from the advisory board shall be reported by the liaison to the city commission. If the city commission determines to act on any advisory board recommendation, it shall discuss the recommendation at a public meeting and, based on the decision, direct the city manager on the commission's discussion with respect to the recommendation. 
(d)  Duties of advisory board. The city beautification advisory board shall advise the city on all matters, projects, and plans that will enhance the aesthetics of the city and make it a more attractive place to live and work. 
(Ord. No. 2012-06, § 2, 5-8-2012) 
Sec. 2-165. - Cemetery advisory board. 
(a)  Creation of board. The City of Pahokee hereby creates the City of Pahokee Cemetery advisory board. 
(b)  Membership. The board shall consist of five (5) members who are residents of the city and who are appointed for two-year terms by the city commission. 
(c)  Advisory board liaison. One (1) member of the city commission, appointed by the commission, shall serve as city commission liaison. This liaison shall report to the city commission any recommendations of the advisory board. The commission liaison shall not be a voting member of the advisory board. All input from the advisory board shall be reported by the liaison to the city commission. 
(d)  Duties of advisory board. The cemetery advisory board shall advise the city on all matters, projects, and plans that will enhance the cemetery of the City of Pahokee. 
(Ord. No. 2016-10 , § 2, 10-11-2016) 
Sec. 2-166. - City youth council. 
(a)  Creation of council. The City of Pahokee hereby creates the City of Pahokee youth council. 
(b)  Membership. The youth council shall consist of five (5) members who are residents of the city and who are appointed for two-year terms by the city commission. 
(c)  Advisory board liaison. One (1) member of the city commission, appointed by the commission, shall serve as city commission liaison. This liaison shall report to the city commission any recommendations of the advisory board. The commission liaison shall not be a voting member of the advisory board. All input from the advisory board shall be reported by the liaison to the city commission. 
(d)  Duties of advisory board. The city youth council shall advise the city on all matters, projects, and plans relating to youth participation in city government and civic activities in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-11 , § 2, 10-25-2016) 
Secs. 2-167-2-169. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - CODE ENFORCEMENT ADVISORY BOARD[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 2009-02, adopted April 4, 2009, created division 5, Code Advisory Board. The ordinance specified the sections of the new division be numbered as 2-162 through 2-164. In order to retain reserved sections between divisions and articles, the sections were renumbered as 2-170 through 2-172 at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 2-170. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created and established a seven (7) member committee entitled "Code Enforcement Advisory Board." The purpose of the code enforcement advisory board is to advise and to assist the city commission, the city manager, city code enforcement officer, law enforcement, the fire department, and the city manager in finding ways to improve the appearance and safety of the city, and to educate and encourage all residents to participate in the beautification of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02, § 1(2-162), 4-4-2009) 
Sec. 2-171. - Membership. 
    One member of the code enforcement advisory board shall be appointed by each commissioner. Two members shall be appointed by the mayor and two members shall be appointed by the vice mayor. There shall be at least one (1) member with a substantial business background; one (1) member from the Chamber of Commerce; one (1) member representing a recognized religious organization; one (1) member from law enforcement or the fire department; and the remaining members from the community at large. With the exception of representatives from law enforcement and the fire department, all members shall reside within the city. Members shall serve for two terms of two (2) years. The city commission shall make appointments to fill vacancies for unexpired terms. In order to encourage as much community involvement as possible, a member may only serve four continuous years. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02, § 1(2-163), 4-4-2009) 
Sec. 2-172. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  Conduct a review of those municipal ordinances as deemed necessary by the CEAB, related to the appearance, health and/or safety of the community, or as recommended by the city commission. The board shall make recommendations to the city commission for the addition, deletion and revision of ordinances. 
(b)  Make recommendations for educating citizens in code compliance, and encouraging each resident to take pride in keeping their property safe and clean. 
(c)  Recommend enforcement priorities for city staff. Make recommendations to the city manager or his/her designee based on the needs of the community. 
(d)  Act as a conduit of communication between the city and the community, and gather and assess the information necessary to make sound recommendations to the city for service delivery. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02, § 1(2-164), 4-4-2009) 
Secs. 2-173-2-176. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-177-2-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HOSPITALIZATION AND MEDICAL INSURANCE 

Sec. 2-181. - Selected. 
    The city commission shall select the hospitalization and medical insurance for the city. 
(Code 1984, § 2-126) 
Sec. 2-182. - "City employee" defined. 
    For the purpose of the city hospital and medical care employees insurance program, a city employee shall mean all elected officials, all salaried employees and all employees paid on an hourly rate basis that are scheduled to work at least forty (40) hours per week as a regular city employee. An employee must complete sixty (60) calendar days of employment before being eligible and may enroll in the plan upon his completion of an application at any time during the third thirty (30) days of his first ninety (90) days of employment, or if he does not do so, then only during the annual anniversary enrollment period under the then existing city contract with the insurance carrier. It shall be the duty of the employee to make application for coverage under this insurance program with the city clerk during the time he may lawfully enroll under the city insurance contract, otherwise he shall be deemed to have rejected coverage. After the filing of the application by the employee, coverage shall become effective for that employee as provided in the then existing city contract with the insurance carrier. Any employee who has terminated employment with the city and is subsequently reemployed by the city must against qualify and make a new application as provided above for any new employee. 
(Code 1984, § 2-127; Ord. No. 2013-03, § 2, 7-9-2013) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-183. - Premium. 
    The city shall pay the cost of the single person premium rate for each employee of the city, according to the premium thereof required by the contract entered into between the city and the insurance carrier. Any employee may elect at the times allowed by the contract to provide supplemental coverage for members of his family permitted under the contract, provided he pays the additional premium cost thereof and authorizes the premium cost to be deducted from his regular payroll compensation. 
(Code 1984, § 2-128) 
Secs. 2-184-2-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OLD-AGE AND SURVIVOR'S INSURANCE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Social security for public employees, F.S. Ch. 650; authority of political subdivisions of the state to submit plans for inclusion under the Social Security Act, F.S. § 650.05. 

Sec. 2-201. - Adoption of provisions of Title II of Social Security Act as amended. 
    The city hereby adopts the terms, conditions, requirements, reservations, benefits, privileges, and other conditions thereunto appertaining, of Title II of the Social Security Act as amended by Public Law No. 734 of the 81st Congress, for and on behalf of all the officers and employees thereof and of its departments and agencies, save and except any of such officers and employees now covered or authorized to be covered by any retirement system provided by law, and further excepting any official or employee who occupies any position, office, or employment not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1984, § 2-147) 
Sec. 2-202. - Extended to city officials and employees. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend, effective as of October 1, 1951, to the employees and officials thereof not excluded by law, from time to time, and whether employed in connection with a governmental or proprietary function, the benefits of the system of old-age and survivor's insurance as authorized by the Federal Social Security Acts and amendments thereto, including Public Law 734 of the 81st Congress, and by F.S. Ch. 650; and to cover by such plan all services which constitute employment as defined in F.S. § 650.02(2), performed in the employ of the city by employees thereof. In pursuance of such policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1984, § 2-141) 
Sec. 2-203. - Execution of agreements. 
    The mayor is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the division of retirement, the department of administration, as the state agency for the state, or his authorized representative for the purpose of extending the benefits provided by the system of old-age and survivor's insurance to the employees and officials of this city as provided in section 2-202, which agreement shall provide for such methods of administration of the plan by the city as are found by the state agency to be necessary for the proper and efficient administration thereof, and shall be effective with respect to services in employment covered by such agreement performed after the first day of October 1951. 
(Code 1984, § 2-142) 
Sec. 2-204. - Withholdings from wages. 
    Withholdings from salaries, wages or other compensation of employees and officials for the purpose provided in section 2-202 are hereby authorized to be made, and shall be made, in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the state agency designated by such laws or regulations to receive such amounts. 
(Code 1984, § 2-143) 
Sec. 2-205. - Payments of city contributions. 
    There shall be appropriated from available funds, derived from the general revenue fund, such amounts at such times as may be required to pay promptly the contributions required of the city as employer by applicable state or federal laws or regulations for the propose provided in this division which shall be paid over to the lawfully designated state agency at the times and in the manner provided by law and regulation. 
(Code 1984, § 2-144) 
Sec. 2-206. - Custody of moneys; personnel records. 
    The finance director is hereby designated the custodian of all sums withheld from the compensation of officers and employees and of the appropriated funds for the contribution of the city and the city personnel manager is hereby made the withholding and reporting agent and charged with the duty of maintaining personnel records for the purposes of this division. 
(Code 1984, § 2-148) 
Sec. 2-207. - Records, reports; compliance with state rules and regulations. 
    The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations pertaining to old-age and survivor's insurance, and shall adhere to the rules and regulations of the state agency for the enforcement of such laws and regulations. 
(Code 1984, § 2-145) 
Sec. 2-208. - Duplication of benefits. 
    There is hereby excluded from this division any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position or any employee or official now covered, or authorized to be covered, by any other ordinance or law creating any retirement system for any employee or official of the city. 
(Code 1984, § 2-146) 
Secs. 2-209-2-224. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - (RESERVED) 

Secs. 2-225-2-245. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - FLORIDA RETIREMENT SYSTEM[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Florida retirement system, F.S. Ch. 121. 

Sec. 2-246. - Declaration of policy. 
(a)  The provisions of the Florida Retirement System are no longer available to city employees. Those employees that elected to become part of the Florida Retirement System shall remain eligible for the benefits thereunder. 
(b)  All employees and officials that are participants in the state retirement system as of January 1, 2013, shall remain entitled to all those benefits thereof. 
(c)  All employees and officials shall be entitled to the benefits as determined by the commission as set forth in the city personnel rules and regulations, as amended from time to time. Employees' and officials' rights to benefits are not vested and are subject to change. 
(Code 1984, § 2-181; Ord. No. 2013-03, §§ 2, 3, 7-9-2013) 
Secs. 2-247-2-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FINANCE[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Ordinances promising payment of money; authorizing issuance of bonds saved from repeal, § 1-7(1); appropriation ordinances and ordinances providing for levy of taxes and for annual budgets saved from repeal, § 1-7(8); financial administration department, § 2-102. 
State Law reference- Municipal borrowing, F.S. § 166.101 et seq.; municipal finance and taxation, F.S. § 166.201 et seq.; financial matters pertaining to political subdivisions, F.S. Ch. 218. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-271. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city is hereby fixed and established as the period of time from and including October first to and including the thirtieth day of September, each and every year. 
(Code 1984, § 2-201) 
State Law reference- Mandate for fiscal year, F.S. § 166.241(2). 
Sec. 2-272. - Purchase orders. 
    The power to make purchases or contract for the furnishing of goods or services for and on behalf of the city is hereby authorized as follows: 
(1)  Authorization of procurement officers. 
a.  The city manager is empowered as procurement officer for the city. 
b.  Other employees may be granted limited purchase authority upon written warrant of the city manager. 
c.  The finance director will act as procurement officer in the event of the absence of the city manager. 
d.  A majority of the city commission may appoint one (1) of the members of the commission to act as a procurement officer, in the event of the absences of the city manager and the finance director. 
(2)  Establishment of a purchase order system. 
a.  All purchases made by the city shall have a purchase order number issued by the procurement officer, excluding minor purchases made from petty cash and those purchases declared exempt by this section. 
b.  Purchase orders shall contain the following: Name of the business or firm, description of the purchases, amount of purchase and signature of the authorized procurement officer or purchasing agent. 
c.  The finance director shall cause to be maintained a purchase order record and shall therein record all purchases made by the city. 
(3)  Purchase limitations. No purchase exceeding ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall be made without the approval of the city commission. 
(4)  Competitive bids and exemptions. 
a.  All purchases exceeding ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall be awarded after receiving bids. Local businesses shall be afforded equal opportunity to bid on every city purchase. The city manager, on a case by case basis, may determine that the type of purchase will require workers that are present and available in the local Pahokee workforce. The city manager may set a goal for the use of city residents. 
b.  Purchase orders involving an obligation of the city for a sum in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall be signed by the city clerk, after award by the city commission upon invitations to bid, published once a week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and approval by the city commission of the lowest responsible bidder. The published notice shall set forth the time and place that the sealed bids will be opened and shall either set forth the specifications or disclose where the specifications may be obtained. 
c.  Sole source items shall be exempt from competitive bids. 
d.  Items on the state or other governmental bid lists shall be exempt from competitive bidding. 
e.  Proprietary purchases may be exempt when the vendor will supply the item/service at prices equal to or less than the price quoted on state, federal, or other governmental bid lists. 
(5)  Professional services. Contractors or agreements for the furnishing of professional services to the city, such as engineers, architects, accountants, attorneys, and other professional fees, shall be excluded from this section but shall be by contract approved and authorized, executed by the city commission from time to time in the manner required by law. 
(6)  Exempt purchases. 
a.  Exempt purchases not requiring the use of a purchase order or the express approval of the city commission, but which are included in the budget resolution are utilities, departmental salaries, salary increases, bonuses, insurance, intergovernmental transfers and court ordered payments. 
b.  Any time in any budget year the city commission may make emergency purchases to meet a pressing need for the protection of the public health, safety, or welfare, other than for regular or recurring requirements, upon signature of the city clerk, and approval of a majority of the city commission in session. 
c.  Emergency purchases not exceeding fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) may be made by the city manager or the procurement officer to meet a pressing need for the protection of the public health, safety, or welfare of the community. The city commission shall ratify every emergency purchase as soon as it is reasonably possible. 
(7)  Determination of lowest responsible bidder. All purchases shall be made in such a manner as to invite free competition and to secure the best products, services and properties at the lowest responsible price practicable, taking into consideration all applicable facts. In determining "lowest responsible bidder," in addition to price, the city shall consider: 
a.  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the services required; 
b.  Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly or within the time specified, without delay or interference; 
c.  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder; 
d.  The quality of performance of previous contracts or services; 
e.  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or service; 
f.  The sufficiency of financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service; 
g.  The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies, or contractual services to the particular use required; 
h.  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance for the use of the subject of the contract; 
i.  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid; 
j.  Whether the bidder has met the goal set by the city manager for use of local people under subsection (4)a of this section; 
k.  Whether the bidder has a place of business within the Glades Area of Pahokee, Belle Glade, and South Bay (local bidder). The city commission may give preference to a local bidder if and only if the local bidder's bid is within five (5) percent or five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), whichever is less, of the lowest bid; 
l.  This subsection is void if the project is funded by a federal or state grant that requires low bid be based on cost only. 
(Code 1984, § 2-202; Ord. No. 88-14, § 1, 11-8-1988; Ord. No. 88-14, § 1, 10-24-1989; Ord. No. 96-6, § 1, 6-25-1996; Ord. No. 2002-02, § 1, 4-9-2002; Ord. No. 2009-09, 10-13-2009) 
Sec. 2-273. - Unclaimed funds in possession of city. 
(a)  Whenever there have been held by the city clerk or the chief clerk of the public services department, or any other officer or employee who is authorized by the Charter, this Code or any ordinance of the city to have funds in his possession, monies for a period of three (3) months or more for any of the following: 
(1)  Wages or salaries due to any officer or employee; 
(2)  Overpayment of license fees or occupational license fees or overpayment of fees due under this Code or any ordinances of the city; 
(3)  Bond monies for appearance bonds which have not been forfeited and which have been released by the court; 
(4)  Unclaimed water meter deposits when water has been shut off and bills due the city for water have been paid and the balance is due the water deposit holder; 
which monies properly belong to some known person other than the city and which for some reason the city clerk or the chief clerk of the public services department or any other officer or employee as outlined above has not been able to refund within a three (3) months' period to the person entitled to the same, whether because such person has not called for the money or such person cannot be located or notified so to do, then in such an event, if the party holding the funds is not connected with the public services department the monies shall go into the general funds of the city. If the person holding the funds is connected with the public services department, then such funds shall go in the general funds of the public services department. 
(b)  If unclaimed funds are deposited as specified in subsection (a) and the person entitled to them applies for such funds, it shall be the duty of the particular person who deposited such funds to advise the person to apply to the city commission for payment. Any person who is entitled to monies as provided in subsection (a) shall have the right at any time within five (5) years from the date such money was available to such person to apply to the city commission for payment and the city commission, upon proper proof that the applicant is entitled to the money shall order payment from the funds in which it was originally deposited. If the claim is not filed within such five-year period, the claim will be barred. 
(Code 1984, § 2-203) 
State Law reference- Escheats, F.S. Ch. 716. 
Sec. 2-274. - Grant administration fee. 
(a)  Established. The city hereby imposes an administration fee on all grants received or administered by the city to offset the city's cost of administering the grant, application costs, employee costs, legal costs and all other expenditures incurred by the city in the administration of the grant. The standard fee shall be ten percent (10%) of the grant amount. The fee may be adjusted upon the recommendation of the city manager and approval of the commission if it is shown that: 
(1)  The actual cost of administering the grant is more than ten percent (10%); 
(2)  The grant's terms specify a different percentage allowed for administration; or 
(3)  Other extraordinary circumstances deemed sufficient by the commission to justify a variation from the standard fee. 
(b)  Existing grants. The city manager will report to the commission any existing grants that require ongoing administration costs. The administrative fee shall be charged unless prohibited by contract or law. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, §§ 1, 2, 10-13-2009) 
Secs. 2-275-2-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FINANCE DIRECTOR[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference- Officers, § 2-46 et seq. 

Sec. 2-291. - Position established. 
    The position of finance director is hereby established in order to properly administer, monitor and direct the city's financial and purchasing affairs. 
(Ord. No. 89-10, § 1, 8-22-1989) 
Sec. 2-292. - Employee status. 
    The finance director shall be an "at-will" employee of the city, to be hired, terminated, transferred, promoted, demoted, evaluated and, in all other respects, supervised by the city manager, at his sole discretion and in accordance with the applicable laws of the city. 
(Ord. No. 89-10, § 2, 8-22-1989) 
Sec. 2-293. - Powers and duties. 
    The finance director shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  Plan, assign, direct, supervise and coordinate various city-wide accounting and related fiscal activities; make recommendations with respect to implementation of improvements needed to effect more efficient use of personnel and equipment; 
(2)  Make recommendations and decisions regarding operational policies, expenditures, plans and other administrative matters as they affect the department; prepare and administer the departmental budget; 
(3)  Plan and direct the overall development and the operational controls and techniques for the maintenance of the central accounting system; 
(4)  Participate in the preparation of the annual city-wide budget, making forecasts on the revenues, expenditures, indebtedness, interest, etc., for the upcoming fiscal year; 
(5)  Supervise and direct gathering, interpreting, recording and distributing financial data; prepare or supervise preparation of financial records and reports; monitor fiscal activities and ensure compliance with applicable federal, state, county and municipal requirements; coordinate fiscal services with other municipal departments; 
(6)  Exercise supervision over special funds; negotiate safe investments for special funds and recordkeeping of the funds; 
(7)  Invest temporarily idle funds to ensure maximum return consistent with sound investment policies; 
(8)  Compile, prepare and present financial records and reports on a regular schedule or upon request; supply specific information to investment firms, administrative officials, the city commission, the general public and individuals requesting financial data; 
(9)  Participate in the analysis of city financial policies; interpret financial and accounting data; formulate recommendations for action by the city manager and the city commission; 
(10)  Review results of auditors and responsibility for corrective action if necessary; 
(11)  Prepare annual financial report as required by the Charter; 
(12)  Prescribe accounting forms and procedures; supervise continuous audit of units handling cash and maintaining accounting records; 
(13)  Make recommendations, in the interest of the city, that eligible applicants be hired to fill departmental vacancies and that subordinate employees be reassigned, transferred, disciplined, suspended, terminated, promoted or commended; participate in the adjustment of grievances; 
(14)  Confer with and advise subordinates concerning difficult work problems or regarding the development and installation of new work procedures and policies; 
(15)  Conduct staff studies; recommend policy and management systems that affect the overall city to ensure proper accountability to control operations; 
(16)  Work closely with the city manager and other department heads concerning the automated accounting systems and in developing new data processing applications for financial management and control; set priorities and give general direction to financial data processing activities; 
(17)  Responsibility for the preparation of bonds of indebtedness and for the collection of revenues; 
(18)  Through association with national technical societies, trade and professional associations, other governmental jurisdictions and private businesses, keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products; 
(19)  Receive and verify requisitions and determine propriety of proposed purchases; consolidate departmental requisitions when possible; develop and consult list of appropriate vendors and prepare formal or informal bid invitations as appropriate; receive and analyze quotations and bids for relative prices and consistency with specifications; select best bid and prepare and award contracts to vendors for purchases or prepare recommendations for action by the city manager or city commission; 
(20)  Supervise the preparation of specifications for the purchase of equipment, materials and services; 
(21)  Keep currently informed of laws, rules and regulations affecting the relationship of principal and agent, as well as those affecting contracts and delivery material, and conduct studies for the improvement of procurement and supply policies and practices; 
(22)  Where appropriate, direct a variety of affirmative action efforts designed to ensure that minority and women-owned business enterprises (MBEs/WBEs) have an equitable opportunity to participate in the procurement system; 
(23)  Advise other departments of purchasing requirements and procedures and monitor for compliance; 
(24)  Advise subordinates concerning difficult work problems in the development and installation of new work procedures and policies; 
(25)  Participate in the analysis of city purchasing policies; review type and level of inventory maintained; interpret data; formulate recommendations for action through the department head to the city manager and the city commission; 
(26)  Act as the city's official disbursement officer, preparing, signing, and disbursing cash, checks or negotiable instruments; 
(27)  Perform related work as required. 
(Ord. No. 89-10, § 3, 8-22-1989) 
Chapter 3 - ADVERTISING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Outdoor advertisers, F.S. Ch. 479. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Advertising benches. 
    No advertising benches shall be allowed within the city limits of the city without prior approval of the city subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Advertising benches shall be defined as any and all benches, seats, or similar items containing an advertisement, message, logo, or any and all other material placed on a bench, chair or similar item for advertising purposes. 
(2)  No one person or entity shall be allowed more than six (6) advertising benches within the city limits. 
(3)  All advertising benches must be approved by the city commission, not only as to location, but also as to design, material, and color of both the advertisement and the bench. 
(4)  The property owner of the site where the advertising bench is to be situated, must provide written permission to allow said bench to be situated on the subject property. 
(5)  The advertising bench must be properly maintained. 
(6)  That the city may establish reasonable procedures to apply for the right to install and maintain advertising benches and the city may further charge a reasonable fee in connection therewith. Said procedure may be established by resolution or any other means available to the city. 
(Ord. No. 91-4, § 1, 7-23-1991) 
Secs. 3-2-3-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HANDBILLS 

Sec. 3-26. - Definition. 
    As used in this article, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the word "handbill" shall include any printed or written advertising matter, poster, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed matter or literature, but not regularly established newspapers. 
(Code 1984, § 3-16) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 3-27. - Construction of article. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent merchants, doing business in the city, and residents advertising private sales, from distributing or posting advertisements, circulars and handbills, provided the merchants or residents do so in accordance with all provisions of this article. 
(Code 1984, § 3-24) 
Sec. 3-28. - Article not applicable to certain services. 
    The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to apply to messenger service or to the distribution of the United States mail or telegrams, nor to the delivery of any handbill to any person who has requested delivery of same. 
(Code 1984, § 3-25) 
Sec. 3-29. - Placing on public property prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or on any public thoroughfare, park, ground or other public place within the city. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handing, transmitting or distribution of any handbill to any person willing to accept such handbill. 
(Code 1984, § 3-17) 
Cross reference- Garbage and trash, Ch. 11; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22. 
State Law reference- Florida litter law, F.S. § 403.413. 
Sec. 3-30. - Distribution on private property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to throw, scatter, place, or cast any handbill in or upon any private yard, grounds, walk, steps, building, mailbox or any other private property. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handing, transmitting or distributing of any handbill to the owner or other occupant of such building, private yard, grounds, walk, steps, mailbox or other private property who is willing to accept such handbill, or in case no objection is made by a resident or property owner, handbills may be distributed or placed in or upon private property or a residence provided they are directly handed to a resident of the property or are inserted in a container on the premises or otherwise secured to a package or to the property so as to prevent blowing and drifting about, provided that such residence or building is not temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant so as to create an accumulation of such papers or advertising matter. 
(Code 1984, § 3-18) 
Sec. 3-31. - Distribution on posted property prohibited. 
    It shall be lawful for the owner or the occupant of any property to place a sign in a conspicuous place near the entrance thereof indicating that no handbills are desired; and it shall be unlawful for any person to go upon such premises so posted and distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill. 
(Code 1984, § 3-19) 
Sec. 3-32. - Hours distribution prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute any handbill between the hours of 8:00 p.m. of any day and 8:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(Code 1984, § 3-20) 
Sec. 3-33. - Methods of distribution. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute handbills in such a manner as to impede the free flow of traffic upon any street or sidewalk, nor shall any such person distributing handbills molest or annoy any individual, group or gathering. 
(Code 1984, § 3-21) 
Sec. 3-34. - Posting on bridges, fences, trees, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful to tack, nail, paste, paint or otherwise affix any handbill upon any bridge, fence, sidewalk, building, tree, monument, pole or post; provided, however, that handbills may be affixed upon private property, buildings or billboards if the consent of the owner shall have first been obtained, and provided further that this shall not prohibit lawfully posted legal notices. 
(Code 1984, § 3-22) 
Sec. 3-35. - Destroying, defacing or removing lawfully posted advertisements. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person except the owner of the board or building to mar, deface, destroy or pull down any advertisement lawfully posted in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1984, § 3-23) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Liquors and beverages, F.S. § 561.01 et seq. 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverage means any beverage containing more than one (1) percent of alcohol by weight. 
    Closed means locked and sealed off from any outside street, passageway or alley and locked, sealed and partitioned from any other room, building or opening. 
    Licensee means any vendor who is duly licensed by the state to sell alcoholic beverages. 
    Vendor includes the words person, firm, partnership, corporation, club and association. 
(Code 1984, § 4-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Definitions, F.S. § 561.01. 
Sec. 4-2. - Vendors near church or school. 
(a)  No licensee shall conduct a place of business or establishment for the sale of alcoholic beverages whose place of business for such sales is within three hundred (300) feet of any established church or school, except restaurants that sell beer and wine for consumption on the premises only whose annual sales of food exceed 50 percent of the gross sales of the restaurant (State Liquor License Category (SRX)) may locate next to churches. Such distance shall be measured by following the shortest route of ordinary pedestrian travel along the public thoroughfare from the main entrance of the place of business to the nearest point of the church or school real property in use as part of the church or school facilities. 
(b)  Whenever a licensee has procured a license permitting the sale of alcoholic beverages, and thereafter a church or school is established within three hundred (300) feet of the place of business of the licensee as prohibited by subsection (a), the establishment of such church or school shall not be cause for closing of the business. 
(c)  Existing continuing businesses that sell alcoholic beverages may transfer ownership and are not affected by this ordinance even if a church or school has moved within three hundred (300) feet of the retail business. 
(Code 1984, § 4-2; Ord. No. 98-3, 7-14-1998; Ord. No. 2009-03, § 1, 4-28-2009) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate location of alcoholic beverage establishments, F.S. § 562.45(2). 
Sec. 4-3. - Hours of sale. 
    No alcoholic beverages may be sold, consumed or served or permitted to be served or consumed, in any place holding a license under the state division of alcoholic beverages and tobacco of the department of business regulation, except during the following periods: 
(1)  7:00 a.m. to 3:00 a.m. of the next succeeding day, Mondays through Saturdays; 
(2)  2:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight on Sundays; 
(3)  On New Year's Eve, December 31, except when December 31 falls on a Sunday, from 7:00 a.m., December 31 to 7:00 a.m. of the following day; 
(4)  When December 31 falls on a Sunday, then the hours shall be 2:00 p.m. until 7:00 a.m. of the following day; 
(5)  In private clubs and social organizations holding a valid current state beverage license under F.S. § 565.02(4) the hours of sale shall be 12:01 a.m. on Mondays to 3:00 a.m. on Sundays; except when New Year's Eve, December 31, falls on Sunday, the hours of sale shall be 8:00 p.m. on Sunday to 3:00 a.m. on Monday. 
(Code 1984, § 4-3; Ord. No. 90-4, § 1, 2-27-1990; Ord. No. 2013-01, § 2, 1-8-2013; Ord. No. 2015-04 , § 1, 9-22-2015) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate hours of sale, F.S. §§ 562.14(1), 562.45(2). 
Sec. 4-4. - Selling, purchasing, serving during closed hours. 
    During the hours in which sales of alcoholic beverages are not permitted, it shall be unlawful for any vendor, licensee, clerk, caterer, or person to purchase, sell, possess, store, serve, distribute or have on his person any alcoholic beverage in any public place then open to the public, unless the alcoholic beverage is in the original manufacturer's sealed container, unopened with the seal unbroken. Such acts shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1984, § 4-4) 
Sec. 4-5. - Minors in certain poolrooms. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person, his servant or employee, to permit any minor to frequent or visit any poolroom permitting sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages on its premises in the city. This restriction shall not apply to: 
(1)  A minor on active duty in the armed services of the United States; 
(2)  A minor who has the written permission of his parent or guardian, which has been notarized and filed with that poolroom so designated by the parent or guardian; 
(3)  A married minor; 
(4)  Any minor accompanied by his parent or guardian. 
(b)  The written permission provided for in subsection (a)(2) shall be valid only in that poolroom so designated in the writing. It may be revoked at any time by the parent or guardian, or by the operator of the poolroom, or by law enforcement authorities on conviction of any of the parties of a crime. 
(Code 1984, § 4-5) 
Sec. 4-6. - Consumption upon public property. 
(a)  The following terms and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Alcoholic beverage. Any beverage containing more than one (1) percent of alcohol by weight, as determined in accordance with F.S. § 561.01(4)(b). 
    Beverage law. F.S chs. 561, 562, 563, 564, 565, 567, 568. 
    Commercial establishment parking lot. Any private or public area appurtenant to commercial establishments used by the public for parking for, and pedestrian access to, commercial establishments, including drives, parking areas, and sidewalks and walkways appurtenant thereto. 
    Container. Any can, bottle, carton, or other vessel or alcoholic beverage. 
    Person. Any natural person, corporation, partnership, association, or entity. 
    Public or semipublic area open for vehicular travel. All public and private roads, streets, highways, lanes, alleys, parking lots, and parking areas on which the public is expressly or implicitly invited to travel by motor vehicle or which is otherwise open for vehicular travel. It shall not include areas (1) such as golf courses, go-cart tracks, motor-cross tracks, and similar areas; and (2) private driveways or property serving a single dwelling unit. 
(b)  The following unlawful acts are prohibited: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume any alcoholic beverage in or within five hundred (500) feet of a commercial establishment parking lot in the city limits of the city, except in those areas in which such consumption is permitted pursuant to the beverage law; special or general act of the state legislature; the Florida Administrative Code; or county ordinance, or resolution, or administrative approval. Nothing herein shall prohibit consumption on private property within five hundred (500) feet of a commercial establishment parking lot; provided that the owner or person in control of said private property has explicitly consented to such consumption. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any alcoholic beverage in or within five hundred (500) feet of a commercial establishment parking lot in the city limits of the city, except in those areas in which such possession is permitted pursuant to the beverage law; special or general act of the state legislature; the Florida Administrative Code; or county ordinance, resolution or administrative approval unless such alcoholic beverage is in the original container with the seal unbroken. 
(3)  The following acts are prohibited within the city limits: 
a.  The consumption of alcoholic beverages, including beer, on a semi-public parking lot, public street, or public right-of-way. 
b.  The carrying, transporting, or possession of unsealed alcoholic beverages, including beer, except in the original package with the seal unbroken, on a semi-public parking lot, public street, or public right-of-way. 
A violation of the provisions of subsection (3) hereinabove, shall be punishable by not more than a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and thirty (30) days' incarceration; second and subsequent violations shall be punishable by not more than a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) and sixty (60) days incarceration. Nothing herein shall limit the discretion of the police, court personnel, and judges from referring individuals suspected, charged or convicted of a violation of this provision to treatment programs or facilities as an alternative to prosecution or incarceration, provided that the individual freely consents. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any person engaged in picking up empty beverage containers for the purpose of collecting the deposit or value of the bottle or can itself, nor to any person taking part in a litter control campaign. 
(2)  The possession of any open container by any licensed distributor or licensed vendor of alcoholic beverages provided that such alcoholic beverage is being transported solely for commercial purposes. 
(Code 1984, § 4-6; Ord. No. 95-9, §§ 1, 2, 1-9-1996; Ord. No. 97-1, §§ 1-3, 2-11-1997) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22. 
Sec. 4-7. - Sale, provision or consumption within public parks. 
(a)  The term "public park," when used in this section, shall include any area within the city so designated by the city from time to time. 
(b)  No person shall sell, possess or consume any alcoholic beverage within any public park area of this city. 
(Code 1984, § 4-7) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22. 
Sec. 4-8. - Possession, consumption at public school athletic events, in athletic arenas. 
    No person shall possess or drink alcoholic beverages within the confines or parking area of any stadium, basketball court or other place in the city in which athletic events are in progress or during or near to the playing of public school athletic contests or events. 
(Code 1984, § 4-8) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22. 
Sec. 4-9. - City nightclub security. 
(a)  Short title. This section shall be entitled the "Pahokee Nightclub Security Ordinance." 
(b)  Definitions. The following words and phrases when used in this section shall have the meanings as set out herein: 
    Nightclub means any commercial establishment at which alcohol is sold and consumed, and which, at any one (1) time, is determined to be a nightclub by application of the factors set forth in this definition. If a commercial establishment could reasonably be classified as either a restaurant, a nightclub, or some different use, it shall be deemed a nightclub for purposes of this section. In determining whether an establishment is a nightclub, the following factors shall be considered: 
(1)  If one (1) of the following two (2) factors is satisfied, then the establishment is a nightclub: 
a.  The establishment charges a cover charge, door charge, required contribution, or one-time membership fee which is paid at the door; or 
b.  The establishment has a minimum drink purchase requirement. 
(2)  If neither of the factors listed in subsection (1) above are present, then if three (3) of the following five (5) factors are satisfied, the establishment is a nightclub: 
a.  There is a dance floor or other open area used by patrons for dancing or for viewing of live entertainment (such dance floor or open space may be established by the temporary removal or rearrangement of furniture or tables); 
b.  The establishment is open to the public any time between 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any day of the week; 
c.  The maximum capacity of the establishment, as set by the fire officials through fire, building, structure, and other relevant laws and ordinances, is over one hundred fifty (150) persons. The facility may restrict its capacity to a lesser number. 
d.  Advertisements for the establishment routinely describe specific entertainment events or engagements (e.g. "House Party Saturday Night," "DJ Thursday Night," "Rock Band Tonight"); or 
e.  The establishment features a platform or musical staging area used in connection with performances or entertainment. 
    Owner, except when specific reference is made to the owner of the physical location or premises, shall include the owner, operator, manager, promoter or other person having supervision over a nightclub as defined herein. 
    Parking lot means an area given, leased, rented or otherwise used by patrons and staff to park vehicles. 
    Promoter means a person or the legal entity who assumes the financial responsibilities of a nightclub, including, but not limited to, contracting with the principals, renting the site and collecting the gate revenues. 
    Security officer means any individual who, for consideration, advertises as providing or performs bodyguard services or otherwise guards persons or property and maintains a class D license pursuant to state law. 
    Sheriff means the Palm Beach County Sheriff. 
(c)  Security, law enforcement presence. Nightclubs shall be required to comply with the security/law enforcement presence as follows: 
(1)  All nightclubs located in the city shall provide interior and exterior security personnel of a number equaling one (1) security officer per each occupancy level of one hundred fifty (150) occupants or any portion thereof or as determined by the sheriff's office, with cause. For example, if the occupancy level of an establishment is five hundred (500), a total of four (4) interior and exterior security personnel are required. If the occupancy level is one hundred fifty (150), a total of one (1) interior and exterior security personnel is required. Security officers employed or contracted by owners shall complete the requirements for a class D license established pursuant to F.S. § 493.6303, and be so licensed. Security officers must provide proof of the class D license upon request of law enforcement. 
(2)  Additionally, the owner shall, at its expense, provide the required minimum number of off-duty sheriff deputies, as approved by the sheriff or his designee. The sheriff or his designee may periodically review and adjust its recommendation as to the required staffing of off-duty sheriff deputies, based on the availability of off-duty sheriff deputies and current security conditions at the nightclub and within its vicinity. Such deputies shall commence service at 10:00 p.m. or as designed by the sheriff's office each evening the nightclub is open to the public later than 10:00 p.m. and ending one (1) hour after closing of said nightclub or as designated by the sheriff's office. Nightclubs shall be required to employ a minimum of two (2) sheriff's deputies and one (1) additional sheriff's deputy thereafter for each one hundred fifty (150) persons or any portion thereof of the maximum capacity of the premises or as designated by the sheriff's office. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the sheriff may, within his sole discretion, authorize a nightclub to use security officers in lieu of off-duty deputies in order to comply with this subsection. 
(3)  This section shall not apply to nightclubs that have had less than four (4) incidents which required a law enforcement response within the preceding calendar year, and which are attributable to events held at the nightclub. 
(d)  Additional security measure. Nightclubs shall provide exterior security lighting of a minimum illumination of an average of one and one-half (1.5) horizontal and vertical footcandles measured at six (6) feet above grade level throughout the parking area. Said illumination likewise measured at the property line of an adjoining nonresidential parcel, shall not exceed three (3) horizontal and vertical footcandles measured at six (6) feet above grade level. 
(e)  Patron age restriction. It shall be unlawful for persons under the age of twenty-one (21) to patronize, visit, loiter, be admitted or allowed access, in any nightclub, except as hereinafter provided. This restriction shall not apply to: 
(1)  Persons employed by or at the nightclub; 
(2)  A nightclub, during any time period in which it is not serving or selling alcoholic beverages to the public or allowing alcoholic beverages to be consumed on its premises, provided that, before anyone under the age of twenty-one (21) is admitted into the nightclub, all alcoholic beverages previously served to customers or being consumed by customers, are removed from customer access and otherwise discarded and the nightclub's entire inventory of alcoholic beverages is properly secured from public access. The sale, service or consumption of alcoholic beverages may not resume until all persons under the age of twenty-one (21) have vacated the premises; or 
(3)  Members of the military or armed services with proper military identification which reflects that they are currently on active duty with a branch of the United States military. 
(4)  It may be a defense to alleged violations of this section that the persons under the age of twenty-one (21) obtained access despite the owner's reasonable efforts to prevent such access, or through fraudulent identification, and the business used reasonable efforts to prevent the use of fraudulent identifications. "Reasonable efforts" shall include, but not be limited to, employees properly checking identification cards at the entrance to the subject establishment. For purposes of this section, "identification cards" are defined as official federal, state or local government-issued identification cards. Under these circumstances, only the persons who gained access to the alcoholic beverage establishment by presenting fraudulent identification shall be considered in violation of this section. 
(f)  Enforcement and penalties. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this section. 
    Code enforcement notices of violation shall be issued to any nightclub that fails to meet any of the illumination requirements established in subsection (d) of this section. The notice of violation shall be left with the owner, proprietor, or highest-ranking employee then on the premises. An additional copy of the notice will also be mailed via U.S. mail, certified, return receipt requested, to the nightclub at the street address of the nightclub. Proof of delivery of either of these two (2) methods (hand delivery or certified mail) shall be sufficient to establish receipt by the owner. 
    Violations of all other subsections of this section shall be punishable, upon conviction, pursuant to F.S. § 125.69(1), by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation or imprisonment not exceeding sixty (60) days, or both such fine or imprisonment. Each day of violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
    In addition to the sanctions contained herein, the city shall take any other appropriate legal action, including but not limited to, cease and desist orders, other administrative action and requests for temporary and permanent injunctions to enforce the provisions of this section. It is the purpose of this section to provide additional cumulative remedies. 
(g)  Police supervision. The presence of any sheriff's deputy at any nightclub shall not relieve the owner thereof, or any of his employees, from the responsibility of adhering to the provisions of this section or for violations of any law or ordinance or from the responsibility of maintaining decency and order in said nightclub. 
(h)  Right of entry for purpose of inspection. All sheriff's deputies shall have free access to nightclubs when open for business for the purposes of inspection and to enforce compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(i)  Limitation of liability. Neither the sheriff's office or the city shall be under any obligation or duty to any person hereunder by reason of this section. The sheriff and the city specifically disclaim liability for any damages which may be caused by failure to provide security. 
(j)  Applicability. This section shall apply to all existing establishments and all new establishments meeting the definition of "nightclub" located in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05 , § 1, 9-8-2015) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-05, § 1, adopted September 8, 2015, set out provisions intended for use as § 4-8. In order to prevent duplication of section numbers, the section has been designated as § 4-9 at the discretion of the editor. 
Chapter 5 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Game and freshwater fish, F.S. Ch. 372. 

Sec. 5-1. - Vicious animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner to keep any vicious, fierce or dangerous animal within the city unless it is confined within a secure building or enclosure or unless it is securely muzzled and under restraint by a competent person who by means of a leash, chain or rope has such animal under control at all times. An animal may be declared to be vicious by the chief of police on the showing that the animal has bitten a person without provocation on two (2) separate occasions within a period of six (6) months or if such animal shows fierce or dangerous propensities which indicate that if unrestrained the animal is likely to cause injury to persons other than the owner. This declaration of viciousness shall be delivered in writing to the owner of the animal by the police department. 
(Code 1984, § 5-1) 
Sec. 5-2. - Nuisances. 
    The owner of any animal which is at large or which destroys or damages any property of another person or which causes serious annoyance to a neighboring residence and interferes with the reasonable use and enjoyment of his property, or which is otherwise offensive so as to create a nuisance shall be deemed to be committing an act in violation of this section. 
(Code 1984, § 5-2) 
State Law reference- Livestock at large, F.S. § 588.12 et seq.; damage by dogs, F.S. Ch. 767. 
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 9; construction requirements for flood damage prevention, § 10-51 et seq.; removal of trash and debris caused by building operations, § 11-8(d); land development code, Ch. 14; mobile homes and recreational vehicles, Ch. 15; planning, Ch. 19; obstruction of streets and sidewalks during building construction, § 22-12; subdivisions, Ch. 23; building permit prohibited for lot sold in violation of subdivision chapter, § 23-24; utilities, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference- Building construction standards, F.S. Ch. 553; licensing of construction industry, F.S. § 468.101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Codes adopted. 
    The City hereby adopts the following codes. These codes supersede all previously adopted codes. 
(1)  Florida Building Code, 2010 edition; 
(2)  2008 National Election Code/NFPA 70; 
(3)  Palm Beach County local amendments to the Florida Fire Prevention Code Chapter 69A-70. Florida Administrative Code, including N.F.P.A.1, Florida Edition. N.F.P.A.101, Florida Edition, as adopted by Palm Beach County in 2011-038, and as hereafter amended by Palm Beach County. 
(Ord. No. 97-10, 7-8-1998; Ord. No. 2000-1, 3-14-2000; Ord. No. 2013-03, § 4, 7-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-2. - Technical amendments to the Florida Building Code, Building. 
Modify the definition as follows: 
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a building or structure taking place during a three-year period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started. For each building or structure, the three-year period begins on the date of the first permit issued for improvement or repair of that building or structure subsequent to April 26, 2016. If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
2.  Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Modify section 1612.4.1 as follows: 
1612.4.1 Additional requirements for enclosed areas. In addition to the requirements of ASCE 24, enclosed areas below the design flood elevation shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms except for stairwells, ramps, and elevators. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 3, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 6-3. - Technical amendments to the Florida Building Code, Existing Building. 
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a building or structure taking place during a three-year period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started. For each building or structure, the three-year period begins on the date of the first permit issued for improvement or repair of that building or structure subsequent to April 26, 2016. If the structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
2.  Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 4, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 6-4. - Technical amendments to the Florida Building Code, Residential. 
    R322.2.2 Enclosed areas below design flood elevation. Enclosed areas, including crawl spaces, that are below the design flood elevation shall: 
1.  Be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage. The interior portion of such enclosed areas shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms except for stairwells, ramps, and elevators, unless a partition is required by the fire code. The limitation on partitions does not apply to load bearing walls interior to perimeter wall (crawlspace) foundations. Access to enclosed areas shall be the minimum necessary to allow for the parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the building (stairway or elevator). 
Remainder of R322.2.2 unchanged. 
    R322.3.4 Walls below design flood elevation. Walls and partitions are not permitted below the elevated floor. 
    R322.3.5 Enclosed areas below design flood elevation. Enclosed areas below the design flood elevation are not permitted. 
Exception: Areas enclosed by insect screening or open lattice. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 5, 4-26-2016) 
Secs. 6-5-6-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - (RESERVED) 

Secs. 6-26-6-66. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS 

Sec. 6-67. - Duties of building inspector and code enforcement officer. 
    The building inspector and code enforcement officer shall: 
(1)  Inspect or cause to be inspected annually all public buildings; schools; halls; churches; theaters; hotels; roominghouses; tourist camps; tenements; commercial, manufacturing or loft buildings for the purpose of determining whether any conditions exist which render such places dangerous buildings within the terms of this article; 
(2)  Inspect any building, wall or structure about which complaints are filed by any person to the effect that such building, wall or structure is or may be existing in violation of this article; 
(3)  Inspect any building, wall or structure reported by the fire or police department of the city as probably existing in violation of the terms of this article; 
(4)  Inspect annually buildings in the city, to determine whether they are dangerous buildings within the terms of this article; 
(5)  Notify, in writing, the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent and all other persons having an interest in such buildings as shown by the land records of the recorder of deeds of the county, of any building found by him to be a dangerous building within the standards set forth in this article that: 
a.  The owner must vacate, repair or demolish such building in accordance with the terms of the notice and this article; 
b.  The occupant or lessee must vacate such building or may have it repaired in accordance with the notice and remain in possession; 
c.  The mortgagee, agent or other person having an interest in such building as shown by the land records of the recorder of deeds of the county may at his own risk repair, vacate or demolish such building or have such work or act done; provided that any person notified under this subsection to repair, vacate or demolish any building shall be given such reasonable time, not exceeding thirty (30) days, as may be necessary to do or have done the work or act required by the notice provided for in this section. 
(6)  Set forth in the notice provided for in subsection (5) hereof, a description of the building, or structure deemed unsafe, a statement of the particulars which make the building or structure a dangerous building and an order requiring the same to be put in such condition as to comply with the terms of this article within such length of time, not to exceed thirty (30) days, as is reasonable; 
(7)  Report to the city commission any noncompliance with the notice provided for in subsections (5) and (6) of this section; 
(8)  Appear at all hearings conducted by the city commission and testify as to the condition of dangerous buildings; 
(9)  Place a notice on all dangerous buildings reading as follows: "This building has been found to be a dangerous building by the building inspector. This notice is to remain on this building until it is repaired, vacated or demolished in accordance with the notice which has been given the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee or agent of this building, and all other persons having an interest in this building as shown by the land records of the recorder of deeds of the county. It is unlawful to remove this notice until such notice is complied with." 
(10)  Report to the city attorney the names of all persons failing to comply with the notice provided for in subsections (5) and (6) of this section or who remove the notice provided for in subsection (9) of this section. 
(Code 1984, § 6-110) 
Sec. 6-68. - Duties of the special magistrate. 
    The special magistrate shall: 
(1)  Upon receipt of a report of the building inspector as provided for in section 6-67(7), give written notice to the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, agent and all other persons having an interest in such building as shown by the land records of the recorder of deeds of the county to appear before it at a certain date within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice at a regular meeting of the city commission to show cause why the building or structure reported to be a dangerous building should not be repaired, vacated or demolished in accordance with the statement of particulars set forth in the building inspector's notice provided for in section 6-67(6); 
(2)  Hold a hearing and hear such testimony as the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee or any other person having an interest in such building as shown by the land records of the recorder of deeds of the county offer relative to the dangerous building; 
(3)  Make a written finding of facts as to whether or not the building in question is a dangerous building; 
(4)  Issue an order commanding the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, agent and all other persons having an interest in such building as shown by the land records of the recorder of deeds of the county to repair, vacate or demolish any building found to be a dangerous building within the terms of this article and provided that any person so notified, except the owner, shall have the privilege of either vacating or repairing such dangerous building. Any person not the owner of such dangerous building but having an interest in such building as shown by the land records of the recorder of deeds of the county may demolish such dangerous building at his own risk to prevent the acquiring of a lien against the land upon which the dangerous building stands by the city as provided in subsection (5) of this section; 
(5)  If the owner, occupant, mortgagee or lessee fails to comply with the order provided for in subsection (4) of this section, within ten (10) days, the special magistrate shall cause such building or structure to be repaired, vacated or demolished as the facts may warrant, and shall, with the assistance of the city attorney, cause the costs of such repair, vacation or demolition to be charged against the land on which the building existed as a municipal lien or cause such costs to be added to the tax duplicate as an assessment, or to be levied as a special tax against the land upon which the building stands or did stand, or to be recovered in a suit at law against the owner; except in cases where such procedure is desirable and any delay thereby caused will not be dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people of the city, the special magistrate shall notify the city attorney to take legal action to force the owner to make all necessary repairs or demolish the building; 
(6)  Report to the city attorney the names of all persons not complying with the order provided for in subsection (4) of this section. 
(Code 1984, § 6-111; Ord. No. 2013-03, § 5, 7-9-2013) 
Sec. 6-69. - Liability for damage resulting from enforcement of article; suits. 
    No officer, agent or employee of the city shall render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this article. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the city as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this article shall be defended by the city attorney until the final determination of the proceedings therein. 
(Code 1984, § 6-114) 
Sec. 6-70. - Removal of notice. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove the notice provided for in section 6-67(9). 
(Code 1984, § 6-116) 
Sec. 6-71. - Disregarding notices, orders. 
(a)  The owner of any dangerous building who shall fail to comply with any notice or order to repair, vacate, or demolish any building given by any person authorized by this article to give such notice or order shall be guilty of violation of this article. Each and every day such failure to comply continues beyond the date fixed for compliance shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The occupant or lessee in possession who fails to comply with any notice to vacate and fails to repair such building in accordance with any notice given as provided for in this article shall be guilty of a violation of this article. Each and every day such failure continues beyond the date fixed for compliance shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1984, § 6-117) 
Sec. 6-72. - Emergency repair, vacation or demolition. 
    In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to the life or safety of any person unless a dangerous building is immediately repaired, vacated or demolished, the building inspector shall report such facts to the city commission and the city commission shall cause the immediate repair, vacation or demolition of such dangerous building, provided that if any building in the city is in such condition that it is dangerous to life and limb, such building shall be removed immediately by the building inspector without notice of any kind, but no building shall be removed without notice except in case of fire in or on adjoining premises to safeguard other buildings, or in case of a hurricane or an approaching hurricane to protect other buildings or residents from flying timber or debris, and in such cases only upon order of the fire chief or chief of police. The costs of such emergency repair, vacation or demolition shall be collected in the same manner as provided in section 6-68. 
(Code 1984, § 6-118) 
Secs. 6-73-6-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MINIMUM STANDARDS CODES 

Sec. 6-96. - Adopted by reference. 
    The city does hereby establish and adopt Minimum Standards Codes, a copy of which is attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived and incorporated by reference herein to create minimum standards governing the maintenance, appearance and condition of all buildings, structures and premises as set forth in the codes. 
(Ord. No. 90-11, § 1, 1-8-1991) 
Secs. 6-97-6-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS 

Sec. 6-111. - Generally. 
    The following provisions of this article shall constitute the standards for wireless communications towers and antennas within the city's municipal boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 99-2, § 2, 3-23-1999) 
Sec. 6-112. - Intent. 
(a)  The regulations and requirements of this section are intended to: 
(1)  Promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens by regulating the siting of wireless communications facilities; 
(2)  Accommodate the growing need and demand for wireless communication services; 
(3)  Provide for the appropriate location and development of wireless communication facilities within the city; 
(4)  Minimize adverse visual effects of wireless communication facilities through careful design, siting, landscaping screening and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
(5)  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures; 
(6)  Encourage the location and collocation of antennas on existing structures thereby minimizing new visual impacts and reducing the need for additional towers; and 
(7)  Further the balance between the need to provide for certainty to the communications industry in the placement of wireless communication facilities and the need to provide certainty to the residents and citizens of the city that the aesthetic integrity of the city will be protected from the proliferation of unnecessary towers. 
(b)  Wireless communication facilities will be regulated and permitted pursuant to this section and not regulated or permitted as essential services, public utilities or private utilities. 
(Ord. No. 99-2, § 3, 3-23-1999) 
Sec. 6-113. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the content clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory equipment building shall mean any building, cabinet, or equipment enclosure constructed for the primary purpose of housing the electronic, backup power, power generators and other free standing equipment associated with the operation of antennas. 
    Administrator shall mean the city manager or designee. 
    Antenna support structure shall mean any building or structure used or useable for one (1) or more antennas. 
    Anti-climbing device shall mean any means of preventing accessibility to a tower. 
    Antenna shall mean any exterior apparatus device, mounted on a tower, building or structure, used for transmitting and receiving that radiates or captures electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless communication signals, or other communication signals. For the purpose of this article, the term "antenna" does not include over-the-air reception devices, which deliver television broadcast signals. Direct broadcast satellite services, or multichannel multi-point distribution services, as defined and regulated by 47 C.F.R. 1.4000, as amended, or any device otherwise meeting the definition set forth herein which is less than thirty (30) feet in total height. 
    Applicant shall mean any person that applies for a tower development permit. 
    Application shall mean the process by which the owner of a parcel of land within the city submits a request to develop, construct, build, modify, or erect a tower upon such parcel of land. Application includes all written documentation and representations, in whatever form of forum, made by an applicant to the city concerning such a request. 
    Engineer shall mean a registered structural engineer in the state with expertise in tower design. 
    FAA shall mean the Federal Aviation Administration. 
    FCC shall mean the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Owner shall mean any person with fee title to or a long-term (exceeding ten (10) years) leasehold interest in any parcel within the city who desires to develop, or construct, build, modify, or erect a tower upon such parcel of land. 
    Provider shall mean a FCC-licensed company. 
    Total height shall mean from the ground to its highest point including any and all appurtenances. 
    Tower shall mean a structure, such as lattice tower, guy tower, or monopole tower, constructed as a free-standing structure or in association with a building, other permanent structure, or equipment, on which is located one (1) or more antennas for transmitting or receiving analog, digital, microwave, cellar, telephone, personal wireless service, or similar forms of electronic communication. The term includes microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular phone towers, alternative tower structures, and any support thereto. 
    Wireless communications facilities shall mean facilities that are used to provide or facilitate one or more wireless communications services, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless communications services, including antennas and towers, either individually or together. 
    Wireless communications services means the transmission of information by electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless communications signals, or other communications signals, whether or not the transmission medium is owned by the provider itself. 
(Ord. No. 99-2, § 4, 3-23-1999) 
Sec. 6-114. - Application procedures. 
    Application for a building permit or special use permit for any wireless communications facility shall be made to the administrator by the person, company or organization that will not be considered until it is complete. The following information shall be submitted when applying for any building permit, special use permit or other permit or variance included in this section and must be submitted for an application to be considered complete: 
(1)  Basic information. 
a.  The name, address and telephone number of the owner and lessee of the parcel of land upon which the tower is situated. If the applicant is not the owner of the parcel of land upon which the tower is situated, the written consent of the owner shall be evidenced on the application. 
b.  The legal description, folio number, and address of the parcel of land upon which the wireless communications facility is situated or proposed to be situated. 
c.  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all owners of other towers or antenna support structures within a one-half (1/2) mile radius of the proposed new wireless communications site, including city-owned property. 
d.  Site plan and plans to scale specifying the location of wireless communications facilities, transmission and accessory equipment buildings, accessory uses, access, parking, fences, landscaped areas, adjacent land uses and distance of all buildings or structures adjacent to the site. Applicants shall submit a location map identifying such specifications. 
e.  Landscape plan to scale indicating size, spacing and type of plantings required in section 6-116(a)(7). 
f.  A full description of the environment surrounding the proposed wireless communications facility, including any adjacent residential structure and districts, structures and sites of historic significance, streetscapes or scenic view corridors. 
g.  A description of anticipated maintenance needs for the wireless communications facility, including frequency of service, personnel needs, equipment needs, traffic volume and noise or safety impacts of such maintenance. 
h.  Report from a qualified independent engineer licensed in the state, documenting the following: 
1.  Wireless communications facility height and design, including technical, engineering, economic, and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed designs; 
2.  Total anticipated capacity of the wireless communications facility, including number and types of antennas which can be accommodated; 
3.  Evidence of structural integrity of the tower structure; and 
4.  Structural failure characteristics of the wireless communications facility and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris. 
i.  A definition of the area of service to be served by the wireless communications facility and whether such facility is needed for coverage or capacity. 
j.  Information showing the proposed facility would provide the needed coverage or capacity. 
k.  The identity of a community liaison officer appointed by the applicant to resolve issues of concern to neighbors and residents relating to the construction and operation of the facility. Include name, address, telephone number, facsimile number, and electronic mail address, if applicable. 
l.  Identification of the geographic service area for the subject installation, including a map showing the site and the nearest or associated wireless communications facility sites within the network, including a description of the distance between the wireless communications facility sites and how this service area fits into and is necessary for the service network. 
m.  Designation of which location preference, identified in section 6-115, the proposed facility is meeting. If the proposed location is not a preferred location site or is a disfavored site, describe: (a) what publicly used buildings, collocation sites or other preferred location sites are located within the geographic service area, provide a list (by address with lot and block number noted) and a 1:200 scale map of all such buildings within the service area; (b) what good faith efforts and measures were taken to secure each of these preferred locations sites; (c) why each such site was not technologically, legally or economically feasible and why such efforts were unsuccessful; and (d) how and why the proposed site is essential to meet service demands for the geographic service area and citywide network. 
n.  Written, technical evidence from a qualified engineer delivered to the fire marshall and the building official that the propose site of the wireless communications facility does not pose a risk to explosion, fire or other danger to life or property due to its proximity to volatile, flammable, explosive or hazardous materials such as LP gas, propane, gasoline, natural gas, or corrosive or other dangerous chemicals. 
o.  Certification that the proposed wireless communications facility meets or exceeds the standards and requirements of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate wireless communications towers and facilities. This requirement specifically includes certification that RF emissions will meet FCC standards. 
p.  The zoning, adjustment and planning board and city commission may each require an applicant to supplement any information that the board or commission considers inadequate or that the applicant has failed to supply. The application may be denied on the basis that the applicant has not supplied the information required in this subsection. Applications shall be reviewed by the city in a prompt manner and all decisions shall be supported in writing setting forth the reasons for approval or denial. 
(2)  Five-year plan and site inventory. Each application shall include a five-year facilities plan and site inventory including the following: 
a.  A list of all existing, existing to be upgraded or replaced, and proposed wireless communications facility sites within the city limits and within one (1) mile of the city limits and a map showing these sites. The list must include the following information for each site: 
1.  Street address; 
2.  A legal description; 
3.  Zoning district; 
4.  Type of building (commercial, residential, mixed use) and number of stories; 
5.  The number of antennas and base transceiver stations per site and the location of the base transceiver station installation(s); 
6.  The height from grade to the top of the antenna installation; and 
7.  The radio frequency range in megahertz, the wattage output of the equipment and effective radiated power. 
b.  If the applicant does not know specific future tower and antenna site locations but does know of areas where wireless communication facilities will be needed within the next five (5) years to provide service, the applicant shall list the assessor's blocks contained within the anticipated geographic service area and identify each geographic service area with a number that will correspond to the future wireless communications facility site. 
c.  This information will be held in confidence. 
(3)  Additional information requirements for towers. 
a.  The applicant must identify all existing towers and all towers for which there are applicants currently on file with the administrator. The applicants must provide evidence of the lack of space on all suitable existing towers to locate the proposed antenna. If collocation on any such towers would result in less visual impact than the visual impact of the proposed tower, the applicant must demonstrate why such collocation is not being proposed. 
b.  The applicant must provide written verification that wireless communications service cannot be provided without the use of a wireless communications tower. 
c.  The applicant shall quantify the additional tower capacity anticipated, including the approximate number and types of antennas. The applicants shall provide a drawing for each tower showing existing and proposed antenna locations. The applicant shall describe the technical options available to overcome those limitations and reasons why the technical options considered were not chosen to be incorporated. If those limitations cannot be overcome by reasonable technical means, they shall be approved. 
d.  The applicant must provide any other information which may be requested by the administrator to fully evaluate and review the application and the potential impact of a proposed wireless communications facility to assure that the application complies with the city code. 
(Ord. No. 99-2, § 5, 3-23-1999) 
Sec. 6-115. - Sites. 
(a)  Preferred location sites. 
(1)  Collocation sites. Any existing wireless communications towers currently being used for transmitting or receiving analog, digital, microwave, cellular telephone, personal wireless service, or similar forms of electronic communication shall be a preferred location site regardless of the underlying zoning designation of the site, provided, however, that locations which meet this criteria shall be subject to the design and siting components of this section and collocation sites shall not become an "antenna farm" or otherwise be visually obtrusive. 
(2)  Publicly-used structures. Publicly-used structures are preferred locations throughout the city because they appear in virtually all neighborhoods, are dispersed throughout the city, and due to their institutional or infrastructure uses are generally similar in appearance to or readily adaptable for wireless communications facilities. Therefore, wireless communications facilities should be less noticeable when placed on publicly used structures than when placed on commercial or residential structures. Publicly used structures include, but are not limited to, facilities such as police or fire stations, community centers, civic centers, utility structures, water towers, flag poles, and hospitals. 
(3)  Approval. Preferred locations may be approved by administrative review and proper building permits. 
(b)  Disfavored location sites. All family residential structures or multi-family structures shall be disfavored sites for the location facilities. However, stealth structures will be considered on private structures by administrative review. 
(Ord. No. 99-2, § 6, 3-23-1999) 
Sec. 6-116. - Requirements for wireless communications facilities. 
(a)  General requirements for all wireless communications facilities. The requirements set forth in this section shall govern the location and construction of all wireless communications facilities governed by this section. 
(1)  Building codes and safety standard. To ensure the structural integrity of wireless communications facilities, the owner of a wireless communications facility shall ensure that it is erected and maintained in compliance with standards for such wireless communications facilities. 
(2)  Regulatory compliance. 
a.  All wireless communications facilities which are regulated by any agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate wireless communications facilities must meet or exceed current standards and regulations. If the governing agencies require changes, then the owners of the wireless communications facilities governed by this section shall bring such wireless communications facilities into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within the date established by the agency promulgating the standards or regulations. 
b.  Owners of wireless communications facilities shall provide certification showing that each wireless communications facility is in compliance with all applicable federal and state requirements. Evidence of compliance must be submitted every five (5) years to the administrator. 
(3)  Security. All wireless communications facilities shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device or other similar protective device to prevent unauthorized access to the wireless communications facility. 
(4)  Lighting. No unauthorized illumination is permitted on wireless communications facilities. If lighting is required or necessary through FCC or FAA or any other applicable regulating agency, the design must meet the requirements of those agencies and cause the least disturbance to the surrounding uses and views. 
(5)  Advertising. No advertising is permitted on wireless communications facilities. However, a whip antenna may be allowed on any legally permitted permanent billboard or outdoor advertising sign as long as the other requirements of this section are met. 
(6)  Visual impact. 
a.  Wireless communications facilities shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA or other applicable federal or state agency, be painted or textured to match the existing structure so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
b.  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and associated electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. Roof-mounted antennas shall be made visually unobtrusive by screening to match existing air conditioning units, stairs, elevator towers or other background. They shall be flush mounted and painted to match. 
c.  Where feasible, wireless communications facilities should be placed directly above, below or incorporated with vertical design elements of a building to help in camouflaging. 
d.  Wireless communications facilities shall not be placed in a direct line of sight with historic or scenic view corridors as designated by the city commission or by any applicable state of federal law or agency. 
(7)  Landscaping. 
a.  Landscaping shall be used to effectively screen the view of the wireless communications facility from adjacent public ways, public property and residential property. 
b.  Native vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the greatest practical extent. The applicant shall provide a site plan showing significant vegetation to be removed, and vegetation to be replanted to replace that, which will be removed. 
c.  The city commission may waive or modify the landscaping requirement where lesser requirements are desirable for adequate visibility for security purposes, for continued operation of existing bona fide agricultural or forest uses such as farms, nurseries and tree farms or where an antenna is placed on an existing structure. In certain locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, such as remote agriculture or rural locations or developed heavy industrial areas, the landscaping requirement may be modified or waived. 
(8)  Maintenance. Equipment at a transmission facility shall be automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic and congestion. Where the site abuts or has access to a collector of local street, access for maintenance vehicles shall be exclusively by means of the collector or local street. 
(9)  Lot size and setbacks. 
a.  At a minimum, all wireless communications facilities shall be set back on all sides a distance equal to the underlying setback requirement in the applicable zoning district. 
b.  All towers must be set back a distance equal to at least one hundred (100) percent of the height of the tower from any adjoining commercially zoned property lot line. 
c.  All towers must be set back a distance equal to at least two hundred (200) percent of the height of the tower from any adjoining residentially zoned property lot line, whichever is greater, irrespective of whether such residentially zoned property is located within the city's jurisdiction boundaries. 
d.  Setback requirements for towers shall be measured from the base of the tower to the property line of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
e.  Towers, guy wires and accessory facilities must be located on the same parcel as the wireless communications towers. 
(10)  Separation or buffer requirements. 
a.  For the purposes of this section, the separation distances between towers shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between the base of the existing or approved structure and the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan of the proposed tower. The minimum tower separation distances shall be calculated and applied irrespective of city jurisdictional boundaries. 
b.  Proposed towers must meet the following minimum separation requirements from existing towers or towers which have a development permit but are not yet constructed at the time a development permit is granted pursuant to this code: 
1.  Monopole tower structures shall be separated from all other towers, whether monopole, self-supporting lattice, or guyed, by a minimum of seven hundred fifty (750) feet. 
2.  Self-supporting lattice or guyed tower structures shall be separated from all other self-supporting or guyed towers by a minimum of fifteen hundred (1,500) feet. 
(11)  Additional requirements for towers. 
a.  Site location and development shall preserve the pre-existing character of the surrounding buildings and land uses as much as possible. Wireless communications towers shall be integrated through location and design to blend in with existing characteristics of the site to the extent practical. 
b.  Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved or improved, and disturbance of the existing topography shall be minimized, unless such disturbance would result in less visual impact of the site to the surrounding area. 
c.  At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend the tower and related facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 
d.  Towers shall not be sited where they will affect historic or scenic view corridors as designed by the city commission or any applicable state and federal law or agency or where they will create visual clutter. 
e.  Towers shall be enclosed by decay-resistant security fencing not less that eight (8) feet in height and shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device or other similar protective device designated to prevent tower access. 
f.  Placement of more than one (1) tower on a lot shall be permitted, provided all setback, separation, design and landscape requirements are met as to each tower and a structural engineer determines that the failure of one tower will not lead to multiple failures. 
g.  Certificates and inspections. 
1.  All towers shall be certified by an engineer to be structurally sound and in conformance with the requirements of the building code and all other construction standards set forth by the city's code and federal and state law. For new monopole towers, such certification shall be submitted with an application pursuant to section 6-114 of this article and every five (5) years thereafter. For existing monopole towers, certification shall be submitted within six (6) months of the effective date of the article and then every five (5) years thereafter. For new lattice or guyed towers, such certification shall be submitted with an application pursuant to section 6-114 of this article and every two (2) years thereafter. For existing lattice or guyed towers, certification shall be submitted within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this article and then every two (2) years thereafter. The tower owner may be required by the city to submit more frequent certifications should there be reason to believe that the structural and electrical integrity of the tower is jeopardized. 
2.  The city or its agents shall have authority to enter onto the property upon which a tower is located, between the inspections and certifications required above, to inspect the tower for the purpose of determining whether it complies with the building code and all other construction standards provided by the city code and federal and state law. 
3.  The city reserves the right to conduct such inspection at any time upon reasonable notice to the tower owner. 
(Ord. No. 99-2, § 7, 3-23-1999) 
Sec. 6-117. - Tower maintenance. 
(a)  Tower owners shall at all times employ ordinary and reasonable care and shall install and maintain in use nothing less than commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries or nuisances to the public. 
(b)  Tower owners shall install and maintain towers, wireless communications facilities, wires, cables, fixtures and other equipment in substantial compliance with the requirements of the National Electric Safety Code and all applicable FCC, state and local regulations, and in such manner that will not interfere with the use of other property. 
(c)  All towers, wireless communications facilities, and antenna support structure shall at all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order and repair so that the same shall not menace or endanger the life or property of any person. 
(d)  All maintenance or construction of towers wireless communications facilities, or antenna support structures shall be performed by licensed maintenance and construction personnel. 
(e)  All towers shall maintain compliance with current RF emission standards of the FCC. 
(f)  In the event that the use of a tower is disconnected, the tower owner shall provide written notice to the city of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the use shall be discontinued. 
(Ord. No. 99-2, § 8, 3-23-1999) 
Sec. 6-118. - Accessory equipment buildings. 
(a)  Accessory equipment buildings used in conjunction with the operation and maintenance of antennas shall be permitted provided they meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Do not exceed seven hundred fifty (750) square feet of gross floor area per provider; 
(2)  If ground constructed or mounted, do not exceed twenty (20) feet in height and meet the underlying zoning district setback requirements for accessory structures; 
(3)  Concealed from public view or made compatible with the architecture of the surrounding structures utilizing landscaping or materials and colors consistent with the surrounding backdrop; 
(4)  Located within close proximity, as is reasonably possible, to the structure upon which the antennas are attached; and 
(5)  Designed, constructed, and installed in compliance with all applicable and local building codes. 
(b)  Accessory equipment buildings or structures shall not be used for offices, vehicle storage, or other outdoor storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a wireless communications facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the wireless communications facility. 
(Ord. No. 99-2, § 9, 3-23-1999) 
Sec. 6-119. - Modifications of towers. 
(a)  A tower existing or application in process prior to the effective date of this article, which was in compliance with the city's zoning regulations immediately prior to the effective date of this article, may continue in existence as a nonconforming structure. Such nonconforming structures may be modified or demolished and rebuilt without complying with any of the additional requirements of the section, except for section 6-116(a)(10), "Separation of buffer requirements," section 6-116(a)(11)g., "Certifications and inspections," and section 6-117, "Tower maintenance," provided that: 
(1)  The tower is being modified or demolished and rebuilt for the sole purpose of accommodating, within six (6) months of the completion of the modification or rebuild, additional wireless communications facilities comparable in weight, size and surface area to the discrete operating wireless communications facilities of any person currently installed on the tower. 
(2)  An application for a development permit is made to the city building department. The grant of a development permit pursuant to this section allowing the modification or demolition and rebuild of an existing nonconforming tower shall not be considered a determination that the modified or demolished and rebuilt tower is conforming. 
(3)  The height of the modified or rebuilt tower and wireless communications facilities attached thereto do not exceed the maximum height allowed under this article. 
(b)  Except as provided in this section, a nonconforming structure or use many not be enlarged, increased in size or discontinued in use for a period of more that one hundred eighty (180) days. This article shall not be interpreted to legalize any structure or use existing at the time this article is adopted which structure or use is in violation of the Code prior to enactment of the article. 
(Ord. No. 99-2, § 10, 3-23-1999) 
Sec. 6-120. - Collocation. 
    Applicant and owner shall allow other future personal wireless service companies, including public and quasi-public agencies, using functionally equivalent personal wireless technology to collocate antennas, equipment and facilities on a wireless communications facility unless carriers shall provide a mechanism for the construction and maintenance of shared facilities and infrastructure and shall provide for equitable sharing of cost in accordance with industry standards. Collocation of antennas by more than one (1) provider on existing or new wireless communications towers shall take precedence over the construction of new, single-use wireless communications towers. 
(Ord. No. 99-2, § 11, 3-23-1999) 
Sec. 6-121. - Appeals. 
    Appeals from any decision of the administrator shall be made to the city commission through the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 99-2, § 12, 3-23-1999) 
Sec. 6-122. - Nuisances. 
    Wireless communications facilities, including, without limitation, power source, ventilation and cooling, shall be operated at all times within the limits of the county and state noise control laws, and shall not be operated so as to cause the generation of heat that adversely affects a building occupant and shall not be maintained or operated in such a manner as to be a nuisance. Generators may be used in case of power outages and emergencies. 
(Ord. No. 99-2, § 13, 3-23-1999) 
Sec. 6-123. - Removal of antennas and towers. 
(a)  All wireless communications facilities shall be maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable building and technical codes so as to ensure the structural integrity of such facilities. If upon inspection by the administrator any such wireless communication facilities is determined not to comply with the code standards or to constitute a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner facility and the owner of the property, if different, such owners shall have thirty (30) days to bring such facility into compliance. In the event such wireless communications facility is not brought into compliance within thirty (30) days, the city may provide notice to the owners requiring the wireless communications facility to be removed. In the event such wireless communications facility is not removed within thirty (30) days of receipt of such notice, the city may take appropriate action to remove such facility and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. Delay by the city in taking action shall not in any way waive the city's right to take action. The city may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that wireless communications facilities not in compliance with the code standards or which constitute a danger to persons or property are brought into compliance or removed. The city may seek to have the wireless communications facility removed regardless of the owner's or operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
(b)  If the owner of an abandoned tower or antenna wishes to use such abandoned tower or antenna, the owner must apply for and receive all applicable permits and meet all of the conditions of this article as if such tower or antenna was a new tower or antenna. 
(Ord. No. 99-2, § 14, 3-23-1999) 
Sec. 6-124. - Pre-existing towers and nonconforming uses. 
    All wireless communications facilities existing on the effective date of this article shall be considered an nonconforming use and may continue as a nonconforming use and is governed by section 6-109 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 99-2, § 15, 3-23-1999) 
Sec. 6-125. - Penalty for violation. 
    Violation of the code will be addressed by the zoning, adjustment and planning board by way of the code enforcement officer and/or the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 99-2, § 16, 3-23-1999) 
Chapter 7 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Emergency continuity of government, F.S. Ch. 22; enabling authority for local officers, F.S. § 22.05; Florida mutual aid act, F.S. § 23.12 et seq.; state disaster preparedness act, F.S. Ch. 252; county as local disaster agency, F.S. § 252.38; emergency measures by local authorities, F.S. § 870.041 et seq. 

Sec. 7-1. - Officers authorized to declare state of emergency. 
    Pursuant to F.S. § 870.042, the mayor is hereby designated as the official empowered to declare that a state of emergency exists within the boundaries of this city and to exercise the emergency powers conferred in F.S. §§ 870.041 through 870.047. In the event of the death, absence or disability of the mayor, the vice mayor is next so designated as such person. If neither of the above officers is able to act, either because of absence, disability or death, then the sheriff of Palm Beach County is so empowered. 
(Code 1984, § 7-1; Ord. No. 2013-03, § 6, 7-9-2013) 
Chapter 8 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Elections generally, Art. IV. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; city clerk to be supervisor of elections, § 2-63(10). 
State Law reference- Electors and elections, F.S. Ch. 97 et seq. 

Sec. 8-1. - State law to govern matters not covered. 
    All matters not provided for in this chapter concerning registration or the conduct of elections and not provided for in the Charter shall be in accordance with the general law of the state. 
(Code 1984, § 8-1) 
Sec. 8-2. - Exemption of city from Chapter 83-498, Laws of Florida. 
    The city hereby exempts itself from Chapter 83-498, Laws of Florida (HB 742), enacted by the 1983 Legislature of the State of Florida, and shall continue to hold all municipal elections in accordance with their existing municipal Charter provisions. 
(Code 1984, § 8-1.1) 
Charter reference- Municipal elections schedule, § 4.04(a). 
Sec. 8-3. - Supervision by city clerk. 
    City elections shall be conducted under the supervision of the city clerk. The city clerk shall do any and all other things necessary and not otherwise provided for in this chapter to prepare for, hold and conduct the election in accordance with the applicable laws of the state and this Code. 
(Code 1984, § 8-2) 
Cross reference- City clerk to be supervisor of elections, § 2-63(10). 
Sec. 8-4. - Reserved. 
Sec. 8-5. - Candidates for city commissioner and mayor-commissioner-Applications and qualifications. 
(a)  The city clerk shall accept qualifying documents from candidates in person only beginning at 12:00 p.m. (noon) on the third Tuesday in November, and ending at 12:00 p.m. (noon) on the fourth Tuesday in November. Said candidate shall also state in what group the candidate wishes to run at the time said candidate shall qualify. 
(b)  There is hereby created a canvassing board of the City of Pahokee, which shall consist of the sitting commissioners who are not up for election, and the city attorney. The canvassing board will convene only if there is a dispute in the counting of ballots cast; otherwise, the certification by the Palm Beach County Supervisor of Elections shall be final, and no other action by the canvassing board is required. 
(Ord. No. 88-3, § 1, 5-24-1988; Ord. No. 96-12, § 1, 10-22-1996; Ord. No. 2017-05 , § 1, 7-25-2017) 
Sec. 8-6. - Same-Qualifying fee. 
(a)  Each candidate for the office of city commissioner or mayor shall, at the time he makes application to be a candidate, pay a qualifying fee to the city clerk for the benefit of the city in addition to the statutory fee required under F.S. § 99.093. The fees shall be set by resolution of the city commission, which amounts may be adjusted from time to time. The resolution setting the fees shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  If a candidate's check is returned by the bank for any reason, the filing officer shall immediately notify the candidate and the end of qualifying notwithstanding, the candidate shall have 48 hours from the time such notification is received, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, to pay the fee with a cashier's check purchased from funds of the campaign account. Failure to pay the fee as provided in this subsection shall disqualify the candidate. 
(Code 1984, § 8-9; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 1, 8-28-2007) 
Sec. 8-7. - Candidate's name to appear on ballot; exception. 
    No elector may cast a vote in any city election for any candidate for office of this city unless such candidate's name appears on the printed or prepared ballot or the candidate has previously qualified as a write-in candidate for such election and office. 
(Code 1984, § 8-10) 
Sec. 8-8. - Write-in candidates. 
    Any person seeking election by write-in votes to any elective office of this city, in order to have such votes cast for him counted, shall not be less than twenty (20) days prior to such election, certify in writing under oath to the city clerk his name, address, that he is qualified to hold such office if elected, the name of the office he seeks and that he will accept the office if elected. Upon compliance with this section, such candidate shall be considered a candidate for such office, except he shall not be entitled to have his name printed on the official ballot. The city clerk shall certify to the election board, not later than the opening of the polls for that election, the names of such write-in candidates. 
(Code 1984, § 8-11) 
Sec. 8-9. - Voting place. 
    Until otherwise directed by the city commission there shall be one (1) voting place in all city elections and that voting place shall be at the cafeteria building at the recreation complex located at 360-C East Main Street, Pahokee, Florida. 
(Code 1984, § 8-4; Ord. No. 2003-2, § 1, 4-8-2003) 
Sec. 8-10. - Opening and closing of polls. 
    The inspectors shall make public proclamation of the opening and closing of the polls, and during the election and canvass of the votes the ballot box shall not be concealed from the public. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5) 
State Law reference- Opening and closing of polls, F.S. § 100.011. 
Sec. 8-11. - Electors to use equipment provided by county supervisor of elections. 
    All elections of the city shall be conducted using the official equipment and tabulations system of the county supervisor of elections that shall be in conformance with the general laws of the state and the practice and procedures of the supervisors of elections for municipal elections. 
(Code 1984, § 8-6; Ord. No. 2013-03, § 7, 7-9-2013) 
Sec. 8-12. - Solicitation of votes at polling place on election day. 
    Solicitation of votes at polling places shall conform to state law, including F.S. ch. 102. 
(Ord. No. 87-1, §§ 1-3, 3-24-1987; Ord. No. 2013-03, § 8, 7-9-2013) 
Sec. 8-13. - Reserved. 
Sec. 8-14. - City exempted from early voting state law. 
    The city exercises its right to exempt itself from the early voting provisions of F.S. § 101.657. (Ord. No. 2005-01, § 1, 2-22-2005) 
Chapter 8.5 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 8.5-1-8.5-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STORMWATER CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - PREAMBLE AND DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 8.5-21. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as the city initial stormwater control ordinance, and may be so cited. 
(Ord. No. 93-3, Art. 1.0, 4-13-1993) 
Sec. 8.5-22. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city. This article is intended to comply with federal and state law and regulations regarding water quality. 
(Ord. No. 93-3, Art. 1.0, § 1.1, 4-13-1993) 
Sec. 8.5-23. - Definitions. 
    Authorized official. Any employee or agent of the city authorized in writing by the commission to administer or enforce the provisions of this article. 
    Discharge. Any direct or indirect entry of any solid, liquid or gaseous matter. 
    Person. Any natural individual, corporation, partnership, institution, or other entity. 
    Site of industrial activity. Any area or facility used for manufacturing, processing or raw material storage, as defined under 40 CFR section 122.26(a)(14) of regulations of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, as amended. 
    Stormwater. Any stormwater run-off, and surface run-off and drainage. 
    Stormwater system. The system of conveyances used for collecting, storing, and transporting stormwater owned by the city but not including any facilities intended to be used in accordance with applicable law for collecting and transporting sanitary or other wastewater. 
(Ord. No. 93-3, Art. 1.0, § 1.2, 4-13-1993) 
Secs. 8.5-24-8.5-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY 

Sec. 8.5-31. - General prohibitions. 
    Any discharge into the stormwater system in violation of any federal, state, county, municipal or other law, rule, regulation or permit is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 93-3, Art. 2.0, § 2.1, 4-13-1993) 
Sec. 8.5-32. - Specific prohibitions. 
    By adoption of industrial activity stormwater regulations or by issuance of industrial activity stormwater permits, or both, the city may impose reasonable limitations as to the quality of stormwater (including without limitation the designation of maximum levels of pollutants) discharged into the stormwater system from sites of industrial activity. Any promulgation of such regulations and issuance of permits by the city shall be in accordance with applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 93-3, Art. 2.0, § 2.2, 4-13-1993) 
Sec. 8.5-33. - Administrative orders. 
    The city may issue an order to any person to immediately cease any discharge determined by the city to be in violation of any provisions of this article, or in violation of any regulation or permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 93-3, Art. 2.0, § 2.3, 4-13-1993) 
Sec. 8.5-34. - NPDES permits. 
    Any person who holds a national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit shall provide a copy of such permit to the city no later than the later of: sixty (60) calendar days after the effective date of this article or sixty (60) calendar days after issuance. 
(Ord. No. 93-3, Art. 2.0, § 2.4, 4-13-1993) 
Secs. 8.5-35-8.5-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ILLICIT DISCHARGES 

Sec. 8.5-41. - General prohibitions. 
    Except as set forth under section 8.5-43 of this article or as in accordance with a valid NPDES permit, any discharge to the stormwater system that is not composed entirely of stormwater is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 93-3, Art. 3.0, § 3.1, 4-13-1993) 
Sec. 8.5-42. - Specific prohibitions. 
    Any discharge to the stormwater system containing any sewage, industrial waste or other waste material, or containing any material in violation of federal, state, county, municipal, or other laws, rules, regulations, orders or permits, is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 93-3, Art. 3.0, § 3.2, 4-13-1993) 
Sec. 8.5-43. - Authorized exceptions. 
    Unless the city determines that it is not properly managed or otherwise is not acceptable, the following discharges are exempt from the general prohibitions set forth under section 8.5-41 of this article: flows from fire fighting, water line flushing and other contributions from potable water sources, landscaping irrigation and lawn watering, irrigation water, diverted stream flows, rising groundwaters, direct infiltration to the stormwater system, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation and footing drains, water from crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, individual residential car washings, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, and dechlorinated swimming pool contributions. 
(Ord. No. 93-3, Art. 3.0, § 3.3, 4-13-1993) 
Sec. 8.5-44. - Illicit connections. 
    No person may maintain, use or establish any direct or indirect connection to the stormwater system that results in any discharge in violation of this article. This prohibition is retroactive and applies to connection made in the past, regardless of whether made under a permit, or other authorization, or whether permissible under laws or practices applicable or prevailing at the time the connection was made. 
(Ord. No. 93-3, Art. 3.0, § 3.4, 4-13-1993) 
Sec. 8.5-45. - Administrative order. 
    The city may issue an order to any person to immediately cease any discharge, or any connection to the stormwater system, determined by the city to be in violation of any provision of this article, or in violation of any regulation or permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 93-3, Art. 3.0, § 3.5, 4-13-1993) 
Secs. 8.5-46-8.5-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SPILLS AND DUMPING 

Sec. 8.5-51. - General prohibitions. 
    Except as set forth under section 8.5-43 of this article or as in accordance with a valid NPDES permit, any discharge to the stormwater system that is not composed entirely of stormwater is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 93-3, Art. 4.0, § 4.1, 4-13-1993) 
Sec. 8.5-52. - Specific prohibitions. 
    Any discharge to the stormwater system containing any sewage, industrial waste or other waste material, or containing any materials in violation of federal, state, county, municipal, or other laws, rules, regulations, orders or permits, is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 93-3, Art. 4.0, § 4.2, 4-13-1993) 
Sec. 8.5-53. - Notification of spills. 
    As soon as any person has knowledge of any discharge to the stormwater system in violation of this article, such person shall immediately notify the city by telephoning (407) 924-5534, and if such person is directly or indirectly responsible for such discharge, then such person shall take immediate action to ensure the containment and clean up of such discharge and shall confirm such telephone notification in writing to the city at 171 N. Lake Avenue, Pahokee, Florida 33476 within three (3) calendar days. 
(Ord. No. 93-3, Art. 4.0, § 4.3, 4-13-1993) 
Sec. 8.5-54. - Administrative order. 
    The city may issue an order to any person to immediately cease any discharge, or connection to the stormwater system, determined by the city to be in violation of any provision of this article, or in violation of any regulation or permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 93-3, Art. 4.0, § 4.4, 4-13-1993) 
Secs. 8.5-55-8.5-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 8.5-61. - Injunctive relief. 
    Any violation of any provision of this article, or of any regulation or order issued hereunder, shall be subject to injunctive relief if necessary to protect the public health, safety or general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 93-3, Art. 5.0, § 5.1, 4-13-1993) 
Sec. 8.5-62. - Continuing violation. 
    A person shall be deemed guilty of a separate violation for each and every day during any continuing violation of any provision of this article, or of any regulation or permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 93-3, Art. 5.0, § 5.2, 4-13-1993) 
Sec. 8.5-63. - Enforcement actions. 
    The city may take all actions necessary, including the issuance of notices of violation, the filing of court actions and/or referral of the matter to the local code enforcement board to require and enforce compliance with the provisions of this article and with any regulation or permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 93-3, Art. 5.0, § 5.3, 4-13-1993) 
Secs. 8.5-64-8.5-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - INSPECTION AND MONITORING 

Sec. 8.5-71. - Authority for inspections. 
    Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this article, or regulation or permit issued hereunder, or whenever an authorized official has reasonable cause to believe there exists any condition constituting a violation of any of the provisions of this article, or regulation or permit issued hereunder, any authorized official may enter any property, building or facility at any reasonable time to inspect the same or to perform any duty related to enforcement of the provisions of this article or any regulations or permits issued hereunder; provided that (a) if such property, building or facility is occupied, such authorized official shall first present credential and request permission to enter, and (b) if such property, building or facility is unoccupied, such authorized official shall make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the property, building or facility, and shall request permission to enter. Any request for permission to enter made hereunder shall state the owner or person in control has the right to refuse entry; and that in such event that entry is refused, the authorized official may enter to make inspection only upon issuance of a search warrant by a duly authorized magistrate. If the owner or person in control refuses permission to enter after such request has been made, the authorized official is hereby authorized to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining entry. Routine or area-wide inspections shall be based upon such reasonable selection processes as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this article, including but not limited to random sampling and sampling in areas with evidence of stormwater contamination discharges, or similar factors. 
(Ord. No. 93-3, Art. 6.0, § 6.1, 4-13-1993) 
Sec. 8.5-72. - Authority for monitoring and sampling. 
    Any authorized official may establish on any property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering of discharges to the stormwater system. During any inspections made to enforce the provisions of this article, or regulations or permits issued hereunder, any authorized official may take any sample deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 93-3, Art. 6.0, § 6.2, 4-13-1993) 
Sec. 8.5-73. - Requirement for monitoring. 
    The city may require any person engaging in any activity or owning any property, building or facility (including but not limited to a site of industrial activity) to undertake such reasonable monitoring of any discharge(s) to the stormwater system and to furnish periodic reports. 
(Ord. No. 93-3, Art. 6.0, § 6.3, 4-13-1993) 
Secs. 8.5-74-8.5-83. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MAINTENANCE OF DRAINAGE CANALS, SWALES AND STRUCTURES 

Sec. 8.5-84. - Maintenance of drainage. 
    It shall be unlawful for any real property owner to fail to maintain any drainage canals, swales, or other structures designed to convey stormwater runoff located on their property, unless the owner produces a recorded, legally binding instrument providing that the maintenance is the responsibility of another person or entity. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, § 2(8.5-74), 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 8.5-85. - Responsible party for maintenance. 
    It shall be unlawful and subject to the code enforcement procedures of the city for any entity or person who has the legal obligation to maintain a canal, swale, or other drainage structure to fail to keep such free and clear of all debris, overgrowth, or other hindrance so as to prevent the canal, swale, or drainage structure from free-flowing and functioning as designed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, § 2(8.5-75), 11-9-2010) 
Sec. 8.5-86. - Obstructing drainage. 
    It shall be unlawful for any persons to place garbage, trash, debris, vegetative matter, or any other material of any kind into any drainage canal, swale, or other drainage structure. 
(Ord. No. 2010-11, § 2(8.5-76), 11-9-2010) 
Secs. 8.5-87-8.5-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NUTRIENT LEVELS IN COUNTY WATER BODIES 

Sec. 8.5-91. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the Fertilizer-Friendly Use Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § I, 5-15-2013) 
Sec. 8.5-92. - Definitions. 
    For this article, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth in this section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Application or apply means the actual physical deposition of fertilizer to turf or landscape plants. 
    Applicator means any person who applies fertilizer on turf and/or landscape plants in the city. 
    Approved test means a soil test from the University of Florida, government, or other commercial licensed laboratory that regularly performs soil testing and recommendations. 
    Best management practices (BMPs) means turf and landscape practices or combination of practices based on research, field-testing, and expert review, determined to be the most effective and practical site-specific means, including economic and technological considerations, for improving water quality, conserving water supplies and protecting natural resources. 
    Code enforcement officer, official, or inspector means any designated employee or agent of the city whose duty it is to enforce codes and ordinances enacted by the city. 
    Commercial fertilizer applicator, except as provided in F.S. § 482.1562(9), means any person who applies fertilizer for payment or other consideration to property not owned by the person or firm applying the fertilizer or the employer of the applicators. 
    Fertilizer means any substance or mixture of substances that contains one or more recognized plant nutrients and promotes plant growth, or controls soil acidity or alkalinity, or provides other soil enrichment, or provides other corrective measures to the soil. 
    Fertilizing or fertilization means the act of applying fertilizer to turf, specialized turf, or landscape plants. 
    Institutional applicator means any person, other than a private, noncommercial or a commercial applicator (unless such definitions also apply under the circumstances), that applies fertilizer for the purpose of maintaining turf and/or landscape plants. Institutional applicators shall include, but shall not be limited to, owners, managers, or employees of public lands, schools, parks, religious institutions, utilities, industrial or business sites and any residential properties maintained in condominium and/or common ownership. 
    Landscape plant means any native or non-native tree, shrub, or groundcover (excluding turf). 
    Pasture means land managed for livestock grazing. 
    Person means any natural person, business, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, limited partnership, association, club, organization, and/or any group of people acting as an organized entity. 
    Prohibited application period means the time period during which a flood watch or warning, a tropical storm watch or warning, or a hurricane watch or warning is in effect for any portion of the city, issued by the National Weather Service, or if heavy rain (two (2) inches or more within a twenty-four (24) hour period) is likely. 
    Saturated soil means a soil in which the voids are filled with water. Saturation does not require flow. For the purposes of this article, soils shall be considered saturated if standing water is present or the pressure of a person standing on the soil causes the release of free water. 
    Slow-release, controlled release, timed-release, slowly available, or water-insoluble nitrogen means nitrogen in a form which delays its availability for vegetative uptake and use after application, or which extends its availability to the vegetation longer than a reference rapid or quick release product. 
    Turf, sod or lawn means an area of grass-covered soil held together by the roots of the grass. 
    Urban landscape means pervious areas on residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, highway rights-of-way, or other nonagricultural lands that are planted with turf or landscape plants. For the purposes of this section, agriculture has the same meaning as provided in F.S. § 570.02. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § II, 5-15-2013) 
Sec. 8.5-93. - Findings. 
    As a result of the state department of environmental protection's determination that certain water bodies within the county are impaired for excessive nutrient levels, the city finds that the best management practices contained in the most recent edition of Florida-Friendly Best Management Practices for Protection of Water Resources by the Green Industries are required in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § III, 5-15-2013) 
Sec. 8.5-94. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  This article regulates the proper use of fertilizers by any applicator; requires proper training of commercial and institutional fertilizer applicators; establishes training and licensing requirements; establishes a Prohibited Application Period; and specifies allowable fertilizer application rates and methods, fertilizer-free zones, and exemptions. 
(b)  This article requires the use of best management practices to minimize negative environmental effects associated with excessive nutrients in our water bodies. These environmental effects have been observed in and on the county's natural and constructed stormwater conveyances, rivers, creeks, canals, lakes, estuaries and other water bodies. Collectively, these water bodies are an asset important to the environmental, recreational, cultural and economic well-being of county residents and the health of the public. Overgrowth of algae and vegetation hinder the effectiveness of flood attenuation provided by natural and constructed stormwater conveyances. Regulation of nutrients, including both phosphorus and nitrogen contained in fertilizer, is anticipated to help improve and maintain water and habitat quality. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § IV, 5-15-2013) 
Sec. 8.5-95. - Applicability. 
    This article shall be applicable to and shall regulate any and all applicators of fertilizer and areas of application of fertilizer to urban landscapes within the city, unless such application is specifically exempted by section 8.5-102. This article shall be prospective only, and shall not impair any existing contracts. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § V, 5-15-2013) 
Sec. 8.5-96. - Timing of fertilizer applications. 
(a)  No applicator shall apply fertilizers containing nitrogen and/or phosphorus to turf and/or landscape plants during the prohibited application period or to saturated soils. 
(b)  Fertilizer containing nitrogen and/or phosphorus shall not be applied before seeding or sodding a site, and shall not be applied for the first thirty (30) days after seeding or sodding, except when hydro-seeding for temporary or permanent erosion control in an emergency situation (wildfire, etc.), or in accordance with the stormwater pollution prevent plan for that site. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § VI, 5-15-2013) 
Sec. 8.5-97. - Fertilizer free zones. 
    Fertilizer shall not be applied within ten (10) feet, or three (3) feet if a deflector shield or drop spreader is used, of any pond, stream, water body, lake, canal, or wetland as defined by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (F.A.C. ch. 62-340) or from the top of a seawall or lake bulkhead. Newly planted turf or landscape plants may be fertilized in this zone only for a sixty (60) day period beginning thirty (30) days after planting if needed to allow the vegetation to become well established. Caution shall be used to prevent direct deposition of fertilizer into the water. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § VII, 5-15-2013) 
Sec. 8.5-98. - Fertilizer content and application rates. 
(a)  Fertilizers applied to turf within the city shall be applied in accordance with requirements and directions provided by F.A.C. 5E-1.003(2), Labeling Requirements For Urban Turf Fertilizers. Under F.A.C. 5E- 1.003(2), required application rate and frequency maximums, which vary by plant and turf types, are found on the labeled fertilizer bag or container. 
(b)  Nitrogen or phosphorus fertilizer shall not be applied to turf or landscape plants except as provided in section (1) above for turf, or in UF/IFAS recommendations for landscape plants, vegetable gardens, and fruit trees and shrubs, unless a soil or tissue deficiency has been verified by an approved test. 
(c)  Fertilizer used for sports turf at golf courses shall be applied in accordance with the recommendations in Best Management Practices for the Enhancement of Environmental Quality on Florida Golf Courses, published by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, dated January 2007, as may be amended. Fertilizer used at park or athletic fields shall be applied in accordance with F.A.C. 5E-1.003(2). 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § VIII, 5-15-2013) 
Sec. 8.5-99. - Fertilizer application practices. 
(a)  As required in section 8.5-102, spreader deflector shields shall be used when fertilizing via rotary (broadcast) spreaders. Deflectors must be positioned such that fertilizer granules are deflected away from all impervious surfaces, fertilizer-free zones and water bodies, including wetlands. Any fertilizer applied, spilled, or deposited, either intentionally or accidentally, on any impervious surface shall be immediately and completely removed to the greatest extent practicable. 
(b)  Fertilizer released on an impervious surface must be immediately contained and either legally applied to turf or any other legal site, or returned to the original or other appropriate container. 
(c)  In no case shall fertilizer be washed, swept, or blown off impervious surfaces into stormwater drains, ditches, conveyances, or water bodies. 
(d)  Property owners and managers are encouraged to use an integrated pest management (IPM) strategy as currently recommended by the University of Florida Cooperative Extension Service publications. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § IX, 5-15-2013) 
Sec. 8.5-100. - Management of grass clippings and vegetative matter. 
    In no case shall grass clippings, vegetative material, and/or vegetative debris intentionally be washed, swept, or blown on to or into stormwater drains, ditches, conveyances, water bodies, wetlands, sidewalks or roadways. Vegetative material may be placed within the roadway right-of-way, but not over the storm drains, for pickup by the municipality's vegetative waste hauler. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § X, 5-15-2013) 
Sec. 8.5-101. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions set forth in this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Bona fide farm operations as defined in the Florida Right-to-Farm Act, F.S. § 823.14. 
(2)  Other properties not subject to or covered under the Florida Right-to-Farm Act that have pastures used for grazing livestock. 
(3)  Any lands used for bona fide scientific research, including, but not limited to, research on the effects of fertilizer use on urban stormwater, water quality, agronomics, or horticulture. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § XI, 5-15-2013) 
Sec. 8.5-102. - Training. 
(a)  All commercial and institutional applicators of fertilizer within the city shall abide by and successfully complete the six-hour training program in the Florida-Friendly Best Management Practices for Protection of Water Resources by the Green Industries offered by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection through the University of Florida/Palm Beach County Cooperative Extension Service Florida-Friendly Landscaping program or an approved equivalent program. 
(b)  Non-commercial and non-institutional applicators not otherwise required to be certified, such as private citizens on their own residential property, are encouraged to follow the recommendations of the University of Florida/IFAS Florida-Friendly Landscaping program and label instructions when applying fertilizers. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § XII, 5-15-2013) 
Sec. 8.5-103. - Licensing of commercial applicators. 
(a)  All businesses applying fertilizer to turf or landscape plants (including, but not limited to, residential lawns, golf courses, commercial properties, and multi-family and condominium properties) must ensure that the business owner or his/her designee holds the appropriate Florida-Friendly Best Management Practices for Protection of Water Resources by the Green Industries training certificate prior to the business owner obtaining a local business tax certificate. Owners for any category of occupation which may apply any fertilizer to turf and/or landscape plants shall provide proof of completion of the program to the city code enforcement department. It is the responsibility of the business owner to maintain the Florida-Friendly Best Management Practices for Protection of Water Resources by the Green Industries certificate to receive their business tax receipt annually. 
(b)  After December 31, 2013, all commercial applicators of fertilizer within the city shall have and carry in their possession at all times when applying fertilizer, evidence of certification by the state department of agriculture and consumer services as a commercial fertilizer applicator per F.A.C. 5E-14.117(18). 
(c)  All businesses applying fertilizer to turf and/or landscape plants (including, but not limited to, residential lawns, golf courses, commercial properties and multi-family and condominium properties) must ensure that at least one (1) employee has an appropriate Florida-Friendly Best Management Practices for Protection of Water Resources by the Green Industries training certificate prior to the business owner obtaining a local business tax certificate. Standard business tax receipt (BTR) and transaction fees shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § XIII, 5-15-2013) 
Sec. 8.5-104. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this article shall be enforced by: 
(1)  The city special master pursuant to the authority granted by F.S. § 162.01 et. seq., as may be amended, and article 10 of the Unified Land Development Code, as may be amended; 
(2)  The city, through its authority to enjoin and restrain any person violating the Unified Land Development Code; or 
(3)  The city, through the prosecution of violations in the name of the state, pursuant to the authority granted by F.S. § 125.69, as may be amended. The code enforcement director may pursue these or any other enforcement remedies available to and applicable to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § XIV, 5-15-2013) 
Sec. 8.5-105. - Penalties. 
(a)  Failure to comply with the requirement of this article shall constitute a violation of this article and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $250.00 per incident for the violation or a fine not to exceed $500.00 per incident for a repeat violation, and, in addition, may include all costs of repairs and remediation including administrative costs. Each new day the violation exists it is considered a separate incident. 
(b)  In determining the amount of fines that should be imposed, the Special Master shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  The gravity of the violation; 
(2)  Any actions taken by the violator to correct the violation; and 
(3)  Any previous violations committed by the violator. If the special master finds the violation is irreparable or irreversible in nature, a fine not to exceed $15,000.00 per violation may be imposed. 
(c)  Funds generated by penalties imposed under this Ordinance shall be used by the city for the administration and enforcement of F.S. § 403.9337 and the corresponding sections of this article, and to further water conservation and nonpoint pollution prevention activities. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § XV, 5-15-2013) 
Sec. 8.5-106. - Appeal. 
    An aggrieved party, including the city, may appeal a final administrative order of a special master to the circuit court. Such an appeal shall not be a hearing de novo, but shall be limited to appellate review of the record created before the special master. An appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days of the execution of the order to be appealed. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § XVI, 5-15-2013) 
Secs. 8.5-107-8.5-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RECYCLING FACILITIES 

Sec. 8.5-111. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all categories of recycling facilities located within the City of Pahokee. 
(Ord. No. 2016-14 , § 1, 11-22-2016) 
Sec. 8.5-112. - Time for compliance. 
(a)  All existing recycling facilities must comply with the provisions of this article within four (4) months of the effective date. 
(b)  All proposals for new recycling facilities will comply with the provisions of this article before the commencement of the operation of the facility. No building permit, occupational license, or business tax receipt shall be issued by the city until the recycling facility complies with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-14 , § 1, 11-22-2016) 
Sec. 8.5-113. - Security bond or guarantee. 
    The operators of all recycling facilities in the city will post a surety bond in favor of the city, or such other method of surety acceptable to the city manager and city attorney that shall guarantee the performance of the requirements of this article. The surety bond or other guarantee must be kept current at all times with the city, until the facility has closed and all recycling materials, garbage, trash, or other debris has been removed from the property, and the site has been inspected by the city code enforcement department, health department, and any other state-funded or local government agency with jurisdiction over the facility or the type of recycling done on-site. 
(Ord. No. 2016-14 , § 1, 11-22-2016) 
Chapter 8.7 - FAIR HOUSING 

Sec. 8.7-1. - Declaration of policy. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city, in the exercise of its police power for the public safety, public health, and general welfare, to assure equal opportunity to obtain adequate housing by all persons, regardless of race, color, sex, religion, national origin, familial status, or handicap, and, to that end, to eliminate discrimination in housing. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § I, 2-11-1997) 
Sec. 8.7-2. - Definitions. 
    When used herein: 
    Council means the city commission of the City of Pahokee, Florida. 
    Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under section 8.7-4, 8.7-5, or 8.7-6 of this chapter. 
    Dwelling means any building, structure, or portion hereof which is occupied as, or designated or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one (1) or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof. 
    Familial status means one (1) or more individuals (who have not attained the age of eighteen (18) years) being domiciled with: 
(1)  A parent or another person having legal custody of such individual or individuals; or 
(2)  The designee of such parent or other persons having such custody, with the written permission of such parent or other persons. The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years. 
    Family means a single individual. 
    Handicap means that a person has a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one (1) or more major life activities or that he/she has a record of having, or is regarded as having, such physical or mental impairment. 
    Person includes one (1) or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, point-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, and fiduciaries. 
    To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § II, 2-11-1997) 
Sec. 8.7-3. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Nothing in section 8.7-4 (other than subsection (b)) shall apply to: 
(1)  Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner: provided, that such private individual owner does not own more than three (3) such single-family houses at any one time; provided further, that in the case of the sale of any such single-family house by a private individual owner not residing in such house at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such house prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one (1) such sale within any twenty-four-month period; provided, further, that after the effective date of this chapter the sale or rental of any such single-family house shall be excepted from the application of this chapter only if such house is sold or rented (a) without the use of any manner of sales or rental facilities or the sales of rental services of any real estate broker, agent, or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman, or person; and (b) without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of section 8.7-4(c) of this title; but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title; or 
(2)  Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his residence. 
(b)  For the purpose of subsection (a), a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if: 
(1)  He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as principal in three (3) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or 
(2)  He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of his personal residence in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two (2) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or 
(3)  He is the owner of any dwelling designated or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five (5) or more families. 
(c)  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex, religion, national origin, familial status, or handicap. Nor shall anything in this chapter prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodging from which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodging to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(d)  Nothing in this chapter requires any person renting or dwelling to modify, alter or adjust the dwelling in order to provide physical accessibility except as otherwise required by law. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § III, 2-11-1997) 
Sec. 8.7-4. - Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing. 
    As made applicable by section 8.7-3 and except as exempted by sections 8.7-3(a) and 8.7-7, it shall be unlawful: 
(1)  To refuse to sell or rent after making of a bonafide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, sex, religion, national origin, familial status, or handicap. 
(2)  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, sex, religion, national origin, familial status, or handicap. 
(3)  To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preferences, imitation, or discrimination based on race, color, sex, religion, national origin, familial status, or handicap, or an intention to make any such preference, imitation, or discrimination. 
(4)  To represent to any person because of race, color, sex, religion, national origin, familial status, or handicap that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(5)  For profit to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, sex, religion, national origin, familial status, or handicap. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § IV, 2-11-1997) 
Sec. 8.7-5. - Discrimination in the financing of housing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company, or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefore for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, financial assistance, because of race, color, sex, religion, national origin, familial status, or handicap of such person of any person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given; provided, that nothing contained in this section shall impair the scope or effectiveness of the exception contained in section 8.7-3. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § V, 2-11-1997) 
Sec. 8.7-6. - Discrimination in the provision of brokerage service. 
    It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation on account of race, color, sex, religion, national origin, familial status, or handicap. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § VI, 2-11-1997) 
Sec. 8.7-7. - Administration. 
(a)  The authority and responsibility for administering this chapter shall be with the city commission. 
(b)  The city commission may delegate its functions, duties, and powers to an appointed board, including functions, duties, and powers with respect to investigating, conciliating, hearing, determining, ordering, certifying, reporting, or otherwise acting as to any work, business, or matter under this chapter. 
(c)  The city commission or its appointed board shall: 
(1)  Implement the provisions of this chapter and rules and regulations promulgated hereunder and all ordinances, codes, rules, and regulations pertaining to housing discrimination. 
(2)  Receive, initiate, and investigate any and all complaints alleging violations of the ordinance, and take appropriate action to eliminate, conciliate, prevent, and/or initiate prosecution of any such violations. 
(3)  Provide assistance in all matters relating to equal housing opportunity. 
(4)  Publish and disseminate public information and educational materials relating to housing discrimination. 
(5)  Enter into written working agreements, as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter, with federal, state and county agencies involved in reducing housing discrimination. 
(6)  Administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of evidence before it by subpoenas issued by the city commission or its appointed board. 
(7)  Take other informational, educational, or persuasive actions to implement the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § VII, 2-11-1997) 
Sec. 8.7-8. - Procedure. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by an unlawful practice prohibited by this chapter must file a written complaint with the city commission, or its appointed board within forty-five (45) days after the alleged unlawful practice occurs. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a complaint, the city commission or its appointed board shall serve upon the individual charged with a violation (hereinafter referred to as the respondent), the complaint and a written resume setting forth the rights of the parties including, but not limited to, the right of the respondent to a hearing on the matter before adjudication by the city commission or its appointed board. 
(c)  The city commission or its appointed board shall immediately investigate the complaint. Within sixty (60) days from the date of the receipt of the complaint, the city commission or its appointed board shall establish written report with findings of fact. 
(d)  Copies of the city commission or its appointed board's report shall be sent to the complainant and the respondent. Either may within ten (10) days after such services, request a hearing before the city commission. 
(e)  When the complainant or the respondent requests a hearing by the city commission or its appointed board, or when the city commission or its appointed board itself determine that a hearing is desirable, the city commission or its appointed board shall call and conduct such hearing in accordance with section 8.7-9 of this chapter. 
(f)  The city commission or its appointed board shall carry into execution the actions specified in its report, or, if a hearing is held, shall carry into execution the actions determined upon by the city commission or its appointed board in the hearing. 
(g)  The city commission or its appointed board in its review or its hearing may determine: 
(1)  That the complaint lacks ground upon which to base action for violation of this chapter; or 
(2)  That the complaint has been adequately dealt with by conciliation of the parties; or 
(3)  That the case warrant filing charges against the offending party in the appropriate court. In some cases both conciliation and adjudicative orders, or both adjudicative orders and initiation of court action may be indicated. 
(h)  If the city commission or its appointed board issues an adjudicative order to correct, adjust, conciliate, prevent, or prohibit any unlawful act prohibited by this chapter, and the respondent refuses or fails to comply with or obey such adjudication, the city commission or its appointed board shall forthwith request that the state attorney file a complaint in the appropriate court. The city commission or its appointed board shall, at all times, provide the complainant with full and timely information as to all the alternatives available to him or her under local, state, and federal law, including assistance to initiate judicial action if desired, under the circumstances. 
(i)  The provisions of Rule 1.090, Florida Rules of Civil Procedure, shall govern the computation of any period of time prescribed by this chapter. 
(j)  All papers or pleadings required by this chapter to be served may be served by certified mail or in accordance with the provisions of Rule 1.080(b), Florida Rules of Civil Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § VIII, 2-11-1997) 
Sec. 8.7-9. - Hearings before the city commission. 
(a)  When a hearing is required before the city commission or its appointed board, as specified in section 8.7-8(e) of this chapter, the city commission or its appointed board shall schedule the hearing and serve upon all interested parties a notice of time and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be held promptly, but not less than fifteen (15) days after service of such notice and of the city commission or its appointed board's written report (section 8.7-8 of this chapter). 
(b)  All parties, or their authorized counsel, may file such statements with the city commission or its appointed board, prior to the hearing date, as they deem necessary in support of their positions. The parties may appear before the city commission or its appointed board in person or by duly constituted representative and may have the assistance of attorneys. The parties may present testimony and evidence, and the right to cross-examine witnesses shall be preserved. The testimony shall be given under oath or by affirmation. The city commission or its appointed board shall not be bound by strict rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity but due process shall be observed. The city commission or its appointed board shall keep a full record of the hearing, which records shall be public and open to inspection by any person, and upon request by any principal party to the proceedings the city commission or its appointed board shall furnish such party a copy of the hearing record at no cost. The constitutional rights of the respondent not to incriminate himself shall be scrupulously observed. 
(c)  The city commission or its appointed board shall make a finding of fact, and determination of action to be taken (section 8.7-8(g)). 
(d)  The city commission or its appointed board may issue subpoenas to compel access to or the production or appearance of premises, records, documents, individuals, and other evidence or possible sources of evidence relative to the complaint at issue. 
(e)  Upon written application to the city commission or its appointed board, a respondent shall be entitled to the issuance of a reasonable number of subpoenas by and in the name of the city commission or, to the same extent and subject to the same limitations as subpoenas issued by the city commission or its appointed board itself. Subpoenas issued at the request of a respondent shall show on their face the name and address of such respondent and shall state that they were issued at his request. 
(f)  Witnesses summoned by subpoena of the city commission or its appointed board shall be entitled to the same witness and mileage fees as are witnesses in proceedings in the state courts of Florida. Fees payable to a witness summoned by a subpoena issued at the request of a respondent shall be paid by him, unless he is indigent in which case the city commission shall bear the cost of said fees. 
(g)  Within ten (10) days after service of a subpoena upon any person, such person may petition the city commission or its appointed board to revoke or modify the subpoena. The city commission or its appointed board shall grant the petition if it finds that the subpoena requires appearance or attendance, at an unreasonable time or place, that it requires production of evidence which does not relate to any matter under investigation, that it does not describe with sufficient particularity the evidence to be produced, that compliance would be unduly onerous, or for other good reason. 
(h)  In case of refusal to obey a subpoena, the city commission or its appointed board or the person at whose request it was issued may petition for its enforcement in the appropriate court. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § IX, 2-11-1997) 
Sec. 8.7-10. - Other remedies. 
    Nothing herein shall prevent any person from exercising any right or seeking any remedy to which he might otherwise be entitled, or from filing of any complaint with any other agency or any court having proper jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § X, 2-11-1997) 
Sec. 8.7-11. - Report to real estate commission. 
    If a real estate broker, a real estate salesman, or an employee thereof has been found to have committed an unlawful practice in violation of this chapter, or has failed to comply with an order issued by the city commission or its appointed board, the city commission or its appointed board shall, in addition to the other procedures set forth herein, report the facts to the real estate commission of the state. 
(Ord. No. 97-2, § XI, 2-11-1997) 
Chapter 9 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; permit to burn garbage and trash required, § 11-13. 
State Law reference- Fire prevention and control, F.S. Ch. 633; local fire chief authorized to enforce laws and rules of state fire marshal, F.S. § 633.121; explosives, F.S. Ch. 552; procedure to lawfully burn land, F.S. § 590.12; sale of fireworks, F.S. Ch. 791. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Adoption of Palm Beach County's local amendments to Florida Fire Prevention Code. 
    It is hereby adopted by reference as fully and to the same extent as if set out at length herein Palm Beach County's local amendments to the Florida Fire Prevention Code, as adopted by Palm Beach County in Ordinance No. 2011-38, as it may be amended from time to time, copies of which are now and have been for the ten (10) days preceding the adoption of this section on file in the office of the fire chief, such codes to be designated as the fire code of the town. 
(Code 1984, § 6-16; Ord. No. 2002-7, § 1, 9-10-2002) 
Sec. 9-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2002-7, § 2, adopted Sept. 10, 2002 repealed §§ 9-2 and 9-26-9-28, which pertained to starting fires in fields, lots, streets, and the fire department, and was derived from Code 1984, §§ 6-1 and 6-16-6-18. 
Secs. 9-3-9-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - (RESERVED)[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- See the editor's note to § 9-2. 

Secs. 9-26-9-45. - Reserved 
Chapter 10 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, adopted April 26, 2016, repealed former ch. 10, §§ 10-1-10-55, and enacted a new ch. 10 as set out herein. Former ch. 10 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 88-11, adopted August 24, 1988. 

ARTICLE I. - ADMINISTRATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Title. 
    These regulations shall be known as the "Floodplain Management Ordinance" of the City of Pahokee, hereinafter referred to as "this chapter." 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-2. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all development that is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area, including but not limited to the subdivision of land; filling, grading, and other site improvements and utility installations; construction, alteration, remodeling, enlargement, improvement, replacement, repair, relocation or demolition of buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code; placement, installation, or replacement of manufactured homes and manufactured buildings; installation or replacement of tanks; placement of recreational vehicles; installation of swimming pools; and any other development. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-3. - Intent. 
    The purposes of this chapter and the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code are to establish minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flooding through regulation of development in flood hazard areas to: 
(1)  Minimize unnecessary disruption of commerce, access and public service during times of flooding; 
(2)  Require the use of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize future flood damage; 
(3)  Manage filling, grading, dredging, mining, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion potential; 
(4)  Manage the alteration of flood hazard areas, watercourses, and shorelines to minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial functions of the floodplain; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public and private facilities and utilities; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood hazard areas; 
(7)  Minimize the need for future expenditure of public funds for flood control projects and response to and recovery from flood events; and 
(8)  Meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program for community participation as set forth in the Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Section 59.22. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-4. - Coordination with theFlorida Building Code. 
    This chapter is intended to be administered and enforced in conjunction with the Florida Building Code. Where cited, ASCE 24 refers to the edition of the standard that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-5. - Warning. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter and the Florida Building Code, as amended by this community, is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside of mapped special flood hazard areas, or that uses permitted within such flood hazard areas, will be free from flooding or flood damage. The flood hazard areas and base flood elevations contained in the Flood Insurance Study and shown on Flood Insurance Rate Maps and the requirements of Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Sections 59 and 60 may be revised by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, requiring this community to revise these regulations to remain eligible for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. No guaranty of vested use, existing use, or future use is implied or expressed by compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-6. - Disclaimer of liability. 
    This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Pahokee or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
DIVISION 2. - APPLICABILITY 

Sec. 10-7. - General. 
    Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-8. - Areas to which this chapter applies. 
    This chapter shall apply to all flood hazard areas within the City of Pahokee, as established in section 10-9 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-9. - Basis for establishing flood hazard areas. 
    The Flood Insurance Study for Palm Beach County, Florida, and Incorporated Areas, dated October 5th, 2017, and all subsequent amendments and revisions, and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) and all subsequent amendments and revisions to such maps, are adopted by reference as a part of this chapter and shall serve as the minimum basis for establishing flood hazard areas. Studies and maps that establish flood hazard areas are on file at the city hall. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016; Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 1, 8-8-2017) 
Sec. 10-10. - Submission of additional data to establish flood hazard areas. 
    To establish flood hazard areas and base flood elevations, pursuant to article I, division 5 of this chapter the floodplain administrator may require submission of additional data. Where field surveyed topography prepared by a Florida licensed professional surveyor or digital topography accepted by the community indicates that ground elevations: 
(1)  Are below the closest applicable base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as flood hazard area and subject to the requirements of this chapter and, as applicable, the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(2)  Are above the closest applicable base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as special flood hazard area unless the applicant obtains a Letter of Map Change that removes the area from the special flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-11. - Other laws. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-12. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This chapter supersedes any chapter in effect for management of development in flood hazard areas. However, it is not intended to repeal or abrogate any existing chapters including but not limited to land development regulations, zoning chapters, stormwater management regulations, or the Florida Building Code. In the event of a conflict between this chapter and any other chapter, the more restrictive shall govern. This chapter shall not impair any deed restriction, covenant or easement, but any land that is subject to such interests shall also be governed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-13. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
DIVISION 3. - DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR 

Sec. 10-14. - Designation. 
    The zoning officer is designated as the floodplain administrator. The floodplain administrator may delegate performance of certain duties to other employees. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-15. - General. 
    The floodplain administrator is authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The floodplain administrator shall have the authority to render interpretations of this chapter consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter and may establish policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies, and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided in this chapter without the granting of a variance pursuant to article I, division 7 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-16. - Applications and permits. 
    The floodplain administrator, in coordination with other pertinent offices of the community, shall: 
(1)  Review applications and plans to determine whether proposed new development will be located in flood hazard areas; 
(2)  Review applications for modification of any existing development in flood hazard areas for compliance with the requirements of this chapter; 
(3)  Interpret flood hazard area boundaries where such interpretation is necessary to determine the exact location of boundaries; a person contesting the determination shall have the opportunity to appeal the interpretation; 
(4)  Provide available flood elevation and flood hazard information; 
(5)  Determine whether additional flood hazard data shall be obtained from other sources or shall be developed by an applicant; 
(6)  Review applications to determine whether proposed development will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(7)  Issue floodplain development permits or approvals for development other than buildings and structures that are subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, when compliance with this chapter is demonstrated, or disapprove the same in the event of noncompliance; and 
(8)  Coordinate with and provide comments to the building official to assure that applications, plan reviews, and inspections for buildings and structures in flood hazard areas comply with the applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-17. - Substantial improvement and substantial damage determinations. 
    For applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures, the floodplain administrator, in coordination with the building official, shall: 
(1)  Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are made; 
(2)  Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or structure; 
(3)  Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; the determination requires evaluation of previous permits issued for improvements and repairs as specified in the definition of "substantial improvement"; and 
(4)  Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance with the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code and this chapter is required. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-18. - Modifications of the strict application of the requirements of theFlorida Building Code. 
    The floodplain administrator shall review requests submitted to the building official that seek approval to modify the strict application of the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code to determine whether such requests require the granting of a variance pursuant to article I, division 7 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-19. - Notices and orders. 
    The floodplain administrator shall coordinate with appropriate local agencies for the issuance of all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-20. - Inspections. 
    The floodplain administrator shall make the required inspections as specified in article I, division 6 of this chapter for development that is not subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The floodplain administrator shall inspect flood hazard areas to determine if development is undertaken without issuance of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-21. - Other duties of the floodplain administrator. 
    The floodplain administrator shall have other duties, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Establish, in coordination with the building official, procedures for administering and documenting determinations of substantial improvement and substantial damage made pursuant to section 10-17 of this chapter; 
(2)  Require that applicants proposing alteration of a watercourse notify adjacent communities and the Florida Division of Emergency Management, State Floodplain Management Office, and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(3)  Require applicants who submit hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses to support permit applications to submit to FEMA the data and information necessary to maintain the Flood Insurance Rate Maps if the analyses propose to change base flood elevations, flood hazard area boundaries, or floodway designations; such submissions shall be made within six (6) months of such data becoming available; 
(4)  Review required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by this chapter and the Florida Building Code to determine that such certifications and documentations are complete; 
(5)  Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency when the corporate boundaries of City of Pahokee are modified; and 
(6)  Advise applicants for new buildings and structures, including substantial improvements, that are located in any unit of the Coastal Barrier Resources System established by the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348) and the Coastal Barrier Improvement Act of 1990 (Pub. L. 101-591) that federal flood insurance is not available on such construction; areas subject to this limitation are identified on Flood Insurance Rate Maps as "Coastal Barrier Resource System Areas" and "Otherwise Protected Areas." 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-22. - Floodplain management records. 
    Regardless of any limitation on the period required for retention of public records, the floodplain administrator shall maintain and permanently keep and make available for public inspection all records that are necessary for the administration of this chapter and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, including Flood Insurance Rate Maps; Letters of Map Change; records of issuance of permits and denial of permits; determinations of whether proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by the Florida Building Code and this chapter; notifications to adjacent communities, FEMA, and the state related to alterations of watercourses; assurances that the flood carrying capacity of altered watercourses will be maintained; documentation related to appeals and variances, including justification for issuance or denial; and records of enforcement actions taken pursuant to this chapter and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. These records shall be available for public inspection at city hall. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
DIVISION 4. - PERMITS 

Sec. 10-23. - Permits required. 
    Any owner or owner's authorized agent (hereinafter "applicant") who intends to undertake any development activity within the scope of this chapter, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, which is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area shall first make application to the floodplain administrator, and the building official if applicable, and shall obtain the required permit(s) and approval(s). No such permit or approval shall be issued until compliance with the requirements of this chapter and all other applicable codes and regulations has been satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-24. - Floodplain development permits or approvals. 
    Floodplain development permits or approvals shall be issued pursuant to this chapter for any development activities not subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Depending on the nature and extent of proposed development that includes a building or structure, the floodplain administrator may determine that a floodplain development permit or approval is required in addition to a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-25. - Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from theFlorida Building Code. 
    Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. Sections 59 and 60), floodplain development permits or approvals shall be required for the following buildings, structures and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code and any further exemptions provided by law, which are subject to the requirements of this chapter: 
(1)  Railroads and ancillary facilities associated with the railroad. 
(2)  Nonresidential farm buildings on farms, as provided in section 604.50, F.S. 
(3)  Temporary buildings or sheds used exclusively for construction purposes. 
(4)  Mobile or modular structures used as temporary offices. 
(5)  Those structures or facilities of electric utilities, as defined in section 366.02, F.S., which are directly involved in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity. 
(6)  Chickees constructed by the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida or the Seminole Tribe of Florida. As used in this paragraph, the term "chickee" means an open-sided wooden hut that has a thatched roof of palm or palmetto or other traditional materials, and that does not incorporate any electrical, plumbing, or other non-wood features. 
(7)  Family mausoleums not exceeding two hundred fifty (250) square feet in area which are prefabricated and assembled on site or preassembled and delivered on site and have walls, roofs, and a floor constructed of granite, marble, or reinforced concrete. 
(8)  Temporary housing provided by the Department of Corrections to any prisoner in the state correctional system. 
(9)  Structures identified in F.S. § 553.73(10)(k), are not exempt from the Florida Building Code if such structures are located in flood hazard areas established on Flood Insurance Rate Maps 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-26. - Application for a permit or approval. 
    To obtain a floodplain development permit or approval the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the community. The information provided shall: 
(1)  Identify and describe the development to be covered by the permit or approval. 
(2)  Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be conducted by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitively locate the site. 
(3)  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed development is intended. 
(4)  Be accompanied by a site plan or construction documents as specified in article I, division 5 of this chapter. 
(5)  State the valuation of the proposed work. 
(6)  Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent. 
(7)  Give such other data and information as required by the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-27. - Validity of permit or approval. 
    The issuance of a floodplain development permit or approval pursuant to this chapter shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any violation of this chapter, the Florida Building Codes, or any other chapter of this community. The issuance of permits based on submitted applications, construction documents, and information shall not prevent the floodplain administrator from requiring the correction of errors and omissions. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-28. - Expiration. 
    A floodplain development permit or approval shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days after its issuance, or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days after the work commences. Extensions for periods of not more than one hundred eighty (180) days each shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause shall be demonstrated. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-29. - Suspension or revocation. 
    The floodplain administrator is authorized to suspend or revoke a floodplain development permit or approval if the permit was issued in error, on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of this chapter or any other chapter, regulation or requirement of this community. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-30. - Other permits required. 
    Floodplain development permits and building permits shall include a condition that all other applicable state or federal permits be obtained before commencement of the permitted development, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The South Florida Water Management District; F.S. § 373.036. 
(2)  Florida Department of Health for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems; F.S. § 381.0065 and Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. 
(3)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for construction, reconstruction, changes, or physical activities for shore protection or other activities seaward of the coastal construction control line; F.S. § 161.141. 
(4)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities subject to the Joint Coastal Permit; F.S. § 161.055. 
(5)  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities that affect wetlands and alter surface water flows, in conjunction with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(6)  Federal permits and approvals. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
DIVISION 5. - SITE PLANS AND CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS 

Sec. 10-31. - Information for development in flood hazard areas. 
    The site plan or construction documents for any development subject to the requirements of this chapter shall be drawn to scale and shall include, as applicable to the proposed development: 
(1)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zone(s), base flood elevation(s), and ground elevations if necessary for review of the proposed development. 
(2)  Where base flood elevations or floodway data are not included on the FIRM or in the Flood Insurance Study, they shall be established in accordance with section 10-32(2) or (3) of this chapter. 
(3)  Where the parcel on which the proposed development will take place will have more than fifty (50) lots or is larger than five (5) acres and the base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM or in the Flood Insurance Study, such elevations shall be established in accordance with section 10-32(1) of this chapter. 
(4)  Location of the proposed activity and proposed structures, and locations of existing buildings and structures; in coastal high hazard areas, new buildings shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide. 
(5)  Location, extent, amount, and proposed final grades of any filling, grading, or excavation. 
(6)  Where the placement of fill is proposed, the amount, type, and source of fill material; compaction specifications; a description of the intended purpose of the fill areas; and evidence that the proposed fill areas are the minimum necessary to achieve the intended purpose. 
(7)  Delineation of the Coastal Construction Control Line or notation that the site is seaward of the coastal construction control line, If applicable. 
(8)  Extent of any proposed alteration of sand dunes or mangrove stands, provided such alteration is approved by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection. 
(9)  Existing and proposed alignment of any proposed alteration of a watercourse. 
    The floodplain administrator is authorized to waive the submission of site plans, construction documents, and other data that are required by this chapter but that are not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the proposed development is such that the review of such submissions is not necessary to ascertain compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-32. - Information in flood hazard areas without base flood elevations (approximate Zone A). 
    Where flood hazard areas are delineated on the FIRM and base flood elevation data have not been provided, the floodplain administrator shall: 
(1)  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices. 
(2)  Obtain, review, and provide to applicants base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source or require the applicant to obtain and use base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source. 
(3)  Where base flood elevation and floodway data are not available from another source, where the available data are deemed by the floodplain administrator to not reasonably reflect flooding conditions, or where the available data are known to be scientifically or technically incorrect or otherwise inadequate: 
a.  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices; or 
b.  Specify that the base flood elevation is two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the location of the development, provided there is no evidence indicating flood depths have been or may be greater than two (2) feet. 
(4)  Where the base flood elevation data are to be used to support a Letter of Map Change from FEMA, advise the applicant that the analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer In a format required by FEMA, and that it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to satisfy the submittal requirements and pay the processing fees. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-33. - Additional analyses and certifications. 
    As applicable to the location and nature of the proposed development activity, and in addition to the requirements of this section, the applicant shall have the following analyses signed and sealed by a Florida licensed engineer for submission with the site plan and construction documents: 
(1)  For development activities proposed to be located in a regulatory floodway, a floodway encroachment analysis that demonstrates that the encroachment of the proposed development will not cause any increase in base flood elevations; where the applicant proposes to undertake development activities that do increase base flood elevations, the applicant shall submit such analysis to FEMA as specified in section 10-34 of this chapter and shall submit the Conditional Letter of Map Revision, if issued by FEMA, with the site plan and construction documents. 
(2)  For development activities proposed to be located in a riverine flood hazard area for which base flood elevations are included in the Flood Insurance Study or on the FIRM and floodways have not been designated, hydrologic and hydraulic analyses that demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated flood hazard area encroachments, will not increase the base flood elevation more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. This requirement does not apply in isolated flood hazard areas not connected to a riverine flood hazard area or in flood hazard areas identified as Zone AO or Zone AH. 
(3)  For alteration of a watercourse, an engineering analysis prepared in accordance with standard engineering practices which demonstrates that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse will not be decreased, and certification that the altered watercourse shall be maintained in a manner which preserves the channel's flood-carrying capacity; the applicant shall submit the analysis to FEMA as specified in section 10-34 of this chapter. 
(4)  For activities that propose to alter sand dunes or mangrove stands in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V), an engineering analysis that demonstrates that the proposed alteration will not increase the potential for flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-34. - Submission of additional data. 
    When additional hydrologic, hydraulic or other engineering data, studies, and additional analyses are submitted to support an application, the applicant has the right to seek a Letter of Map Change from FEMA to change the base flood elevations, change floodway boundaries, or change boundaries of flood hazard areas shown on FIRMs, and to submit such data to FEMA for such purposes. The analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
DIVISION 6. - INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 10-35. - General. 
    Development for which a floodplain development permit or approval is required shall be subject to inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-36. - Development other than buildings and structures. 
    The floodplain administrator shall inspect all development to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-37. - Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from theFlorida Building Code. 
    The floodplain administrator shall inspect buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-38. - Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from theFlorida Building Code,lowest floor inspection. 
    Upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the owner of a building, structure or facility exempt from the Florida Building Code, or the owner's authorized agent, shall submit to the floodplain administrator: 
(1)  If a design flood elevation was used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor, the certification of elevation of the lowest floor prepared and sealed by a Florida licensed professional surveyor; or 
(2)  If the elevation used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor was determined in accordance with section 10-32(3)(b) of this chapter, the documentation of height of the lowest floor above highest adjacent grade, prepared by the owner or the owner's authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-39. - Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from theFlorida Building Code,final inspection. 
    As part of the final inspection, the owner or owner's authorized agent shall submit to the floodplain administrator a final certification of elevation of the lowest floor or final documentation of the height of the lowest floor above the highest adjacent grade; such certifications and documentations shall be prepared as specified in section 10-38 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-40. - Manufactured homes. 
    The floodplain administrator shall Inspect manufactured homes that are installed or replaced in flood hazard areas to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the conditions of the issued permit. Upon placement of a manufactured home, certification of the elevation of the lowest floor shall be submitted to the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
DIVISION 7. - VARIANCES AND APPEALS 

Sec. 10-41. - General. 
    The board of adjustments shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of this chapter. Pursuant to section 553.73(5), F.S., the board of adjustments shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. This section does not apply to Section 3109 of the Florida Building Code, Building. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-42. - Appeals. 
    The board of adjustments shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the administration and enforcement of this chapter. Any person aggrieved by the decision may appeal such decision to the circuit court, as provided by Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-43. - Limitations on authority to grant variances. 
    The board of adjustments shall base its decisions on variances on technical justifications submitted by applicants, the considerations for issuance in section 10-47 of this chapter, the conditions of issuance set forth in section 10-48 of this chapter, and the comments and recommendations of the floodplain administrator and the building official. The board of adjustments has the right to attach such conditions as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-44. - Restrictions in floodways. 
    A variance shall not be issued for any proposed development in a floodway if any increase in base flood elevations would result, as evidenced by the applicable analyses and certifications required in section 10-33 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-45. - Historic buildings. 
    A variance is authorized to be issued for the repair, improvement, or rehabilitation of a historic building that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 12 Historic Buildings, upon a determination that the proposed repair, improvement, or rehabilitation will not preclude the building's continued designation as a historic building and the variance Is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the building. If the proposed work precludes the building's continued designation as a historic building, a variance shall not be granted and the building and any repair, improvement, and rehabilitation shall be subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-46. - Functionally dependent uses. 
    A variance is authorized to be issued for the construction or substantial improvement necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, as defined in this chapter, provided the variance meets the requirements of section 10-44, is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, and all due consideration has been given to use of methods and materials that minimize flood damage during occurrence of the base flood. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-47. - Considerations for issuance of variances. 
    In reviewing requests for variances, the board of adjustments shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all other applicable provisions of the Florida Building Code, this chapter, and the following: 
(1)  The danger that materials and debris may be swept onto other lands resulting in further injury or damage; 
(2)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed development, including contents, to flood damage and the effect of such damage on current and future owners; 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed development to the community; 
(5)  The availability of alternate locations for the proposed development that are subject to lower risk of flooding or erosion; 
(6)  The compatibility of the proposed development with existing and anticipated development; 
(7)  The relationship of the proposed development to the Comprehensive Plan and floodplain management program for the area; 
(8)  The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(9)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and debris and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(10)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-48. - Conditions for issuance of variances. 
    Variances shall be issued only upon: 
(1)  Submission by the applicant, of a showing of good and sufficient cause that the unique characteristics of the size, configuration, or topography of the site limit compliance with any provision of this chapter or the required elevation standards; 
(2)  Determination by the board of adjustments that: 
a.  Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the land that render the lot undevelopable; increased costs to satisfy the requirements or inconvenience do not constitute hardship; 
b.  The granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws and chapters; and 
c.  The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; 
(3)  Receipt of a signed statement by the applicant that the variance, if granted, shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the court in such a manner that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land; and 
(4)  If the request is for a variance to allow construction of the lowest floor of a new building, or substantial improvement of a building, below the required elevation, a copy in the record of a written notice from the floodplain administrator to the applicant for the variance, specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the proposed elevation of the lowest floor, stating that the cost of federal flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced floor elevation (up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage), and stating that construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
DIVISION 8. - VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 10-49. - Violations. 
    Any development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this chapter that is performed without an issued permit, that is in conflict with an issued permit, or that does not fully comply with this chapter, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. A building or structure without the documentation of elevation of the lowest floor, other required design certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter or the Florida Building Code is presumed to be a violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-50. - Authority. 
    For development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this chapter and that is determined to be a violation, the floodplain administrator is authorized to serve notices of violation or stop work orders to owners of the property involved, to the owner's agent, or to the person or persons performing the work. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-51. - Unlawful continuance. 
    Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a notice of violation or a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove or remedy a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL 

Sec. 10-52. - Scope. 
    Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings shown in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-53. - Terms defined in theFlorida Building Code. 
    Where terms are not defined in this chapter and are defined in the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in that code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-54. - Terms not defined. 
    Where terms are not defined in this chapter or the Florida Building Code, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 
    Alteration of a watercourse means a dam, impoundment, channel relocation, change in channel alignment, channelization, or change in cross-sectional area of the channel or the channel capacity, or any other form of modification which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the riverine flow of water during conditions of the base flood. 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
    ASCE 24 means a standard titled Flood Resistant Design and Construction that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. ASCE 24 is developed and published by the American Society of Civil Engineers, Reston, VA. 
    Base flood means a flood having a 1-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] The base flood is commonly referred to as the "100-year flood" or the "1-percent-annual chance flood." 
    Base flood elevation means the elevation of the base flood, including wave height, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
    Basement means the portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202; see "Basement (for flood loads)".] 
    Coastal construction control line means the line established by the State of Florida pursuant to F.S. § 161.053, and recorded in the official records of the community, which defines that portion of the beach-dune system subject to severe fluctuations based on a 100-year storm surge, storm waves or other predictable weather conditions. 
    Coastal high hazard area means a special flood hazard area extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. Coastal high hazard areas are also referred to as "high hazard areas subject to high velocity wave action" or "V Zones" and are designated on Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) as Zone V1-V30, VE, or V. 
    Design flood means the flood associated with the greater of the following two (2) areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
(1)  Area with a floodplain subject to a 1-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year; or 
(2)  Area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
    Design flood elevation means the elevation of the "design flood," including wave height, relative to the datum specified on the community's legally designated flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO, the design flood elevation shall be the elevation of the highest existing grade of the building's perimeter plus the depth number (in feet) specified on the flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO where the depth number is not specified on the map, the depth number shall be taken as being equal to 2 feet. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
    Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, tanks, temporary structures, temporary or permanent storage of equipment or materials, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavations, drilling operations or any other land disturbing activities. 
    Encroachment means the placement of fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or other development into a flood hazard area which may impede or alter the flow capacity of riverine flood hazard areas. 
    Existing building and existing structure means any buildings and structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before May 15, 1978. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before May 15, 1978. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) means the federal agency that, in addition to carrying out other functions, administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land from: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202,] 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood damage-resistant materials means any construction material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
    Flood hazard area means the greater of the following two (2) areas: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
(1)  The area within a floodplain subject to a 1-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year. 
(2)  The area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
    Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means the official map of the community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
    Flood Insurance Study (FIS) means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that contains the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (if applicable), the water surface elevations of the base flood, and supporting technical data. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
    Floodplain administrator means the office or position designated and charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter (may be referred to as the floodplain manager). 
    Floodplain development permit or approval means an official document or certificate issued by the community, or other evidence of approval or concurrence, which authorizes performance of specific development activities that are located in flood hazard areas and that are determined to be compliant with this chapter. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other riverine watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
    Floodway encroachment analysis means an engineering analysis of the impact that a proposed encroachment into a floodway is expected to have on the floodway boundaries and base flood elevations; the evaluation shall be prepared by a qualified Florida licensed engineer using standard engineering methods and models. 
    Florida Building Code means the family of codes adopted by the Florida Building Commission, including: Florida Building Code, Building; Florida Building Code, Residential; Florida Building Code, Existing Building; Florida Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Plumbing; Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, including only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities; the term does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls or foundation of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood hazard area requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 12 Historic Buildings. 
    Letter of Map Change (LOMC) means an official determination issued by FEMA that amends or revises an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study. Letters of Map Change include: 
    Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) means an amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective Flood Insurance Rate Map and establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area. 
    Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) means a revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features. 
    Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F) means a determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard area. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with the community's floodplain management regulations. 
    Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) means a formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a Letter of Map Revision may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. 
    Light-duty truck as defined in 40 C.F.R. 86.082-2, any motor vehicle rated at eight thousand five hundred (8,500) pounds Gross Vehicular Weight Rating or less which has a vehicular curb weight of six thousand (6,000) pounds or less and which has a basic vehicle frontal area of forty-five (45) square feet or less, which is: 
(1)  Designed primarily for purposes of transportation of property or is a derivation of such a vehicle, or 
(2)  Designed primarily for transportation of persons and has a capacity of more than twelve (12) persons; or 
(3)  Available with special features enabling off-street or off-highway operation and use. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area of a building or structure, including basement, but excluding any unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, other than a basement, usable solely for vehicle parking, building access or limited storage provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the non-elevation requirements of the Florida Building Code or ASCE 24. [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is eight (8) feet or more in width and greater than four hundred (400) square feet, and which is built on a permanent, integral chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle" or "park trailer." [Also defined in 15C-1.0101, F.A.C.] 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Market value means the price at which a property will change hands between a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither party being under compulsion to buy or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts. As used in this chapter, the term refers to the market value of buildings and structures, excluding the land and other improvements on the parcel. Market value may be established by a qualified independent appraiser, actual cash value (replacement cost depreciated for age and quality of construction), or tax assessment value adjusted to approximate market value by a factor provided by the property appraiser. 
    New construction means for the purposes of administration of this chapter and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after May 15, 1978 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after May 15, 1978. 
    Park trailer means a transportable unit which has a body width not exceeding fourteen (14) feet and which is built on a single chassis and is designed to provide seasonal or temporary living quarters when connected to utilities necessary for operation of installed fixtures and appliances. [Defined in F.S. § 320.01] 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, including a park trailer, which is: [See F.S. § 320.01] 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Sand dunes menas naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach. 
    Special flood hazard area means an area in the floodplain subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are shown on FIRMs as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, V1-V30, VE or V. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 202.] 
    Start of construction means the date of issuance of permits for new construction and substantial improvements, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement is within one hundred eighty (180) days of the date of the issuance. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns. 
    Permanent construction does not include land preparation (such as clearing, grading, or filling), the installation of streets or walkways, excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations, the erection of temporary forms or the installation of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main buildings. For a substantial improvement, the actual "start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 202.] 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a building or structure whereby the cost of restoring the building or structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the building or structure before the damage occurred. [Also defined in FBC, B Section 202.] 
    Substantial improvement means any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a building or structure taking place during a three-year period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the building or structure before the improvement or repair is started. For each building or structure, the three-year period begins on the date of the first permit issued for improvement or repair of that building or structure subsequent to April 26, 2016. If the structure has incurred "substantial damage," any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: [Also defined in FBC, B, Section 202.] 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, or the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, which permits construction in a manner that would not otherwise be permitted by this chapter or the Florida Building Code. 
    Watercourse means a river, creek, stream, channel or other topographic feature in, on, through, or over which water flows at least periodically. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD RESISTANT DEVELOPMENT 
DIVISION 1. - BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES 

Sec. 10-55. - Design and construction of buildings, structures and facilities exempt from theFlorida Building Code. 
    Pursuant to section 10-25 of this chapter, buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code, including substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage of such buildings, structures and facilities, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of ASCE 24. Structures exempt from the Florida Building Code that are not walled and roofed buildings shall comply with the requirements of article III, division 7 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-56. - Buildings and structures seaward of the coastal construction control line. 
    If extending, in whole or in part, seaward of the coastal construction control line and also located, in whole or in part, in a flood hazard area: 
(1)  Buildings and structures shall be designed and constructed to comply with the more restrictive applicable requirements of the Florida Building Code, Building Section 3109 and Section 1612 or Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322. 
(2)  Minor structures and non-habitable major structures as defined in section 161.54, F.S., shall be designed and constructed to comply with the intent and applicable provisions of this chapter and ASCE 24. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
DIVISION 2. - SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 10-57. - Minimum requirements. 
    Subdivision proposals, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-58. - Subdivision plats. 
    Where any portion of proposed subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, lies within a flood hazard area, the following shall be required: 
(1)  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries and flood zones, and design flood elevations, as appropriate, shall be shown on preliminary plats; 
(2)  Where the subdivision has more than fifty (50) lots or is larger than five (5) acres and base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM, the base flood elevations determined in accordance with section 10-32(1) of this chapter; and 
(3)  Compliance with the site improvement and utilities requirements of article III, division 3 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
DIVISION 3. - SITE IMPROVEMENTS, UTILITIES AND LIMITATIONS 

Sec. 10-59. - Minimum requirements. 
    All proposed new development shall be reviewed to determine that: 
(1)  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-60. - Sanitary sewage facilities. 
    All new and replacement sanitary sewage facilities, private sewage treatment plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems), and on-site waste disposal systems shall be designed in accordance with the standards for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems in Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the facilities and discharge from the facilities into flood waters, and impairment of the facilities and systems. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-61. - Water supply facilities. 
    All new and replacement water supply facilities shall be designed in accordance with the water well construction standards in Chapter 62-532.500, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-62. - Limitations on sites in regulatory floodways. 
    No development, including but not limited to site improvements, and land disturbing activity involving fill or regrading, shall be authorized in the regulatory floodway unless the floodway encroachment analysis required in section 10-33(1) of this chapter demonstrates that the proposed development or land disturbing activity will not result in any increase in the base flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-63. - Limitations on placement of fill. 
    Subject to the limitations of this chapter, fill shall be designed to be stable under conditions of flooding including rapid rise and rapid drawdown of floodwaters, prolonged inundation, and protection against flood-related erosion and scour. In addition to these requirements, if intended to support buildings and structures (Zone A only), fill shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-64. - Limitations on sites in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). 
    In coastal high hazard areas, alteration of shoreline or native vegetation shall be permitted only if such alteration is approved by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection and only if the engineering analysis required by section 10-33(4) of this chapter demonstrates that the proposed alteration will not increase the potential for flood damage. Construction or restoration under or around elevated buildings and structures shall comply with section 10-87(3) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
DIVISION 4. - MANUFACTURED HOMES 

Sec. 10-65. - General. 
    All manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed by an installer that is licensed pursuant to section 320.8249, F.S., and shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15C-1, F.A.C. and the requirements of this chapter. If located seaward of the coastal construction control line, all manufactured homes shall comply with the more restrictive of the applicable requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-66 - Limitations on installation in floodways and coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). 
    New installations of manufactured homes shall not be permitted in floodways and coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-67. - Foundations. 
    All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed on permanent, reinforced foundations that: 
(1)  In flood hazard areas (Zone A) other than coastal high hazard areas, are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 and this chapter. Foundations for manufactured homes subject to section 10-71 of this chapter are permitted to be reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength. 
(2)  In coastal high hazard areas (Zone V), are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.3 and this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-68. - Anchoring. 
    All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This anchoring requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for wind resistance. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-69. - Elevation. 
    Manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved shall comply with Section 10-70 or 10-71 of this chapter, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-70. - General elevation requirement. 
    Unless subject to the requirements of section 10-71 of this chapter, all manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located: (a) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (b) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (c) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (d) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall be elevated such that the bottom of the frame is at or above the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A) or Section R322.3 (Zone V). 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-71. - Elevation requirement for certain existing manufactured home parks and subdivisions. 
    Manufactured homes that are not subject to section 10-70 of this chapter, including manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, unless on a site where substantial damage as result of flooding has occurred, shall be elevated such that either the: 
(1)  Bottom of the frame of the manufactured home is at or above the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A) or Section R322.3 (Zone V); or 
(2)  Bottom of the frame is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are not less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-72. - Enclosures. 
    Enclosed areas below elevated manufactured homes shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.2 or R322.3 for such enclosed areas, as applicable to the flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-73. - Utility equipment. 
    Utility equipment that serves manufactured homes, including electric, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322, as applicable to the flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
DIVISION 5. - RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND PARK TRAILERS 

Sec. 10-74. - Temporary placement. 
    Recreational vehicles and park trailers placed temporarily in flood hazard areas shall: 
(1)  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; or 
(2)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, which means the recreational vehicle or park model is on wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanent attachments such as additions, rooms, stairs, decks and porches. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-75. - Permanent placement. 
    Recreational vehicles and park trailers that do not meet the limitations in section 10-74 of this chapter for temporary placement shall meet the requirements of article III, division 4 of this chapter for manufactured homes. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
DIVISION 6. - Tanks 

Sec. 10-76. - Underground tanks. 
    Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-77. - Above-ground tanks, not elevated. 
    Above-ground tanks that do not meet the elevation requirements of section 10-78 of this chapter shall: 
(1)  Be permitted in flood hazard areas (Zone A) other than coastal high hazard areas, provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris. 
(2)  Not be permitted in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-78. - Above-ground tanks, elevated. 
    Above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be attached to and elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement during conditions of the design flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-79. - Tank inlets and vents. 
    Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be: 
(1)  At or above the design flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during conditions of the design flood; and 
(2)  Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
DIVISION 7. - OTHER DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 10-80. - General requirements for other development. 
    All development, including man-made changes to improved or unimproved real estate for which specific provisions are not specified in this chapter or the Florida Building Code, shall: 
(1)  Be located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  Meet the limitations of section 10-62 of this chapter if located in a regulated floodway; 
(3)  Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood; 
(4)  Be constructed of flood damage-resistant materials; and 
(5)  Have mechanical, plumbing, and electrical systems above the design flood elevation or meet the requirements of ASCE 24, except that minimum electric service required to address life safety and electric code requirements is permitted below the design flood elevation provided it conforms to the provisions of the electrical part of building code for wet locations. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-81. - Fences in regulated floodways. 
    Fences in regulated floodways that have the potential to block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, shall meet the limitations of section 10-62of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-82. - Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways in regulated floodways. 
    Retaining walls and sidewalks and driveways that involve the placement of fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of section 10-62 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-83. - Roads and watercourse crossings in regulated floodways. 
    Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water crossings and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel from one (1) side of a watercourse to the other side, that encroach into regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of section 10-62 of this chapter. Alteration of a watercourse that is part of a road or watercourse crossing shall meet the requirements of section 10-33(3) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-84. - Concrete slabs used as parking pads, enclosure floors, landings, decks, walkways, patios and similar nonstructural uses in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). 
    In coastal high hazard areas, concrete slabs used as parking pads, enclosure floors, landings, decks, walkways, patios and similar nonstructural uses are permitted beneath or adjacent to buildings and structures provided the concrete slabs are designed and constructed to be: 
(1)  Structurally independent of the foundation system of the building or structure; 
(2)  Frangible and not reinforced, so as to minimize debris during flooding that is capable of causing significant damage to any structure; and 
(3)  Have a maximum slab thickness of not more than four (4) inches. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-85. - Decks and patios in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). 
    In addition to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, in coastal high hazard areas decks and patios shall be located, designed, and constructed in compliance with the following: 
(1)  A deck that is structurally attached to a building or structure shall have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member at or above the design flood elevation and any supporting members that extend below the design flood elevation shall comply with the foundation requirements that apply to the building or structure, which shall be designed to accommodate any increased loads resulting from the attached deck. 
(2)  A deck or patio that is located below the design flood elevation shall be structurally independent from buildings or structures and their foundation systems, and shall be designed and constructed either to remain intact and in place during design flood conditions or to break apart into small pieces to minimize debris during flooding that is capable of causing structural damage to the building or structure or to adjacent buildings and structures. 
(3)  A deck or patio that has a vertical thickness of more than twelve (12) inches or that is constructed with more than the minimum amount of fill necessary for site drainage shall not be approved unless an analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional demonstrates no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase damage to the building or structure or to adjacent buildings and structures. 
(4)  A deck or patio that has a vertical thickness of twelve (12) inches or less and that is at natural grade or on nonstructural fill material that is similar to and compatible with local soils and is the minimum amount necessary for site drainage may be approved without requiring analysis of the impact on diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-86. - Other development in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). 
    In coastal high hazard areas, development activities other than buildings and structures shall be permitted only if also authorized by the appropriate federal, state or local authority; if located outside the footprint of, and not structurally attached to, buildings and structures; and if analyses prepared by qualified registered design professionals demonstrate no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase damage to adjacent buildings and structures. Such other development activities include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Bulkheads, seawalls, retaining walls, revetments, and similar erosion control structures; 
(2)  Solid fences and privacy walls, and fences prone to trapping debris, unless designed and constructed to fail under flood conditions less than the design flood or otherwise function to avoid obstruction of floodwaters; and 
(3)  On-site sewage treatment and disposal systems defined in 64E-6.002, F.A.C., as filled systems or mound systems. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 10-87. - Nonstructural fill in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). 
    In coastal high hazard areas: 
(1)  Minor grading and the placement of minor quantities of nonstructural fill shall be permitted for landscaping and for drainage purposes under and around buildings. 
(2)  Nonstructural fill with finished slopes that are steeper than one (1) unit vertical to five (5) units horizontal shall be permitted only if an analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional demonstrates no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase damage to adjacent buildings and structures. 
(3)  Where authorized by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection or applicable local approval, sand dune construction and restoration of sand dunes under or around elevated buildings are permitted without additional engineering analysis or certification of the diversion of floodwater or wave runup and wave reflection if the scale and location of the dune work is consistent with local beach-dune morphology and the vertical clearance is maintained between the top of the sand dune and the lowest horizontal structural member of the building. 
(Ord. No. 2016-02 , § 2, 4-26-2016) 
Chapter 11 - GARBAGE AND TRASH[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Public services department, § 2-106; placing handbills on public property prohibited, § 3-29; health and sanitation, Ch. 12; junk and abandoned property, Ch. 13; garbage and waste disposal in recreational vehicle parks, § 15-30; utilities generally, Ch. 26. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Food and industrial processing wastes means the waste products of canneries, slaughterhouses, packing plants, large quantities of condemned food products, industrial wastes from brick, concrete block, roofing shingle or tile plants, debris and wastes accumulated from land clearing, building, rebuilding and altering of buildings, structures, roads, streets, sidewalks, parkways, excavating by an owner, contractor or work performed by purchase and hire of labor and materials. 
    Garbage means every refuse, accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter that attends the preparation, use, cooking and dealing in or storage of meats, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables, and any other matter of any nature whatsoever that is subject to decay, putrefaction and the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors or that during or after decay may serve as breeding or feeding material for flies or other germ-carrying insects; and any bottles, cans, or other containers that due to their ability to retain water may serve as breeding places for mosquitoes or other waterbreeding insects. 
    Garbage container, also referred to as "garbage can," means that rotationally molded, rubberized or plastic container as furnished by the city to the user. Each container shall have a lid hinged to the container, which lid must be kept closed at all times when not being filled or emptied. The ninety-gallon container shall be known as a residential container and the three-hundred-gallon container shall be known as a commercial container. 
    Trash shall be classified in three (3) categories as more specifically set forth: 
(1)  Combustible trash means any refuse, accumulation of paper, excelsior, rags or wooden or paper boxes or containers, sweepings, and all other accumulations of a nature other than garbage which are usual to housekeeping and to the operation of stores, offices and other business places. 
(2)  Noncombustible trash means refuse materials that are unburnable at ordinary incinerator temperatures (eight hundred (800) degrees Fahrenheit to eighteen hundred (1800) degrees Fahrenheit) such as metals, mineral matter, large quantities of glass or crockery, metal furniture, refrigerators, stoves, auto bodies or parts. 
(3)  Garden trash means all accumulations of grass or shrubbery cuttings, and other refuse attending the care of lawns, shrubbery, vines, trees and tree limbs. 
(Code 1984, § 10-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 11-2. - Occupancy or use evidence that garbage and trash is being produced or accumulated. 
    Any place of abode or any place of business occupied or in operation shall be prima facie evidence that garbage is being produced and accumulated on such premises, and it shall be the duty of the proper representatives of the city to inspect and supervise such premises and remove therefrom any and all refuse or garbage found thereon, provided the required fees have been paid by such resident or occupant, or notify the proper persons if such removal is not the duty of the city. 
(Code 1984, § 10-16) 
Sec. 11-3. - Residents, occupants required to have city remove and dispose of accumulations. 
    All residents, occupants or owners of premises in the city are hereby required to have and shall have accumulations of garbage and trash removed and disposed of by the public services department. This shall include both residential and commercial locations. 
(Code 1984, § 10-8) 
Sec. 11-4. - Garbage containers-Required, penalty for destruction. 
(a)  All residents or occupants of residences, apartments, or places of business within the city are hereby required to utilize a city-provided garbage container. 
(b)  The containers shall remain the property of the city and their use shall be limited to that of a garbage container. Any willful destruction of the containers shall be subject to a fine or imprisonment as more specifically set forth in section 1-11, in addition to reimbursement to the city for costs incurred in connection with replacement or repair. 
(Code 1984, § 10-2) 
Sec. 11-5. - Same-Keeping covered. 
    Garbage and trash cans shall be kept tightly covered at all times except when it is necessary to lift the cover to deposit garbage or empty the same. 
(Code 1984, § 10-4) 
Sec. 11-6. - Same-Location. 
    Except on collection days or the day preceding collection days, garbage containers shall be kept at a point upon the premises of the owner or occupant behind the front elevation of the residence, or out of view from the street. They shall not be kept upon neighboring property not in the ownership or tenancy of the person by whom the garbage is accumulated, whether such neighboring property be vacant or improved. Garbage cans are required to be kept in a place easily accessible to the employees of the public services department. On collection days, as designated by the public services department, all garbage containers shall be placed at a distance no further than six (6) feet from the edge of the street in order that the garbage pickup truck will have easy access to the container. All ninety-gallon containers must be removed from the vicinity near the edge of the street on the same day as the container is emptied, however, this shall not apply to those residences where the garbage is picked up in an alley. 
(Code 1984, § 10-5) 
Sec. 11-7. - Liquids and wet garbage. 
    Garbage, tin cans and bottles shall first be drained of liquids, and shall be daily deposited in the garbage cans required by this chapter. The wet garbage matter shall be drained and sealed in a waterproof disposable bag of sufficient strength which will hold the weight of the materials placed in it without bursting. 
(Code 1984, § 10-3) 
Sec. 11-8. - Trash removal generally. 
(a)  All persons paying a garbage fee as provided in section 11-14 shall be entitled to the removal by the city of trash from their premises, provided the quantity of trash shall not exceed 3.375 cubic yards (defined as 41/2 feet wide by 41/2 feet long by 41/2 feet deep), as determined by the public services director or his agent. If the amount of trash accumulated by any such resident or occupant shall exceed 3.375 cubic yards, then such person shall pay to the city an amount equal to the actual cost of removing, handling, and disposing of such excess trash, which amount shall be determined by the public services director. In no event shall such charge be less than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(b)  All trash must be separated into separate piles or sections so that noncombustible trash and garden trash are not mixed together. If noncombustible trash and garden trash are not separated the city will not be responsible for picking up the trash and the same shall be the sole responsibility of the resident or occupant of the subject premises. Noncombustible trash shall be picked up only on the first Wednesday of each month. Garden trash and combustible trash shall be picked up by the city at least once each week or as deemed appropriate by the public services director. 
(c)  All trash to be removed by the city must be placed no further than six (6) feet from the edge of the street, in order that the public services department will have easy access to remove the trash. In no event shall trash be placed in a swale area, upon a sidewalk, within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant, or in any other area that would obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(d)  Trash and debris caused from the operation of lot cleaning or clearing and contractor's debris caused from building, rebuilding or otherwise altering of buildings or structures must be removed by the owner or contractor performing such work. Spent oils or greases accumulated at garages, filling stations or similar establishments will not be removed except for the convenience and use of the city. 
(e)  The city tax collector shall issue special receipts for any such trash removal fees. 
(Code 1984, § 10-12; Ord. No. 2006-05, § 1, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 11-9. - Garden and tree trimming trash removal. 
(a)  Tree trimming accumulations shall be prohibited upon a weather forecast by the National Hurricane Center that a tropical depression or greater storm threat is within the cone of probability for landfall in Palm Beach County and/or Lake Okeechobee area, and that such storm is likely to hit Palm Beach County and/or Lake Okeechobee within five days or less. However, any person who trims trees during this period and immediately hauls such trimmings to a proper waste disposal site shall not be in violation of this section. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any resident or occupant to deposit any type of trash upon any adjoining lot or premises, whether vacant or improved, occupied or unoccupied or upon any other lot or premises, or street, plaza, alley, or park, or in any canal, or waterway, lake or pool within the city. Garden trash containing no combustible matter or matter which will, upon decay, give off offensive odors, may be accumulated by the owner as a mulch or compost pile in the rear of the premises upon which accumulated. 
(Code 1984, § 10-13; Ord. No. 2006-05, § 1, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 11-10. - Disposal generally. 
    Garbage shall be picked up at least twice per week by the public services department. No garbage shall be buried. 
(Code 1984, § 10-6) 
Sec. 11-11. - Unlawful accumulation. 
    No person shall place any accumulation of garbage or trash in any portion of a right-of-way or upon private property in any part of a front yard or a side yard abutting a right-of-way except during the day scheduled for collection or during the day immediately preceding the day scheduled for collection. No trash or garbage, at any time, shall be placed at the rear of a property abutting an alley. 
(Code 1984, § 10-14; Ord. No. 2006-05, § 2, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 11-12. - Prohibited deposits; transportation requiring report to public services department. 
    It shall be unlawful to deposit garbage, trash, bottles, cans, containers or objectionable material upon any vacant or unoccupied premises of the city, or upon any street, alley or park or in any canal, waterway, rockpit, pool or lake within the city, and to transport garbage through or over the streets or alleys of the city without having made a report of such transportation of garbage to the director of the public services department. 
(Code 1984, § 10-7(a)) 
Sec. 11-13. - Permit to burn on premises required. 
    Garbage, trash and garden trash shall not be burned on the premises unless a written permit for such burning is first secured from the fire chief. 
(Code 1984, § 10-7(b)) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection generally, Ch. 9. 
Sec. 11-14. - Determination and amount of fees. 
    The various monthly fees that shall be paid to the city for the service of garbage and trash removal by the city shall be set by resolution of the city commission and adjusted from time to time. Public notice of any proposed rate adjustment shall be given thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of the new rate. A copy of the resolution shall be available in the office of the city clerk. 
(1)-(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  Class C, exempt. Churches for the first ninety-gallon container for two-day pickup per week. All in excess of the above shall be at the rates provided for commercial customers as set out in this section. 
(5)  Applicability. The rates set out in this section shall be applicable to each unit served according to the water meter services as installed and in actual service, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(6)  Mobile home parks. In mobile home and trailer parks where other city water or wastewater services are furnished by a single meter service to all units in the park, regardless of vacancy, in spaces, the rate shall be based on the ninety-gallon container residential rate per space according to the park permit. 
(7)  Office buildings. In office buildings served by a single meter, for multiple offices, the rate shall be based on the size container used and the number of pickups required to provide adequate service. 
(8)  Multiple residences. In multiple residential units, such as apartments, where food preparation is made or provisions are allowed for such preparation in each unit but water service is provided by a single meter, the rate shall be based on the ninety-gallon container residential rate for two (2) days pickup service per family unit in the complex, regardless of occupancy. 
(9)  Initial determination. The director of public works shall make an initial determination of the application rate and notify the customer in writing within thirty (30) days thereafter of any rate in excess of the monthly rate as stated in this section. Such determination shall be made based on the number of containers required for the pickups needed to contain all such garbage from that service in a sanitary and neat manner. Where space or road conditions make it difficult to provide the size containers stated above, another size container may be substituted so long as the customer is provided the equivalent in at least the minimum container space upon the rate being charged that customer. The rate as determined above shall be effective at the time of determination. The customer, however, has a right of hearing to protest such determination at any time upon written request to the director of public works within ten (10) days of delivery of such notice to the premises. The director of public works shall hold such hearing with the customer within fifteen (15) days thereafter after five (5) days' notice to the customer, unless such notice is waived by the customer. If the customer and the director of public works are not able to reach an agreement on such rate at such hearing, they shall report such case to the city manager in writing, at which time the matter shall be heard and a final decision rendered, unless appeal is requested in writing to the office of the Mayor, City of Pahokee, 171 N. Lake Avenue, Pahokee, FL 33476, with a copy forwarded to the city manager. If any customer's rate is increased after the initial determination, the same procedure provided in this section shall be followed for the new rate. 
(10)  Start-up and lease fees. All city garbage/trash customers using city containers will be required to pay a monthly lease fee which shall be set by resolution of the city commission and adjusted from time to time. A copy of the resolution shall be available in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1984, § 10-9; Ord. No. 88-12, § 1, 9-13-1988; Ord. No. 90-8, § 1, 9-25-1990; Ord. No. 90-10, § 1, 1-8-1991; Ord. No. 91-9, § 1, 9-10-1991; Ord. No. 93-8, § 1, 10-12-1993; Ord. No. 93-10, § 1, 11-9-1993; Ord. No. 95-5, § 1, 9-26-1995; Ord. No. 99-4, 4-27-1999; Ord. No. 2000-7, 10-10-2000; Ord. No. 2002-9, 9-24-2002; Ord. No. 2007-11, § 1, 8-28-2007) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2007-11, adopted 8-28-2007, adopted by reference rates previously listed in subsections (1) through (3), which are now reserved, at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 11-15. - Exemption of disabled or senior citizens from fees and charges. 
    Any person who is or becomes a customer of the public service department of this city for the purpose of billing of the fees and charges for garbage and trash service so that an account is carried in their name according to the city records shall be entitled to exemption from all fees and charges of the city for garbage and trash service upon the following conditions: 
(1)  Qualifications. 
a.  The applicant must be sixty-five (65) years of age, or hold a current total disability award from the Social Security Administration under the laws of the United States; and 
b.  The total income of an applicant living alone cannot exceed $7,500.00 during the last calendar year and the income of all persons residing on the premises over eighteen (18) years of age during the past calendar year must not exceed $12,500.00. 
(2)  Application. An application must be filed each year with the public services department on a form furnished by the city. The application must be sworn to before a notary public. Applications may be filed at any time, except an application which has been denied upon appeal to the city commission may not be filed again until after a period of one (1) year from the final action by the city commission. Upon receipt of the application, the director of public services shall within ten (10) days review and investigate the application, grant or deny it and so notify the applicant in writing advising him that if it is denied they have a right to appeal the action to the city commission. To appeal they must file a written request with the city clerk within ten (10) days from their receipt of notice of denial. The city commission shall hear the appeal at its next regular meeting and render its decision thereafter. The applicant, upon request will furnish authority to the city to obtain verification of income from the source of all such persons in the household and failure to so furnish shall be grounds for denial of a permit. 
(3)  Conditions. Any exemption permit issued pursuant to this section shall be only for a term ending on the next succeeding October first. A new application is required for each year. A permit shall be issued for a particular address and if the address is changed a new application must be filed and the former exemption permit surrendered for cancellation. Death of the exemption permit holder shall terminate the permit. No person may hold more than one (1) exemption permit at a time. The exemption permit shall entitle the holder only to one (1) single-family residence free service. 
(Code 1984, § 10-10; Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1, 5-12-2009) 
Sec. 11-16. - Adjustment of fees for exceptional conditions of occupancy. 
    In residential or commercial districts wherever there exists exceptional conditions of occupancy or use, the public services director is hereby authorized to enter into an agreement with the owner, lessee, renter or tenant as to the proper charges to be paid by such persons except that all such agreements shall provide that such charges shall be made in a uniform manner and proportional to other charges for similar service as set forth in this chapter, such agreement being subject to approval by the city commission. 
(Code 1984, § 10-11) 
Sec. 11-17. - Payment of fees. 
(a)  Fees for removal of garbage and trash as required in section 11-14 are net as billed payable in advance and shall become due and payable on the twenty-first day of each month. 
(b)  In order to provide for the health and sanitation of the city, fees for water service, garbage pickup service and trash pickup service shall be included in one (1) bill each month per customer. If bills are not paid on or before the twenty-first day of each month, all such services may be discontinued without the necessity of notice being given thereof and if service is disconnected it will not be resumed until all arrears are paid, including the turning on charge for water. 
(c)  The city reserves the right to refuse payment offered for any one (1) of the services mentioned in subsection (b) of this section unless the full amount due to the city as billed is tendered. 
(d)  The city may mail the monthly bill for water service, garbage pickup service and trash pickup service to the person who has paid the water meter deposit, his agent or any other person whom the city determines is liable for the payment of such bill, and such person, or his principal in whose name the water meter deposit is in, shall be liable for the payment of the entire bill for all of the services, regardless of whether part or all of the premises served with such services are leased, rented, or sublet to some other third person, firm, or corporation and regardless of any lease or rent agreement that such lessor may have with his tenant as to the payment of all or part of the fees for such services. 
(e)  Any customer of the city garbage pickup and trash pickup service may temporarily and voluntarily terminate the service for any period of time as long as the voluntary termination is in minimum increments of one (1) month and the city is given reasonable advance notice. Such customer will still be required to pay for the garbage and trash pickup services unless the customer terminates all services placed on the monthly bill, including water, sewer, and garbage and trash pickup. In the event of the proper termination of all of the services, the customer will not be charged for the period of time during the temporary and voluntary termination. Temporary termination of water services shall be allowed only if the termination complies with the requirements of article II of chapter 26. 
(Code 1984, § 10-15) 
Sec. 11-18. - Disturbing disposal container contents. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall remove, overhaul, molest or interfere with the contents of any can or other container, bundle, or pile set out for disposal, recycling, or removal for any purpose, unless specifically authorized by the city manager. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, unauthorized persons shall be defined as all persons with the exception of: 
(1)  The owner of the property on which the contents for disposal are situated; 
(2)  The owner of the contents for disposal, if different from the owner of the property on which the contents are situated; 
(3)  Employees of the city acting in connection with their official duties or responsibilities; 
(4)  Employees of the solid waste authority under agreement with the city acting within the course and scope of their duties to remove the subject contents. 
(Ord. No. 90-5, § 1, 3-27-1990) 
Secs. 11-19-11-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RECYCLABLE WASTE 

Sec. 11-41. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, for the purposes of this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Occupant means the person living in a residential unit. 
    Owner means the record owner, as shown on the current tax rolls of the county tax assessor as the same shall from time to time exist, of a residential unit. 
    Recyclable waste means, initially, green glass, brown glass, clear glass, aluminum cans, plastic milk and water bottles, plastic beverage containers, household drycell batteries and newspapers. 
    Residential unit means each separate room or combination thereof, apartment, house and any of them located in the city in which any person lives or is intended to live. 
    SWA means the Palm Beach County Solid Waste Authority and its successors and assigns. 
(Ord. No. 90-9, § 1, 10-23-1990) 
Sec. 11-42. - Application of article. 
    This article shall apply only to residential units in the city receiving curbside recyclable waste collection service. 
(Ord. No. 90-9, § 4, 10-23-1990) 
Sec. 11-43. - Collection of source-separated recyclable materials. 
(a)  The occupant of each residential unit serviced by a separate water meter for that unit and the owner of each residential unit serviced through a single water meter supplying water to more than one (1) residential unit, whose residential unit is receiving or available for receiving the collection and distribution of recyclable waste as provided in this article, shall receive a reusable container into which recyclable waste shall be separated, prepared for collection and deposited into the containers which shall be placed for collection at a point on the property in which the residential unit is located, which point is adjacent to the curb of the street nearest the residential unit. Recyclable waste shall be prepared by the occupant or owner, as the case may be, for collection in accordance with the following processing standards: 
(1)  Glass. Rinsed, whole bottles and jars shall not include cooking ware, plate glass, safety glass, light bulbs, ceramic and nonglass materials. Caps, lids and any type of top must be removed from the bottles. Labels may remain on the bottles, but bottles will be empty, rinsed, dry and unbroken. 
(2)  Aluminum. Aluminum beverage cans and containers (pet food, tuna, etc.) shall be empty, rinsed and dry. 
(3)  Plastic beverage containers. Milk jug and water bottle type containers (HDPE) and soft drink bottles (PET), empty, rinsed, and dry, with tops, caps or lids removed, are included in this category. No other plastic bottles or containers are permitted, but if markets develop in the future other plastic items may be included upon direction by the solid waste authority. 
(4)  Newspapers. Newspapers shall be dry and placed in brown (kraft) paper bags. No additional magazines or other types of paper are permitted. Plastic bags may be used if brown bags are not available. 
(5)  Tin cans. Steel and tin-coated steel cans should not be included because they will be removed at the resource recovery facility, but if occasional tin cans are included, the facility will have the ability to remove them. 
(6)  Household batteries. Drycell batteries only shall be placed in the collection container. Wetcell (automobile, truck, boat, etc.) type batteries shall not be included. 
(b)  The recyclable waste materials will be collected from the containers once a week by the SWA, and the container, together with any nonrecyclable waste placed in it, shall be returned to the place of collection, it being the responsibility of the occupant/owner to then lawfully dispose of any such nonrecyclable material. Improperly sorted materials or contaminated materials will be left by the collector in the reusable container or temporarily removed and returned to the reusable container with, on the first or any subsequent occasion, a notification advising the occupant/owner that material has not been properly sorted, how to do it properly, and how to contact the recycling coordinator of the city or SWA for further information. 
(Ord. No. 90-9, § 2, 10-23-1990) 
Sec. 11-44. - Fees. 
(a)  The occupant of a single residential unit which is serviced by a separate water meter shall pay to the city a charge or fee equal to one dollar and ninety-five cents ($1.95) per month for the city's collection and disposition of recyclable waste from that residential unit. The fee or charge will be reflected on the monthly water bill of the occupant. 
(b)  The owner of multiple residential units being serviced through a single water meter shall pay to the city for the collection of recyclable wastes from such units a fee equal to one dollar and ninety-five cents ($1.95) per month for each residential unit serviced through a single water meter. The fee will be reflected on the monthly water bill relating to such residential units. 
(Ord. No. 90-9, § 3, 10-23-1990) 
Sec. 11-45. - Scavenging or pilfering. 
    It is unlawful for any person to scavenge or pilfer any recyclable wastes from recyclable containers, and each incident of scavenging or pilferage of such containers shall constitute a separate violation, each act of which is subject to the penalties provided in the laws of the state and other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 90-9, § 5, 10-23-1990) 
Chapter 12 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Garbage and trash, Ch. 11; junk and abandoned property, Ch. 13; utilities, Ch. 26. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Expectorating on public sidewalks and floors of public buildings. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to expectorate or spit upon any public sidewalk or upon the floor of any public building or upon the floor of any storeroom used by the general public or upon the aisles or floor of any theater. 
(Code 1984, § 11-1) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22. 
Secs. 12-2-12-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SANITARY NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Abatement of nuisances by injunction, F.S. § 60.05; nuisances injurious to health, F.S. Ch. 386; public nuisances, F.S. Ch. 823. 

Sec. 12-26. - Findings. 
    It is hereby found, declared and determined by the city commission that accumulations of trash, filth, unsanitary or other noxious matter, and heavy, dense or rank growths of weeds, grass, underbrush, palmettos, or other uncultivated vegetation, which might constitute a fire hazard, serve as a breeding place for or harbor insects, rodents, snakes or other pests or vermin, or give off an offensive odor shall each and all constitute a nuisance when any part of the accumulations or growths are located within two hundred (200) feet of any structure located in the city. It is further found and declared that the accumulations and growths are detrimental and a menace not only to the public safety, health and welfare of the city and its inhabitants but also to the economic growth, stability and prosperity of the city and its inhabitants. It is further found and declared that dense undergrowth, weeds and vegetation, either cultivated or uncultivated, that are allowed to grow so as to impede and obstruct the normal view of intersections, railroad crossings or traffic signs from streets, roads and highways are traffic hazards and are hereby declared to be nuisances. 
(Code 1984, § 11-16) 
Sec. 12-27. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Owner means any holder of a vested or leasehold interest in land, according to the last available county tax roll. 
    Structure means any residence, garage, shed, bridge or building. 
    Trash means any broken tree limbs, leaves or branches, any garbage or refuse, any discarded and worthless material that might conceal pools of water or create breeding grounds for mosquitoes or other insects, any waste, and any discarded metal, paper, wood, glass or cloth. 
    Uncultivated vegetation means plants, shrubs and other vegetation not cared for on a regular basis. 
    Weeds means any rank vegetable growth which exhales obnoxious and unpleasant doors, any vegetation that may conceal pools of water, trash, filth, or any other accumulations of material that may be detrimental to health, and any other uncultivated vegetation. 
(Code 1984, § 11-17) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 12-28. - Indemnification of employees. 
    The city shall indemnify its employees for any liability incurred while the employees are acting within the course and scope of their employment under the terms and provisions of this article. 
(Code 1984, § 11-25) 
Sec. 12-29. - Described. 
    Any person who shall commit, permit, create or maintain filth, the contents of cesspools, offal, garbage, foul water, dye water, refuse from manufactories, urine, stable manure, decayed animal or vegetable matter, human excreta, or other offensive substances detrimental to health and any person who shall throw, place or allow to remain in or upon any private premises, street, alley, avenue, sidewalk, gutter, public reservation or open lot within the city, any filth, contents of cesspools, offal, garbage, foul water, dye water, refuse from manufactories, urine, stable manure, decayed animal matter, human excreta, vegetable matter or other offensive substances detrimental to health, or any one (1) or either of them shall be guilty of committing a nuisance. 
(Code 1984, § 11-18) 
Sec. 12-30. - Unlawful to permit nuisance as defined in article. 
    It is unlawful for an owner to commit, create, keep, maintain or permit a nuisance as described in this article. 
(Code 1984, § 11-26) 
Sec. 12-31. - Duty of owners to maintain property. 
    The owners of real property within the city are hereby required to keep such property in a safe, clean, and presentable condition and are required to remove from such property all surplus grass, weeds, garbage, trash, debris and accumulations thereof. 
(Code 1984, § 11-19) 
Sec. 12-32. - Failure to comply with article; notice to owner to comply. 
    If an owner of real property within the city shall fail or refuse to keep such property in a safe, clean and presentable condition as provided in section 12-31, the building inspector shall give notice as provided in this article to the owner of such property to comply with the requirements of this article within ten (10) days after service of such notice. Failure to comply with the provisions of such notice shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Code 1984, § 11-20) 
Chapter 13 - JUNK AND ABANDONED PROPERTY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Garbage and trash, Ch. 11; health and sanitation, Ch. 12; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 13-1-13-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - JUNK AND JUNKYARDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Occupational licenses and business regulations generally, Ch. 16. 

Sec. 13-51. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Automobile graveyard means an establishment or place of business which is maintained or operated for the use of storing, keeping, buying, or selling wrecked, scrapped, ruined, or dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts. 
    Junk means old or scrap copper; brass; rope; rags; batteries; paper; lumber; trash; rubber; debris; oddments; litter; leavings; ruins; castoffs; rummage; waste or junked, dismantled or wrecked automobiles or parts thereof; iron; steel; and other old scrap ferrous or nonferrous material. 
    Junkyard means an establishment or place of business which is maintained or operated for the use of storing, keeping, buying or selling, such junk, or for the maintenance or operation of an automobile graveyard, and shall be construed to include, garbage dumps and sanitary fills. 
(Code 1984, § 12-36) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 13-52. - Restrictions on existing establishments. 
    Since it is the intent of this article to minimize the extension of nonconforming uses and to look to their possible eventual elimination, any junkyard or automobile graveyard existing and operating as a nonconforming use in any district on July 1, 1982, shall be allowed to continue its operations subject to the following provisions, and all other applicable provisions of this Code and the Charter: 
(1)  Area. The actual area used for the operation of such junkyards or automobile graveyard as of July 1, 1982, shall not be increased at any time or under any circumstances. 
(2)  Buildings. No additional permanent buildings shall be erected and no presently existing permanent buildings shall be structurally altered to increase their bulk or square footage area. 
(3)  Screening of premises. Within ninety (90) days after July 1, 1982, the area occupied by the junkyard shall be entirely surrounded by a substantial, continuous solid fence or wall at least eight (8) feet in height. The fence shall meet the requirements of section 13-52 and the procedure there outlined for approval of the plans for such fence shall be followed. It is the intent of this article that the time period allowed for the erection of the fence is reasonable and that the requirements of such fence are necessary to accomplish the purposes of this article; and further that any such fence shall enclose the lot or junkyard from public view; therefore, it shall be unlawful for any person operating such an establishment to keep or pile any wrecked automobiles or parts or junk at a height exceeding eight (8) feet. 
(Code 1984, § 12-38) 
Chapter 14 - LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Land Development Code of the city, Ordinance No. 90-7, as adopted by the city commission on May 1, 1990. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Cross reference- Community development department, § 2-104; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; planning, Ch. 19. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 14-1. - Title. 
    This code shall be entitled the "Land Development Code" and may be referred to herein as the "code." 
Sec. 14-2. - Authority. 
    This land development code is enacted pursuant to the requirements and authority of F.S. § 163.3202, (the Local Government comprehensive planning and Land Development Regulation Act), the City of Pahokee Charter effective May 1,1990, and the general powers in F.S. ch. 166/125, (City of Pahokee Government). 
Sec. 14-3. - Applicability. 
(a)  General applicability. Except as specifically provided below, the provisions of this code shall apply to all development in the City of Pahokee, and no development shall be undertaken without prior authorization pursuant to this code. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Previously issued development permits. The provisions of this code and any amendments thereto shall not affect the validity of any lawfully issued and effective development permit if: 
a.  The development activity authorized by the permit has been commenced prior to the effective date of this code or any amendment thereto, or will be commenced after the effective date of this code but within six (6) months of issuance of the building permit; and 
b.  The development activity continues without interruption (except because of war or natural disaster) until the development is complete. If the development permit expires, any further development on that site shall occur only in conformance with the requirements of this code or amendment thereto. 
(2)  Previously approved development orders. Projects with development orders that have not expired at the time this code or an amendment thereto is adopted, and on which development activity has commenced or does commence and proceeds according to the time limits in the regulations under which the development was originally approved, must meet only the requirements of the regulations in effect when the development plan was approved. If the development plan expires or is otherwise invalidated, any further development on that site shall occur only in conformance with the requirements of this code or amendment thereto. 
(3)  Consistency with plan. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize development that is inconsistent with the City of Pahokee comprehensive plan. 
Sec. 14-4. - Guide for users. 
(a)  The integration of land development regulations. This integrated land development code was enacted to replace the land development regulations that had been adopted piecemeal over the years and were thus scattered throughout the local code of ordinances. These scattered regulations lacked coordination and were difficult to find, administer and understand. The replacement of these scattered regulations with an integrated land development code should greatly enhance the efficiency, effectiveness and consistency of land development regulations by the City of Pahokee. 
    This being an integrated code, it should be noted that, there is article XIV of the code labeled "subdivision regulations." Thus, stormwater requirements for development, including subdivisions, are found in the article labeled "stormwater management" in general terms with reference to article XIV, "subdivision" for specific requirements of developments; tree planting requirements are found in the "landscaping" part, and so forth. 
    Likewise, there is article VII labeled "planned development (PD)." The distinction between P.D. developments and others is that it is to be uitilized for existing large non-conforming uses. and for the development of undeveloped lands. Thus, all commercial development, and all residential development except the building of a dwelling on a lot of record, must go through a review process. 
    In short, this code establishes a single set of site design criteria and development review procedures. This integration results in a different layout and an unfamiliar table of contents, but should, as familiarity with the code increases, result in a much more streamlined and effective land development regulatory system. 
(b)  Checklist for preparation and review of development proposals. Every attempt has been made to make this code as easy as possible for interested citizens, developers, and local government staff to use and at the same time implement state mandates. The articles are arranged in an order that reflects the process by which a developer would start with a parcel of land and conclude with an approved development. This same ordering provides a checklist approach for interested citizens and staff who are reviewing a proposed development for compliance and consistency with code requirements. The ordering and checklist are as follows: 
ARTICLE I GENERAL PROVISIONS 
    This article contains general provisions necessary to determine the applicability of the code, and to ensure the code's legal validity. Sec. 14-3 above, "applicability," establishes which development must comply with the requirements of this code. Certain development activities are not covered if they are authorized by previously approved development plans. Thus, an initial question is whether proposed development activity is covered by this code or by rules in effect prior to the adoption of this code. 
    Once a determination is made that this code applies, this user's guide should be reviewed in order to gain an understanding of how the code works. The remainder of article I need not be reviewed unless a question of intent, interpretation or validity of a regulation arises. 
ARTICLE II LAND USE: TYPE, DENSITY AND INTENSITY 
    The first question regarding the development of any site is what use, and what density or intensity of that use, is allowed on the site. Article II provides the answer to this question. The following is a checklist of provisions that should be consulted with regard to a development proposal: 
____________  In what land use district is the development site located. See article IV. 
____________  What uses are allowed in that district. See article V. 
____________  If a residential development is to be proposed, what is the allowable density (dwelling units per acre). See article IV, sections 14-58 to 14-69. 
____________  If a neighborhood commercial development is to be proposed, what is the allowable intensity (floor area ratio) of the development. See Section 14-59. 
ARTICLE XI. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 
    Once the use, and its intensity and density, have been determined for a site, it must be determined whether the site is within an overlay district. For example, if the site is within a historic district, or site plan review development and review restrictions will apply. This article contains all overlay districts that might affect a site. The following is a checklist of provisions that should be consulted with regard to a development proposal: 
____________  Is the site a historic landmark or within a designated historic district? (To be determined at a later date) 
____________  Does the proposed development activity involve the construction of a house in an existing subdivision? 
____________  Is the site within the site plan review designated overlay zone which are those properties fronting Lake Ave, Bacom Point Road, and East Main Street. 
ARTICLE III CONCURRENCY MANAGEMENT AND REVIEW 
    The final question to be answered with regard to whether the use, and density or intensity of that use, is appropriate for the site is whether the consistency and concurrency requirements are met. The purpose of article III is to ensure that proposed development is consistent with the local comprehensive plan. 
    Because the land development code is required to implement the comprehensive plan, it may be reasonable to assume that all development that conforms to all provisions of the land development code is consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
    No presumption may be created, however, for that form of consistency referred to as concurrency. In order for the concurrency requirement to be met, each development proposal must show that adopted levels of service for certain public facilities and services will not be degraded by the impact of the development. The following is a checklist of provisions that should be consulted with regard to a development proposal: 
____________  Is the development (except for concurrency) consistent with the comprehensive plan? 
____________  Is the general concurrency requirement met? Specifically: 
____________  Will the proposed development use potable water? See section 14-42(1). 
____________  Will the proposed development create wastewater? See section 14-42(2). 
____________  Will the proposed development increase traffic on surrounding streets? See section 14-42(3) and (7). 
____________  Will the proposed development change the amount, nature, or patterns of stormwater runoff? See section 14-42(4). 
____________  Will the proposed development create solid waste? See section 14-42(5). 
____________  Will the proposed development create a need for public recreation? See section 14-42(6). 
____________  Will the development have an impact on ridership of the mass transit system? See section 14-42(7). 
ARTICLE XIII. RESOURCE PROTECTION STANDARDS 
    Once the use, and the density and intensity of that use, is determined for a site, the next question is whether any portions of the site must remain totally or partially free of development activity. Article XIII prescribes those areas and the restrictions that apply within them. The following is a checklist of provisions that should be consulted with regard to a development proposal: 
____________  Does the site contain protected trees, or a Canopy Road, as defined in the code? See article XIII, section 14.246. 
____________  Does the site contain wetlands, or other environmentally sensitive lands described in the comprehensive plan? See article XIII, division 3. 
____________  Is the site near a major wellhead as defined in the code? See article XIII, division 4. 
____________  Does the site contain habitat of threatened or endangered species? See article XIII, division 5. 
____________  Does the site contain land in the 100-year flood plain? See article XIII, division 6. 
ARTICLE VI. DEVELOPMENT DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS 
    Once the developable portions of the site have been determined, the next question is how the actual development will be designed and what improvements will be required. Article VI contains standards, which have been made as flexible as possible, for controlling the design of the development so that maximum public benefit is realized. The following is a checklist of provisions that should be consulted with regard to a development proposal: 
____________  Will the development involve the subdivision of land? See article VIII "zoning district" for minimum lot area requirements and article XIV "subdivision" for platting procedures. 
____________  Will the development contain buildings or other impervious surfaces? See article IV and XIV for impervious surface coverage requirements. 
____________  Will the development contain buildings or other structures? See article IV for building setback requirements. 
____________  Will the development contain streets, parking or other vehicle use areas? 
____________  See article VIII and XIV for street layout, design and right of way requirements. 
____________  See article VIII and XIV for sidewalk and bikeway requirements. 
____________  See article VIII for access requirements. 
____________  See article VIII for standards relating to drive-up facilities. 
____________  See article IX for off-street parking and loading requirements. 
____________  See article IX for landscaping requirements. 
____________  Will the development involve the installation of utilities? See article XIV for installation and design standards. 
____________  Will the development affect the quality or quantity of stormwater runoff from the site? See article XII and XIV stormwater management requirements. 
____________  Is the development adjacent to a street or use such that a buffer must be provided? See article IV, V and IX for buffer requirements. 
____________  Does the development involve a use requiring conformance with supplemental development design standards? 
____________  See article for supplemental standards relating uses requiring administsrative review or conditional uses. 
ARTICLE V. ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES 
    Article in conjunction with article IV and XI creates the standards for the creation, placement and construction of accessory structures or uses. The following is a checklist of provisions that should be consulted with regard to a development proposal: 
____________  Is a satellite dish antenna to be installed? 
____________  Is a storage building, utility building, or greenhouse to be installed? 
____________  Is a swimming pool, hot tub or similar structure to be installed? 
____________  Is a fence to be installed? 
____________  Is an accessory apartment to be created? 
ARTICLE X. SIGNS 
    Article X provides standards and prohibitions relating to signs. The following is a checklist of provisions that should be consulted with regard to a development proposal: 
____________  Exempt signs are listed at article X, section 14-161. 
____________  Prohibited signs are listed at article X, section 14-162. 
____________  Regulations relating to temporary signs are at article X, section 14-163(1). 
____________  Regulations relating to permanent accessory signs are at article X, section 14-164. 
____________  Regulations relating to outdoor advertising signs are at article X, section 14-166(d) 
____________  The way in which measurement determinations, e.g. sign height and size, are made is covered in article X, section 14-164. 
____________  Regulations relating to the design, construction and location of signs are in article X, section 14-165. 
ARTICLE XI. SUPPLEMENTAL OPERATIONAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 
    Article XI provides standards governing certain potentially noxious aspects of the ongoing use of development. The following is a checklist of provisions that should be consulted with regard to a development proposal: 
____________  Will the development create an exceptional amount of noise? See article XI section 14-201. 
____________  Will the development create an exceptional amount of vibration? See article XI section 14-202. 
____________  Will the development create air pollution? See article XI section 14-203. 
____________  Will the development create an exceptional amount of odor? See article XI section 14-204. 
____________  Will the development create a risk of fire or explosion? See article XI section 14-205. 
____________  Will the development create a risk of electromagnetic interference? See article XI section 14-206. 
ARTICLE X. HARDSHIP RELIEF 
    Article X provides several avenues for seeking relief from requirements in this code that create an undue hardship. The following is a checklist of provisions that should be consulted with regard to a development proposal: 
____________  Is the development an existing development that does not conform to the use regulations in article II and/or the development design and improvement standards in article VI? See article VI. 
____________  With regard to proposed development, is relief sought from the strict application of a development design standard? See article II. 
ARTICLE II. BOARDS AND AGENCIES 
    At this point in the code, all substantive provisions relating to the use and design of a development site have been covered. If the decision to proceed with development is made, the procedures for development review in article XII must be followed. First, however, one should become familiar with the boards and agencies involved in that review. Article XI establishes and describes the following boards and agencies: 
____________  Office of the director of community development. See section 14-20(d). 
____________  City commission. See section 14-20(a). 
____________  Planning board. See section 14-20(b). 
____________  Board of adjustment. See section 14-20(c). 
____________  Historic preservation. See section 14-20(d). 
____________  Code enforcement board. See section 1SEC.3.05. 
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
    This article sets out the procedures for making land use decisions. Most importantly, it sets out the procedures for reviewing development plans to determine their compliance with code requirements. The following is a checklist of provisions that should be consulted with regard to a development proposal: 
____________  Is the proposed use "development" as defined in the code? See article I and table A. 
____________  If the proposed activity is development, must a development plan showing the proposed development be approved prior to the issuance of a construction permit? See section 14-20(d)(2). 
____________  If a development plan is not required, see section 14-20 for issuance of development permits. 
____________  If a development plan is required, is the proposed development a minor development or a major development. See section ? See, also, the submittal requirements at Section ?. 
____________  If the proposal is a minor development, follow the review procedures at articles II and XIV. 
____________  If the proposal is a major development, follow the review procedures at articles II, VII, and XIV. 
____________  If the development is to be built in phases, see article VII. 
____________  If the development proposal involves platting, see article XIV. 
____________  If a the development proposal requires an amendment to the comprehensive plan or land development code, see article II. 
____________  If an appeal of a decision by the department of planning and development, or by the development review board, is sought, see article II. 
    The next section contains flow charts showing the development review process for major and minor developments. 
Sec. 14-5. - Description of development review procedures. 
    The development review process is that process by which the design of the development is reviewed to determine whether it complies with the requirements of the code. Development plan review is required for virtually all development activity, except the construction of a dwelling on a lot of record, and other very minor development activity such as the installation of a sign or the removal of a protected tree. There are five basic steps in the development plan review process: Pre-application conference, concept review, preliminary development plan review, final development plan review and issuance of construction (development) permits. As shown in the flow charts below, some of the steps are optional for minor development, but all are mandatory for major development. 



Sec. 14-6. - General findings. 
(a)  Statutory requirement. Chapter 163, Florida Statutes, requires each Florida local government to enact a single land development code which implements and is consistent with the local comprehensive plan, and which contains all land development regulations for the City of Pahokee. 
(b)  General public need. Controlling the location, design and construction of development within the City of Pahokee is necessary to maintain and improve the quality of life in the city as more fully described below. 
Sec. 14-7. - Specific findings relating to the various subject areas of this code. 
    With regard to the following specific subject areas of this code, the city commission finds: 
(1)  Administration and enforcement. 
a.  A single set of administrative procedures for making all land use decisions promotes efficiency, predictability, and citizen participation. 
b.  All development proposals should undergo a development review process to assure compliance with the requirements of this code. 
c.  A mandatory pre-application conference requirement enhances communication and understanding between the department and the developer thereby improving the efficiency of the development review process. 
d.  Concept review allows developers to modify proposals in response to early citizen and staff comment. 
e.  Developments of large potential impact on the community should go through a more rigorous review process than others. 
f.  Review of planning decisions should be independent of review of land development decisions to avoid ad hoc planning on a site-by-site basis. 
g.  All administrative decisions should be supported by a record with written findings to assure accountability and efficient appellate review. 
h.  A quick, efficient and non-political avenue of appeal should be available for all ministerial and administrative decisions. 
i.  Enforcement of development orders and the provisions of this code should be through procedures that are efficient, effective and consistent with the code enforcement procedures established by state law. 
(2)  Signs. 
a.  The manner of the erection, location and maintenance of signs affects the public health, safety, morals, and welfare of the people of this community. 
b.  The safety of motorists, cyclists, pedestrians, other users of the public streets is affected by the number, size, location, lighting and movement of signs that divert the attention of drivers. 
c.  The size and location of signs may, if uncontrolled, constitute an obstacle to effective fire-fighting techniques. 
d.  The construction, erection and maintenance of large signs suspended from or placed on the tops of buildings, walls or other structures may constitute a direct danger to pedestrian and vehicular traffic below, especially during periods of strong winds. 
e.  Uncontrolled and unlimited signs may degrade the aesthetic attractiveness of the natural and manmade attributes of the community and thereby undermine the economic value of tourism, visitation and permanent economic growth. 
(3)  Landscaping and tree protection. 
a.  Landscaping and buffering development with trees and other vegetation promotes the health, safety and welfare of the community to such an extent as to justify the imposition of landscaping and buffering requirements. 
b.  Trees and landscaping benefit the community by: 
1.  Absorbing carbon dioxide and returning oxygen to the atmosphere; 
2.  Precipitating dust and other particulates from the air; 
3.  Providing wildlife habitat, particularly for birds which in turn help control insects; 
4.  Providing soil stabilization which reduces erosion and mitigates the effect of flooding; 
5.  Providing shade which reduces energy consumption and glare, and making outdoor areas more comfortable during the warm months; 
6.  Making the built environment more attractive by adding a variety of color, shape and pattern and thus increasing community pride and the value of property; 
7.  Providing attractive buffering between incompatible land uses; and 
8.  Abating noise. 
c.  Because native vegetation is adapted to local diseases, pests, soil and climate, it is generally more economical and desirable than exotic species which require more pesticide, fertilizer and water. 
d.  Exotic vegetation can crowd out native vegetation, use more water, and damage the environment from increased use of fertilizers and pesticides. 
e.  Because some trees are more beneficial than others, the public benefits of tree protection may be obtained without preserving each and every tree. 
f.  Mangrove trees are especially valuable in stabilizing, building and protecting the shoreline, providing for spawning and breeding grounds for marine organisms and other wildlife, and serving as the basis for most of the estuarine food chains, which are critical to seventy (70) to ninety (90) percent of those species considered important from a recreational and/or commercial standpoint. 
(4)  Off-street parking and loading. 
a.  Off-street parking and loading of vehicles promotes the public safety and welfare by reducing traffic congestion. 
b.  Well-designed off-street parking and loading areas promote the safe and efficient storage, loading and circulation of vehicles. 
c.  Deferring the construction of some parking areas pending determination of the actual need for parking spaces, and taking into account public demand and the size of vehicles to be parked, conserves open space and developable land, and reduces the expense and hazard of controlling stormwater runoff. 
d.  Allowing the use of porous paving materials and unpaved parking areas whenever possible conserves water and energy, moderates the microclimate, and reduces the expense and hazards of controlling storm water runoff. 
(5)  Stormwater management. 
a.  Increased stormwater runoff may cause erosion and pollution of ground and surface water with a variety of contaminants such as heavy metals and petroleum products. 
b.  Stormwater runoff often contains nutrients, such as phosphorus and nitrogen, which adversely affect flora and fauna by accelerating eutrophication of receiving waters. 
c.  Erosion silts up water bodies, decreases their capacity to hold and transport water, interferes with navigation, and damages flora and fauna. 
d.  Installation of impervious surfaces increases the volume and rate of stormwater runoff and decreases groundwater recharge. 
e.  Improperly managed stormwater runoff increases the incidence and severity of flooding and endangers property and human life. 
f.  Improperly managed stormwater runoff alters the salinity of estuarine areas and diminishes their biological productivity. 
g.  Degradation of ground and surface waters imposes economic costs on the community. 
h.  Eighty (80) to ninety-five (95) percent of the total annual loading of most stormwater pollutants discharged into receiving waters are concentrated in the flush created by the first one (1) inch of rainfall ("first flush"), and carried off-site in the first one-half (1/2) inch of runoff. 
i.  Improperly managed stormwater adversely affects the drainage of off-site property. 
(6)  Floodplain protection. 
a.  Flooding is a natural, recurring phenomenon in the City of Pahokee. 
b.  Naturally flood-prone lands serve the following important functions in the regional hydrologic cycle and ecological system: 
1.  They provide natural storage and conveyance of flood waters. 
2.  They facilitate groundwater recharge. 
3.  They provide temporary storage of surface waters that moderates flood elevations and the timing, velocity and rate of flood discharges. 
4.  They reduce erosion, and filter nutrients, sediments, and other pollutants from flood waters. 
5.  They export detritus and other food sources to open water bodies and are vital habitat for fish, birds, wildlife and native plant communities. 
c.  Naturally occurring flooding may provide recharge to groundwater and a basic source of flow to surface waters. 
d.  The uncontrolled development of flood-prone lands substantially degrades the health, safety and welfare of the community in the following ways: 
1.  The owners, residents, customers, guests, and employees occupying homes, businesses and other structures located in flood-prone areas are placed at unreasonable risk of personal injury and property damage. 
2.  Expensive and dangerous search, rescue and disaster relief operations may be necessary when developed properties are flooded. 
3.  Roads, public facilities, and utilities associated with development may be damaged by flooding at great expense to taxpayers and rate payers. 
4.  Flooding of developed properties may lead to demands that the government construct expensive and environmentally damaging projects to control flood waters. 
5.  Normally flood-free lands are placed at risk of flooding when flood waters on natural flood-prone areas are obstructed, diverted, displaced or channelized by development. 
6.  Water quality is degraded, the supply of freshwater to estuaries is disrupted and habitat is lost. 
7.  Property values are lowered and economic activity is disrupted by damaging floods. 
(7)  Protection of environmentally sensitive lands. 
a.  Protection of environmentally sensitive lands described or mapped in the conservation element of the comprehensive plan promotes the well being of the people of the City of Pahokee, it should be noted that the city does not have identified environmentally sensitive lands in its comprehensive plan, however, future annexation area could include sensitive area. 
Editor's note- The environmentally sensitive lands provisions of this code assume that all environmentally sensitive lands are mapped or otherwise identified in the conservation element of the local comprehensive plan, and that the justification for a designation as environmentally sensitive is provided in terms of the beneficial functions of the environmentally sensitive areas, e.g., wildlife habitat, flood storage, aquifer recharge. If the mapping of environmentally sensitive areas appears only in the land use element (see § 163.3177(6)(d)), the language of this code should be modified accordingly. 
b.  Wetlands serve the following beneficial functions: 
(Note: This section reserved for potential future identified "Wetland" areas.) 
1.  Wetlands provide natural storage and conveyance of flood waters, and minimize erosion and sedimentation by reducing flood flows and the velocity of flood waters. 
2.  Coastal wetlands, and inland wetlands adjoining larger lakes and rivers, protect wildlife and the shoreline from destructive wave action. 
3.  Wetlands filter and help decompose sediments, nutrients, and other natural and man-made pollutants that would otherwise degrade surface and ground waters. 
4.  Wetlands support commercial and recreational fishing because they provide essential nutrients and hatcheries for aquatic life. 
5.  Wetlands provide habitat for rare and endangered species, and provide essential breeding and protective habitats for many other birds, mammals, and reptiles. 
6.  Wetlands recharge ground and surface water. 
c.  Shorelines serve the following beneficial functions: 
(Note: This section reserved for future shoreline sensitive areas presently, the city fronts on Lake Okeechobee. The shoreline is controlled by the U.S. Corps of Engineers. The shoreline is rip-rapped.) 
1.  Land adjoining waters or wetlands, which can generally be divided into submergent, transitional, and upland vegetation zones, provides essential habitat for many plant and animal species, including species that are endangered, threatened, or of special concern. 
2.  Submergent, transitional, and upland vegetation zones serve as effective buffers against noise and other human activities which may have adverse affects on aquatic and wetland dependent wildlife. 
3.  Submergent, transitional, and upland vegetation zones help slow stormwater runoff flows and increase infiltration of water, nutrients, and other substances. 
4.  Submergent, transitional, and upland vegetation zones reduce predation by domestic pets on wetland and wetland dependent wildlife species. 
d.  "Reserved" (If other environmentally sensitive lands are to be regulated, provide justification therefor here.) 
e.  During the past seventy (70) years activities the U.S. Corp of Engineers, South Florida Water District, East bay Water Management District, Urban Development activity management and agriculture have destroyed or impaired the potential beneficial functions of some environmentally sensitive lands in the City of Pahokee. 
(8)  Protection of cultural resources. 
a.  There are located within the city historical, architectural districts, sites, buildings, and structures, and objects that are unique and irreplaceable assets to the city which are in the process of being identified and inventoried. 
b.  In recognition of these assets, the city has adopted a preservation and conservation element as part of its comprehensive plan. 
c.  The preservation and conservation element of the comprehensive plan. The plan will be updated in the future to include a survey of cultural resources and adopt an official inventory of historic resources of the City of Pahokee by January 1992. 
d.  The recognition, protection, enhancement and use of these resources shall be for public purposes promoting the economic, educational, cultural and general welfare of the public by increasing property values, stabilizing neighborhoods and older areas of the city, increasing economic benefits to the city and its inhabitants, enriching human life in its educational and cultural dimensions, and fostering civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the past. 
e.  The city has for a number of many years exerted efforts in an attempt to encourage redevelopment and rehabilitation of the older parts of the city and continues to do so, under its community development block grant program, code enforcement and other available resources. 
f.  It is the will of the Florida Legislature as expressed in F.S. ch. 267 that the state's historic sites and properties, buildings, artifacts, treasure troves, and objects of antiquity, which have scientific or historical value, or are of interest to the public, be protected and preserved. 
Editor's note- These sections establish the factual basis and the public health, safety or welfare rationale for the regulations in this code. These findings of fact identify the problems that the code is intended to remedy. 
Sec. 14-8. - Relationship to comprehensive plan. 
(a)  Generally. The adoption of a unified land development code implements the following goals, policies and objectives of the comprehensive plan: 
[List appropriate provisions of the local comprehensive plan.] 
Editor's note- Florida law (Section 163.3194(1)(b), Fla. Stat. (1985)) requires that all land development regulations be consistent with the comprehensive plan of the enacting local government. A land development regulation "shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan if the land uses, densities or intensities, or other aspects of development permitted by such order or regulation are compatible with and further the objectives, policies, land uses, and densities or intensities in the comprehensive plan and if it meets all other criteria enumerated by the local government." How this code meets this standard of consistency should be explained in these sections. 
 Listing the goals and objectives of the plan for each subject, as suggested here, may be impracticable. If so, more general statements of the manner in which this code implements the comprehensive plan could be used. 
 For purposes of this code, the statements of consistency relating to the various subject areas covered by the code are compiled here. If only a part of this code is to be used, the relevant statements should be drawn from here and included with the substantive provisions. 
(b)  Specifically. 
(1)  Administration and enforcement. The administration and enforcement provisions of this code implement the following goals, policies and objectives of the comprehensive plan: 
[List appropriate provisions of the local comprehensive plan.] 
(2)  Signs. The sign regulations in this code implement the following goals, policies and objectives of the comprehensive plan: 
[List appropriate provisions of the local comprehensive plan.] 
(3)  Landscaping and tree protection. The landscaping and tree protection regulations in this code implement the following goals, policies and objectives of the comprehensive plan: 
[List appropriate provisions of the local comprehensive plan.] 
(4)  Parking and loading. The parking and loading regulations in this code implement the following goals, policies and objectives of the comprehensive plan: 
[List appropriate provisions of the local comprehensive plan.] 
(5)  Stormwater management. The stormwater management regulations in this code implement the following goals, policies and objectives of the comprehensive plan: 
[List appropriate provisions of the local comprehensive plan.] 
(6)  Floodplain protection. The flood damage prevention provisions in this code implement the following goals, policies and objectives of the comprehensive plan: 
[List appropriate provisions of the local comprehensive plan.] 
(7)  Protection of environmentally sensitive lands. The protection of environmentally sensitive lands provisions in this code implement the following goals, policies and objectives of the comprehensive plan: 
[List appropriate provisions of the local comprehensive plan.] 
(8)  Protection of cultural resources (reserved). The protection of cultural resource provisions in this code implement the following goals, policies and objectives of the comprehensive plan: 
[List appropriate provisions of the local comprehensive plan.] 
Sec. 14-9. - Incorporation by reference. 
(a)  Technical Construction Standards Manual. 
[Engineering standards and construction design specifications should be contained in a Technical Construction Standards Manual which may here be incorporated into this code by reference.] 
(b)  Maps. 
[Maps showing use districts, conservation areas, overlay zones, and the like, may be here incorporated into this code by reference.] 
(c)  Other materials. 
[As may be needed based on the local version of this code.] 
Sec. 14-10. - General intent. 
    With regard to this land development code in general, it's provisions shall be construed and implemented to achieve the following intentions and purposes of the city commission: 
(1)  To establish the regulations, procedures and standards for review and approval of all proposed development in the city. 
(2)  To foster and preserve public health, safety, comfort and welfare, and to aid in the harmonious, orderly, aesthetically pleasing and socially beneficial development of the City of Pahokee in accordance with the comprehensive plan. 
(3)  To adopt a development review process that is: 
a.  Efficient, in terms of time and expense; 
b.  Effective, in terms of addressing the natural resource and public facility implications of proposed development; and 
c.  Equitable, in terms of consistency with established regulations and procedures, respect for the rights of property owners, and consideration of the interests of the citizens of the city. 
(4)  To implement the City of Pahokee comprehensive plan as required by the "Local Government comprehensive planning and Land Development Regulation Act." 
(5)  To provide specific procedures to ensure that development orders and permits are conditioned on the availability of public facilities and services that meet level of service requirements (concurrency). 
Sec. 14-11. - Specific intent relating to the various subject areas of this code. 
Editor's note- For purposes of this code, the statements of legislative intent relating to the various subject areas covered by the code are compiled here. If only a part of this code is to be used, the relevant statements of intent should be drawn from here and included with the substantive provisions. 
    The provisions of this code dealing with the following specific subject areas shall be construed and implemented to achieve the following intentions and purposes of the city commission: 
(1)  Administration and enforcement. 
a.  To assure that all development proposals be thoroughly and efficiently reviewed for compliance with the requirements of this code, the City of Pahokee comprehensive plan, and other applicable city regulations. 
b.  To promote efficiency, predictability and citizen participation. 
c.  To assure compliance with approved development orders and the provisions of this code through rigorous but fair enforcement actions. 
(2)  Signs. 
a.  To create a comprehensive and balanced system of sign control that accommodates both the need for a well-maintained, safe and attractive community, and the need for effective business identification, advertising and communication. 
b.  To permit signs that are: 
1.  Compatible with their surroundings. 
2.  Designed, constructed, installed and maintained in a manner which does not endanger public safety or unduly distract motorists. 
3.  Appropriate to the type of activity to which they pertain. 
4.  Large enough to convey sufficient information about the owner or occupants of a particular property, the products or services available on the property, or the activities conducted on the property, and small enough to satisfy the needs for regulation. 
5.  Reflective of the identity and creativity of individual occupants. 
c.  To promote the economic health of the community through increased tourism and property values. 
(3)  Landscaping and tree protection. 
a.  To enhance the attractiveness of the community. 
b.  To conserve energy through the cooling and shading effects of trees. 
c.  To abate nuisances such as noise, glare, heat, air pollution and stormwater runoff. 
d.  To mitigate conflicts between adjoining land uses; 
e.  To preserve the environmental and ecological benefits of existing native trees and vegetation. 
f.  To promote safe and efficient use of off-street parking facilities and other vehicular use areas by: 
1.  Clearly delineating and buffering the bounds of vehicular use areas, particularly where they abut public rights of way, so that movement, noise, and glare in one (1) area do not adversely distract activity in another area; 
2.  Limiting physical site access to established points of ingress and egress; and 
3.  Limiting the internal movement of vehicles and pedestrians to designated traffic configurations. 
g.  To preserve the community's irreplaceable natural heritage for existing and future generations. 
(4)  Parking and loading. To assure that all developments provide for adequate and safe storage and movement of vehicles in a manner consistent with community standards and good engineering and site design principles. 
(5)  Stormwater management (subdivision standards). 
a.  To protect and maintain the chemical, physical and biological integrity of ground and surface waters. 
b.  To prevent activities which adversely affect ground and surface waters. 
c.  To encourage the construction of stormwater management systems that aesthetically and functionally approximate natural systems. 
d.  To protect natural drainage systems. 
e.  To minimize runoff pollution of ground and surface waters. 
f.  To maintain and restore groundwater levels. 
g.  To protect and maintain natural salinity levels in estuarine areas. 
h.  To minimize erosion and sedimentation. 
i.  To prevent damage to wetlands. 
j.  To protect, maintain, and restore the habitat of fish and wildlife. 
(6)  Floodplain protection. 
a.  To protect human life and health. 
b.  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects. 
c.  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at public expense. 
d.  To minimize prolonged business interruptions and damage to public facilities and utilities caused by flooding. 
e.  To maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas. 
f.  To insure that potential purchasers of subdivided land are notified that the property is in a flood-prone area. 
g.  To assure that uses and facilities vulnerable to floods are designed and constructed to resist flood damage. 
h.  To preserve natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers to accommodate flood waters. 
i.  To limit filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion, sedimentation, or flood damage. 
j.  To prevent unnatural diversion of flood water to lands that are normally flood free. 
k.  To maintain the normal movement of surface waters, the optimum storage capacity of watersheds, desirable groundwater levels, water quality, and the natural hydrological and ecological functions of wetlands and other flood prone lands. 
l.  To avoid the need of costly and environmentally disruptive flood management structures. 
m.  To encourage the use of flood-prone lands as open space. 
n.  To make and maintain the City of Pahokee eligible for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. 
(7)  Protection of environmentally sensitive lands. 
a.  To protect environmentally sensitive lands and their beneficial functions while also protecting the rights of property owners. 
b.  To protect, maintain, and restore the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of ground and surface waters and natural habitats. 
c.  To prevent activities which adversely affect ground and surface waters, natural habitats, and native flora and fauna. 
d.  To maintain recharge for groundwater aquifers. 
e.  To prohibit certain uses that are detrimental to environmentally sensitive areas. 
f.  To protect the recreation opportunities of environmentally sensitive lands for hunting, fishing, boating, hiking, nature observation, photography, camping, and other uses. 
g.  To protect the public's rights in navigable waters. 
h.  To protect aesthetic and property values. 
(8)  Protection of cultural resources. 
a.  To identify, protect, and enhance the use of future districts, sites, buildings, and structures, and areas that are reminders of past eras, events, and persons important in local, state or national history, or which provide significant examples of architectural styles of the past, or which provide this the physical surroundings in which past generations lived. 
b.  To enhance property values, stabilize older neighborhoods and the city business center, and increase the economic benefits to the city arising out of its cultural resources. 
c.  To preserve and enhance the varied architectural styles that reflect the cultural, social, economic, political and architectural history of the city. 
d.  To enrich human life in its educational and cultural dimensions by fostering knowledge of the community's heritage. 
Cross reference- These sections explicitly establish the intent of the city commission. They should be referred to whenever interpretation or application of the code may depend on the legislative intent. 
Sec. 14-12. - Rules of interpretation. 
(a)  Generally. In the interpretation and application of this code all provisions shall be liberally construed in favor of the objectives and purposes of the city and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(b)  Responsibility for interpretation. In the event that any question arises concerning the application of regulations, performance standards, definitions, development criteria, or any other provision of this code, the director shall be responsible for interpretation and shall look to the City of Pahokee comprehensive plan for guidance. Responsibility for interpretation by the director shall be limited to standards, regulations and requirements of this code, but shall not be construed to include interpretation of any technical codes adopted by reference in this code, nor be construed as overriding the responsibilities given to any commission, board or official named in other sections or articles of this code. 
(c)  Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; if the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, that day shall be excluded. 
(d)  Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or some other city officer or employee to do some act or perform some duty, it is to be construed to authorize delegation to professional-level subordinates to perform the required act or duty unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise. 
(e)  Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall be construed to include the feminine and neuter. 
(f)  Number. Words in the singular shall include the plural and words in the plural shall include the singular. 
(g)  Shall, may. The word "shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
(h)  Written or in writing The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
(i)  Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year, unless otherwise indicated. 
(j)  Day. The word "day" shall mean a working day, unless a calendar day is indicated. 
(k)  Boundaries. Interpretations regarding boundaries of land use districts shall be made in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Boundaries shown as following or approximately following any street shall be construed as following the centerline of the street. 
(2)  Boundaries shown as following or approximately following any platted lot line or other property line shall be construed as following such line. 
(3)  Boundaries shown as following or approximately following section lines, half-section lines, or quarter-section lines shall be construed as following such lines. 
(4)  Boundaries shown as following or approximately following natural features shall be construed as following such features. 
Sec. 14-13. - Relationship of specific to general provisions. 
    More specific provisions of this code shall be followed in lieu of more general provisions that may be more lenient than or in conflict with the more specific provision. 
Sec. 14-14. - Abrogation. 
    This land development code is not intended to repeal, abrogate or interfere with any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions duly recorded in the public records of the city. 
Secs. 14-15-14-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ORGANIZATION, ADMINISTRATION, REVIEW, AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 14-20. - Decision-making and administrative authorities. 
(a)  City commission. 
(1)  Authority. In addition to the jurisdiction, authority and duties which may be conferred on the city commission by other provisions, the city commission of the City of Pahokee shall have the following duties and powers under this chapter: 
a.  To consider and enact development code regulations and an official zoning map; 
b.  To consider and enact, enact with modifications, repeal, partially repeal, or reject amendments to these regulations or official zoning map, provided that the city commission has first obtained the recommendation of the planning board; 
c.  To establish fees, charges, and expenses imposed by these development code regulations; 
d.  To enforce the development code regulations, provisions, and restrictions by appropriate administrative and legal action; 
e.  To appoint and confirm members of the city planning board, the board of adjustment, and such other boards or committees as may be required by this development code, as amended; 
f.  To hear and decide appeals from any orders, requirements, decision, or determinations made by the board of adjustment; and, 
g.  To hear and decide appeals from any orders, requirements, decision, or determinations made by the planning board concerning an application for a site plan review. 
(b)  Planning board. 
(1)  Establishment, composition, and terms. The planning board shall consist of seven (7) members who shall be electors of the city and shall serve without compensation. The city commission shall appoint each for a term of three (3) years. Each member shall hold office for the term for which appointed. 
The absence of a member for three (3) consecutive meetings without an excuse approved by the chairman of the planning board and noted in the minutes, shall be deemed just cause for removal by the city commission. 
Any member may be removed from office by the city commission with a majority vote. 
If a vacancy occurs in the membership of the planning board, the city commission within twenty (20) days shall fill the vacancy for the unexpired term. 
(2)  Authority. The planning board shall abide by all applicable provisions of chapter 166, Laws of Florida (City Charter) as amended. 
(3)  Functions and powers. The functions and powers of the planning board shall include: 
a.  To keep the city commission and the general public informed and advised as to the physical development of the city; 
b.  To recommend to the city commission principles and policies for guiding action in the physical development of the city; 
c.  To conduct such public hearings as may be required to gather information necessary for the preparation, establishment, and maintenance of the comprehensive plan, as well as all other public hearings required by these regulations or required by the city commission; 
d.  To advise and consult with the director of community development in the preparation of a comprehensive plan; to consider it and amendments to it; and to recommend to the city commission the plan and amendments formulated, as well as proposed ordinances and regulations designed to promote orderly development consistent with the plan; 
e.  To advise and recommend on the preparation and adoption of a comprehensive plan for the city pursuant to chapter 166, Laws of Florida (City Charter), as amended, and by F.S. ch. 163.3161; 
f.  To recommend whether or not specific proposed developments conform to the principles and requirements of the comprehensive plan as to growth and improvement; 
g.  To consider all major and minor plats which subdivide lands and recommend acceptance, modification, or rejection of them, and to recommend regulations for the subdivision and platting of land; 
h.  To provide advice and recommendations to the city commission on each application for amendments to this chapter and the official zoning map; 
i.  To consider and approve, approve with modifications, or deny applications for site plan review; 
j.  As requested, to recommend to the city manager the appointment of a director community development; 
k.  To prepare in conjunction with the director of community development, the city manager, and the director of finance a list of capital improvements recommended for construction during the next fiscal year and the succeeding four (4) fiscal years. This list shall show the recommended order of priority, the year recommended for beginning and completing construction, and the estimated costs for each recommended improvement; 
l.  To consider all general plans for major landscaping proposed by the city or to be located on city property and to make recommendations with each plan; and, 
m.  To consider all questions involving the location, removal, or alternation in any works of art belonging to the city, including monuments, memorials, and statuary, that are not kept indoors or assigned hereby or by ordinance of the jurisdiction of another agency; and prior to the acceptance or rejection of any proposed gift to the city in the form of a monument or memorial, to approve or recommend modification or rejection of a sketch or plan thereof and the proposed location thereof. 
(4)  Review of applications and amendments by the director of community development. No development application or amendment to this chapter, official zoning map or comprehensive plan shall be considered or authorized until the impact and extent thereof have been studied by the director of community development who shall have a minimum of thirty (30) days to provide a written report recommending approval, modification, or denial of the application or amendment and the reasons for said recommendation to the planning board and city commission. 
(5)  Procedures. The planning board shall adopt rules of procedures, subject to any limitations prescribed by the city Charter, these regulations or ordinances. It shall select a chairman, secretary, and other officers and shall prescribe their duties and powers. Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a lesser number may adjourn from time to time. 
The planning board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, record the vote of each member on each question, and keep records of its discussion, findings, recommendations, and other official actions. All records or other accounts of meetings shall be public records and be filed with and available from the department of community development. 
(c)  Board of adjustment. 
(1)  Establishment, composition, and terms. The board of adjustment shall consist of seven (7) members who shall be electors of the city and shall serve without compensation. The city commission shall appoint each for a term of three (3) years. Each member shall hold office for the term for which appointed. 
The absence of a member for three (3) consecutive meetings without an excuse approved by the chairman of the board adjustment and noted in the minutes, shall be deemed just cause for removal by the city commission. 
Any member may be removed from office by the city commission for malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance in office, or for conduct unbecoming an officer whether connected or unconnected with official duties; provided, no member shall be removed except by affirmative vote of all except one (1) of the membership of the city commission. A hearing or vote for removal of any member shall not occur unless at least twenty (20) days have elapsed following service of written charges upon a member. Prior to a hearing or vote for removal, any member shall be provided at least ten (10) days notice. 
If a vacancy occurs in the membership of the board of adjustment, the city commission within twenty (20) days shall fill the vacancy for the unexpired term. 
(2)  Authority. The board of adjustment shall abide by all applicable provisions of chapter 166, Laws of Florida (City Charter) as amended. 
(3)  Functions and powers. The functions and powers of the board of adjustment shall include: 
a.  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the director of community development in the enforcement of this chapter; 
b.  To reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the appeal from any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the director of community development; 
c.  To interpret the provisions of these regulations in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the official zoning map and comprehensive plan; 
d.  To grant variances; 
e.  To consider and approve, approve with modifications, or deny applications for conditional use approval; and, 
f.  To compel the attendance of witnesses at hearings or meetings and to administer oaths. 
(4)  Review of applications by the director of community development. No development application shall be considered or authorized until the impact and extent thereof have been studied by the director of community development who shall have a minimum of thirty (30) days to provide a written report recommending approval, modification, or denial of the application or amendment and the reasons for said recommendation to the board of adjustment. 
(5)  Procedures. The board of adjustment shall adopt rules of procedures, subject to any limitations prescribed by the City Charter, these regulations or ordinances. It shall select a chairman, secretary, and other officers and shall prescribe their duties and powers. Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a lesser number may adjourn from time to time. 
The board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings, record the vote of each member on each question, and keep records of its discussion, findings, recommendations, and other official actions. All records or other accounts of meetings shall be public records and be filed with and available from the department of community development. 
(d)  Office of the director of community development. 
(1)  Appointment. The director of community development shall be the head of the department of community development and shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager. 
(2)  Jurisdiction, authority, and duties. In addition to the jurisdiction, authority and duties which may be conferred on the director of community development by other provisions, the director of community development shall also have the following powers and duties under this chapter: 
a.  The director of community development shall receive, review, and approve certificates of compliance, land clearing permits, building permits, sign permits, and certificates of occupancy in accordance with the procedures in section 14-21; 
b.  The director of community development shall receive, review, and approve applications for administrative review in accordance with the procedures in section 14-23; 
c.  The director of community development, whenever a use is not specifically listed in article V. shall make a determination as to whether the proposed use is a use permitted by this ordinance, in accordance with article V; 
d.  The director of community development shall serve as staff planner to the planning board, the board of adjustment and the city commission, including the provision of aid and technical assistance in: 
1.  The processing and review of site plan review applications as provided in section 14-24; 
2.  The processing and review of applications for conditional use review as provided in section 14-25.; 
3.  The processing and review of applications for variances as provided in section 14-26; 
4.  The initiation, processing, and review of applications for the amendment to the text of this chapter as provided in section 14-27; 
5.  The initiation, processing, and review of applications for amendments to the official zoning map as provided in section 14-27; 
6.  The initiation, processing and review of comprehensive plan amendments as provided in section 14-28; and 
7.  The processing and review of applications for planned developments as provided in article VII. 
e.  The director of community development shall maintain the official zoning map series; 
f.  The director of community development shall maintain the official comprehensive plan and future land use map series; 
g.  The director of community development shall, whenever requested to do so by the city commission, conduct or cause to be conducted, with the assistance of other city departments if necessary, investigations, reports, surveys, studies, maps, charts, and recommendations with respect to matters before the city commission, the planning board, or the board of adjustment; and 
h.  The director of community development shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
Sec. 14-21. - Certificates and permits. 
(a)  Certificate of compliance. 
(1)  Authority. The director of community development is authorized to issue a certificate of compliance that a proposed development complies with the provisions of the comprehensive plan and this chapter. 
(2)  Purpose. The purpose for issuing a certificate of compliance with the provisions of the comprehensive plan and this chapter is to ensure that all proposed development within the city complies with provisions, goals, objectives and policies of the comprehensive plan and the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Certificate of compliance required. A certificate of compliance shall be required prior the issuance of a land clearing permit, building permit or sign permit. 
(4)  Procedure. 
a.  Upon application for a land clearing permit, building permit or sign permit, the director of community development shall have ten (10) working days in which to determine whether such application complies with the provisions, goals, objectives and policies of the comprehensive plan and the provisions of this chapter. 
b.  If the director of community development determines that a proposed development complies with the provisions, goals, objectives and polices of the comprehensive plan and the provisions of this code, he shall issue a certificate of compliance. 
c.  If the director of community development determines that a proposed development does not comply with the provisions, goals, objectives or policies of the comprehensive plan or the provisions of this chapter, the application shall be returned to the applicant accompanied by a written statement setting forth the provisions, goals, objectives or policies of the comprehensive plan or the provisions of this code with which the proposed development does not comply. 
d.  Failure of the director of community development to make a determination of compliance with the comprehensive plan and this chapter within ten (10) working days from receipt of an application as provided in subsection (a)(4)a. above, shall result in the approval and issuance of a certificate of compliance. 
(5)  Effect of issuance. A certificate of compliance constitute s an official statement that the proposed development complies with the provisions, goals, objectives and policies of the comprehensive plan and the provisions of this chapter. 
(6)  Expiration of certificate of compliance. A certificate of compliance issued in accordance with this section shall be valid for twelve (12) months from the date it is issued at which time it shall expire. Extensions of approved certificates of compliance shall require the submittal of a new application in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(7)  Appeals. Appeals of the issuance or denial of a certificate of compliance by the director of community development shall be made to the board of adjustment. 
(b)  Land clearing permit. 
(1)  Authority. The director of community development is authorized to issue a land clearing permit is accordance with the provisions set forth in this section. 
(2)  Purpose. The purpose for issuing a land clearing permit is to protect the unnecessary destruction of vegetative and wildlife habitat and soils. 
(3)  Land clearing permit required. A land clearing permit shall be required prior to any land clearing, land removing, or land filling activities, except those associated with agricultural practices in approved districts pursuant to article V or as part of legal nonconforming agricultural practices pursuant to article VI. 
(4)  Procedure. 
a.  Application for a land clearing permit shall be made on forms provided by the community development department and contain all information required therein, including a written statement specifying the location of the property and reasons necessitating the land alteration. 
b.  The director of community shall determine, within ten (10) working days, whether the application complies with the following land clearing permit requirements: 
1.  A certificate of compliance has been obtained; 
2.  The proposed land clearing, including the removal of vegetation and trees, grading, filling, contouring, and similar actions, is necessary to allow the permitted use of the property; 
3.  The removal or alteration of trees is in accordance with the provisions of article IX; 
4.  Appropriate measures have been or will be taken to protect existing trees and vegetation in accordance with article IX. 
c.  If the director of community development determines that an application complies with the requirements of subsection (b)(4)b. above, he shall issue a land clearing permit. 
d.  If the director of community development determines that a proposed development does not comply with the requirements of subsection (b)(4)b. above, the application shall be returned to the applicant accompanied by a written statement setting forth the requirements with which the proposed development does not comply. 
e.  Failure of the director of community development to determine whether an application meets the requirements of this section within ten (10) working days from receipt of an application, shall result in the approval and issuance of a land clearing permit. 
(5)  Effect of issuance. A land clearing permit constitutes an official statement that the proposed development complies with the requirements of this section. 
(6)  Expiration of land clearing permits. A land clearing permit issued in accordance with this section shall be valid sixty (60) days from the date it is issued at which time it shall expire. Extensions of land clearing permits shall require the submittal of a new application in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(7)  Appeals. Appeals of the issuance or denial of a land clearing permit by the director of community development shall be made to the board of adjustment. 
(c)  Building permit. The erection, alteration, or reconstruction of any building or structure shall not be commenced without obtaining a building permit from the director of community development in accordance with the provisions of section ____________ . No building permit shall be issued for development without a certificate of compliance. When application for a permit to erect, enlarge, alter, or reconstruct any building or structure has been filed, and a certificate of compliance obtained, the director of community development may, at his discretion, pending the issuance of such building permit, issue a special permit for the foundations of a building. The holder of such a foundation permit shall proceed at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the superstructure will be granted. 
(d)  Sign permit. The erection, alteration, reconstruction, or conversion of any sign shall not be commenced without obtaining a sign permit from the director of community development in accordance with the provisions of article X. No sign permit shall be issued without a certificate of compliance. 
(e)  Certificate of occupancy. No building or structure shall inhabited, occupied or otherwise used for personal or commercial purposes without obtaining a certificate of occupancy from the director of community development. 
Sec. 14-22. - Development by right. 
(a)  Application requirements. All developments to be constructed by right shall make an application for a compliance certificate and a building permit in accordance with sections 14-21(a) and section 14-21(b). 
(b)  Status of approval. The issuance of certificate of compliance and the approval of a building permit for a development by right constitutes an official statement that the proposed development is a development permitted by right in accordance with the provisions of the comprehensive plan and this chapter. 
Sec. 14-23. - Administrative review. 
(a)  Intent. This section sets forth procedures and standards for the director of community development review and approval, approval with conditions, or denial of those uses requiring administrative review. These procedures and standards are instituted to provide an opportunity to utilize property for an activity which is permitted throughout a zoning district, yet subject to certain additional standards not applicable to other uses in that district. The intent of administrative review is to provide for an informal review of proposed development to insure proper precautions and planning are taken to avoid a disruption in the area in which the development is to be located. These procedures and standards are adopted for the director of community development to follow in arriving at any administrative review decision. 
(b)  Applicability. The procedures and standards established in this section for administrative review shall be applicable to the following: 
(1)  The uses identified in article V as requiring administrative review and approval. 
(c)  Administrative review authority. The director of community development shall review each application for an administrative review, and within twenty (20) days from receipt of a complete application shall do one of the following: 
(1)  Grant the application in full. 
(2)  Deny the application in full. 
(3)  Grant the application in part. 
(4)  Grant a modification of the application in such form as the director of community development deems proper and consistent with the applicable standards for administrative review and the comprehensive plan. 
(5)  Return the application to the applicant with specific instructions as to additional information, evidence, or testimony desired in order to make a decision consistent with standards for administrative review and the comprehensive plan. 
(6)  Establish such conditions as the director of community development deems necessary to ensure conformance with the administrative review standards. 
Failure to take action within the twenty (20) day period shall constitute approval of an application without conditions. 
(d)  Administrative review standards. 
(1)  Interpretation of administrative review standards. Uses set forth in this chapter as requiring administrative review shall be deemed to be potentially adverse to surrounding land uses except in specific instances when the director of community development finds that all chapter standards have been or will be met. In those instances when the director of community development finds that all chapter standards for approval of a particular use at a specific location have been met, then the director of community development shall approve the use. If the director of community development finds that all of the chapter standards have not been met, then the use shall be denied. 
(2)  Administrative review standards. The specific standards to be applied to each use requiring an administrative review are set forth in article V. These standards must be met as specified in article V, without exception. The director of community development is not authorized to reduce or waive any administrative review standard set forth in article V. 
(e)  Determination if administrative review required. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of compliance, the director of community development shall determine whether or not administrative review is required pursuant to the provisions of this section. If administrative review is required, the applicant or applicant's agent shall be notified in writing and be permitted withdraw the request. 
(f)  Procedures for submitting and processing applications. The director of community development shall receive, review and process applications for administrative review in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Optional pre-application conference. A pre-application conference is suggested to all applicants to avoid unnecessary delays or confusion in the application and review processes. If requested, an informal meeting will be arranged among the applicant, community development department staff and other appropriate city staff to discuss the proposal and to review any preliminary plans the applicant may wish to present. 
(2)  Application deadlines. Applications for administrative review may submitted at any time. 
(3)  Application fee. Applications shall include all appropriate processing fees as approved by the city commission. 
(4)  Application sufficiency. Within five (5) days of receipt, the director of community development shall review an application to determine whether or not it contains sufficient information to commence processing. An owner or agent with an insufficient application shall be notified by the director of community development within this time period of the those additional items required for processing. 
(5)  Application processing. Applications deemed sufficient by the director of community development shall be acted upon within twenty (20) days of the date on which they were deemed sufficient. Failure of the director of community development to review a sufficient application within this period shall result in a recommendation of approval without conditions. 
(6)  Written finding of fact. The director of community development shall provide a written finding of fact concerning an application and a final determination of approval, approval with conditions or denial. Determinations of approval with conditions or denial shall list those standards with which the application fails to comply and the remedies required to obtain compliance. Failure of the director of community development to provide such a finding of fact or final determination shall result in a determination of approval without conditions. 
(7)  Public inspection of records. Applications submitted pursuant to the provisions of this section may be reviewed by the public or by any interested citizen, according to the provisions of F.S. ch. 119. 
(g)  Application requirements. 
(1)  Minimum application requirements. An application for administrative review shall be made on forms provided by the director of community development for such purpose and shall include all the following information at a minimum: 
a.  The name of the proposed development, if applicable; 
b.  The location of the site by street address and Palm Beach County Property Appraiser Property Control Number; 
c.  The name and signature of the legal owner of the development site, the nature or type of property ownership, and proof of ownership; 
d.  The name and signature of the agent acting on behalf of the legal owner and a written power of attorney granted to the agent regarding the development application; 
e.  The size of the parcel in acres and square feet; 
f.  The specific nature of the intended uses of the development site; and, 
g.  The zoning classification and future land use designation of the site as shown on the official zoning map and the adopted future land use map. 
(2)  Additional application requirements. The director of community development may require one (1) or more of the following items to be submitted with an application in order to insure the administrative review standards are met. 
a.  The square footage of all existing and proposed uses on the development site individually and in aggregate; 
b.  The gross density and/or intensity in dwelling units per acre and/or floor area ratio (FAR); 
c.  The maximum lot coverage by structures permitted in accordance with article IV and article V, and the amount proposed; 
d.  The maximum amount of impervious surface area permitted in accordance with article IV and article V, and the amount proposed; 
e.  The minimum amount of landscaped area required to be provided in accordance with article IV and article V, and the amount proposed; 
f.  The minimum number of parking spaces required to be provided in accordance with article IV and article V, and the number proposed to be provided on-site and/or off-site; 
g.  The minimum number of trees and shrubs required to be provided in accordance with article V and article IX, and the number proposed; 
h.  A development schedule for all phases; 
i.  A location map which delineates the project boundaries on the Palm Beach County Property Appraiser Maps; 
j.  An aerial photograph of the site; 
k.  A boundary and topographic survey, with contour lines at one (1) foot intervals, prepared, signed, and sealed by a registered Florida Land Surveyor which shall contain: 
1.  Acreage certification of all land above the elevation of mean high water (MHW); 
2.  The mean high water line, where applicable; 
3.  The location of all submerged lands, if applicable. 
4.  A legal description. 
l.  A site plan drawing prepared in accordance with the specifications in section 14-24(h)(19); 
m.  A landscape plan prepared in accordance with the requirements of article IX; 
n.  Any information required elsewhere in this chapter; or, 
o.  Any other information deemed necessary by the director of community department for the reasonable review of the proposed development. 
(h)  Withdrawal, continuation or resubmittal of applications. 
(1)  Withdrawal of applications. 
a.  Any application for an administrative review may be withdrawn at any time by an applicant or designated agent by giving written notice to the director of community development. An application withdrawn after it has been deemed sufficient shall not be entitled to a refund of the application fee. 
b.  An application for administrative review may be amended at any time. A request for amendment to the application shall be made in writing to the director of community development. A request of this nature shall require an additional amendment processing fee. Such applications for change shall be considered new applications and the director of community shall have an additional twenty (20) days to review the application. 
(2)  Resubmittals. When an application for administrative review is denied by the director of community development, an application requesting approval of the same or different use requiring administrative review on the same property may be resubmitted at any time. 
(i)  Records of applications and determinations. 
(1)  Application records maintained. Application forms and all information submitted with each application shall be maintained by the community development department. All applications, exhibits, documents, materials, and papers submitted to the director of community development, written reports of any municipal employee or consultant, and the decision and report of the director of community development shall constitute the record. Persons may examine the record during normal business hours and obtain copies at their expense. 
(j)  Action by the director of community development. The director of community development shall render his decision within a reasonable period as provided in this section. All actions of the director of community development shall include the recommendation or decision and the reason for the action. 
(1)  Notification. Notification of the final decision on an application shall be mailed to the applicant and all interested parties. A copy of the final decision shall be filed in the community development department. 
(k)  Status of conditional use review applications . 
(1)  Status if approved. 
a.  Unless the decision of the director of community development is appealed, a certificate of compliance, land clearing permit, building permit, sign permit, or certificate of occupancy may be issued providing all other applicable requirements of the comprehensive plan and this chapter are fulfilled. 
b.  All plans, specifications and statements submitted with the application for administrative review shall become, with any changes ordered by the director of community development, a part of the conditions of any approval. 
c.  Conditions and requirements stated as part of the approval of a use requiring administrative review shall be a continuing obligation of holders of approval. The director of community development shall make periodic inspections of the approved use to determine continuing compliance with all required conditions. 
(2)  Status if denied. Unless the decision of the director of community development is appealed, the application is denied. When an application is denied, a certificate of compliance, land clearing permit, building permit, or sign permit, or certificate of occupancy shall not be issued. 
(l)  Administrative review approval effective period extension, and termination. 
(1)  Effective period of administrative review approval. Administrative review approvals shall have an effective period of twelve (12) months from the date of approval during which period the recipient shall obtain building permits and commence construction of the approved use. Failure to obtain a building permit and commence construction within twelve (12) months from approval or failure to complete construction under the effective period of the first building permit obtained plus one (1) extension thereto shall result in the termination of the administrative review approval. Upon termination, no building permits shall be extended and no additional building permits shall be issued. 
(2)  Extension of administrative review approval effective period. The director of community development may grant up to a six (6) month extension of the effective period of an administrative review approval upon a finding that all of the standards as provided in section 14-23(d) have been or will be met and that the use is consistent with the provisions of the comprehensive plan and this chapter. Only one (1) extension of each administrative review approval shall be permitted. 
(3)  Termination of administrative review approval. Administrative review approval may be withheld or terminated upon a determination by the director of community development of the following: 
a.  Failure to comply with conditions or requirements of the administrative review approval; or, 
b.  Failure to correct violations of conditions or requirements of Administrative review approval within thirty (30) days following issuance of a citation or notice of violation. 
(m)  Violations. Failure to abide all restrictions, stipulations, and safeguards required by the director of community development for approval shall be a violation of this section subject to enforcement and penalty procedures of this chapter. 
(n)  Appeals. 
(1)  Filing an appeal. Any person aggrieved or affected by a decision of the director of community development may appeal to the board of adjustment. Appeals shall be filed in writing with the director of community development within ten (10) days from the date of the decision by the director of community development and shall include the appropriate fee. 
(2)  Appeal proceedings. Within sixty (60) days following receipt of an appeal by the director of community development, the board of adjustment shall hold a public hearing to consider the appeal. Within sixty (60) days after the public hearing, the board of adjustment shall act upon the appeal. At the public hearing, representation shall be limited to the affected or aggrieved person or a duly authorized attorney licensed to practice law in the state of Florida. To over turn a decision by the director of community development shall require five (5) affirmative votes of the board of adjustment. 
Sec. 14-24. - Site plan review. 
(a)  Intent. This section sets forth procedures and standards for the planning board review and approval, approval with conditions, or denial of site plan review applications. The purpose of these provisions is to promote harmonious, functional relationships among the various elements within any development such as the location of activities, vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems, and visual form to insure physical, social, and economic compatibility with neighboring developments and conditions, as well as with the community at large and to prevent detrimental impacts to the natural environment on and off the site by providing for review and evaluation of site plans for all developments of the types listed in this section and elsewhere in this chapter. Although certain minimum standards are prescribed by specific provisions of this section, site plan review will permit maximum flexibility in evaluating each plan on its merits and encourage variety and innovation within the intent and purpose specified for each zoning district while insuring privacy and safety on all levels. 
(b)  Applicability. The procedures and standards established in this section for site plan review shall be applicable to the following: 
(1)  The uses identified in article V as requiring site plan review. 
(2)  All uses within the site plan review overlay district as identified on the official zoning map, which are not otherwise subject to review by the city commission or the board of adjustment. 
(c)  Site plan review authority. The planning board shall review each application for a site plan review and the findings of the director of community development, and within sixty (60) days after the close of the public hearing shall do one (1) of the following: 
(1)  Grant the application in full. 
(2)  Deny the application in full. 
(3)  Grant the application in part. 
(4)  Grant a modification of the application in such form as the planning board deems proper and consistent with the applicable standards for site plan approval and the comprehensive plan. 
(5)  Return the application to the director of community development with specific instructions as to additional information, evidence, or testimony desired in order to make a decision consistent with standards for site plan review and the comprehensive plan. 
(6)  Continue the consideration of the application to a special date. 
(7)  Establish such conditions as the planning board deems necessary to ensure conformance with the site plan review standards. 
Failure to take action within the sixty (60) day period shall constitute approval of an application. 
(d)  Site plan review standards. Site plans shall be reviewed using the following qualitative development standards. 
(1)  Harmonious and efficient organization. All elements of a plan shall be organized harmoniously and efficiently in relation to topography, the size and type of the property affected, the character of adjoining property, and the type and size of buildings. The site shall be developed in a manner that will not impede the normal and orderly development or improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted in this chapter. 
(2)  Preservation of natural conditions. The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, to the degree practical, by minimizing tree and soil removal and by other appropriate site planning techniques. Terrain and vegetation shall not be disturbed in a manner likely to increase significantly either wind or water erosion within or adjacent to a development site. 
(3)  Screening and buffering. Fences, walls, or vegetative screening shall be provided where needed to protect residents and users from undesirable views, lighting, noise or other adverse off-site effects and to protect residents and users of off-site development from on-site adverse effects. 
(4)  Enhancement of residential privacy. The site plan shall provide reasonable visual and auditory privacy for all dwelling units located within and adjacent to the site. Fences, walks, barriers and vegetation shall be arranged to protect and enhance the property and to enhance the privacy of occupants. 
(5)  Emergency access. Structures and other site features shall be arranged to permit access by emergency vehicles to all buildings. 
(6)  Access to public ways. All buildings, dwellings units and other facilities shall have safe and convenient access to public rights-of-way and/or other areas dedicated to common use. 
(7)  Pedestrian circulation. When residential uses are included, a pedestrian circulation system shall be provided that is separated to the extent possible from the vehicular circulation system and that at a minimum shall conform to sidewalk standards of the city. 
(8)  Design of access and egress drives. The location, size, and numbers of access drives to a site will be arranged to minimize any negative impacts on public and private ways and on adjacent private property. Traffic improvements shall be provided where they will significantly improve safety for vehicles and pedestrians. 
(9)  Coordination of on-site circulation with off-site circulation. The arrangement of public or common ways for vehicular and pedestrian circulation shall be coordinated with the pattern of existing or planned streets and pedestrian or bicycle pathways in the area. 
(10)  Design of public rights-of-way . Public streets and rights-of-way within a site shall be designed for maximum efficiency. They shall occupy no more land than is required to provide access, nor shall they unnecessarily fragment development into small blocks. Large developments containing extensive public rights-of-way shall provide a road network with local streets which provide direct access to individual parcels and other streets which provide no or limited direct access to individual parcels. 
(11)  Exterior lighting. Exterior lighting shall not interfere with the quiet enjoyment of adjacent properties or the safety of public rights-of-way. 
(12)  Protection of property values. All elements of a site plan shall be arranged to have a minimal negative impact on the property values of adjoining property. 
(13)  Compatibility with comprehensive plan and development code. Plan shall be consistent with the city comprehensive plan and this chapter. 
(e)  Uses subject to administrative review and site plan review. Uses which are subject to administrative review and site plan review shall, as a minimum application requirement for site plan review, comply with all administrative review standards. Failure to obtain administrative review approval pursuant to section 14-23 shall prohibit the submission of an application for site plan review. 
    As part of its review proceedings, the planning board may not waive or reduce any of the administrative review standards. The administrative review standards, however, may be increased by the planning board if deemed necessary for compliance with the site plan review standards. 
(f)  Determination if site plan review required. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of compliance, the director of community development shall determine whether or not a site plan review is required pursuant to the provisions of this section. If site plan review is required, the applicant or applicant's agent shall be notified in writing and be permitted withdraw the request. 
(g)  Procedures for submitting and processing applications. The director of community development shall receive, review and process applications for site plan review in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Optional pre-application conference. A pre-application conference is suggested to all applicants to avoid unnecessary delays or confusion in the application and review processes. If requested, an informal meeting will be arranged among the applicant, community development department staff and other appropriate city staff to discuss the proposal and to review any preliminary plans the applicant may wish to present. 
(2)  Application deadlines. The planning board shall approve a schedule of site plan review meetings and their corresponding application deadlines. 
(3)  Application fee. Applications shall include all appropriate processing fees as approved by the city commission. 
(4)  Application sufficiency. Within ten (10) days of receipt, the director of community development shall review an application to determine whether or not it contains sufficient information to commence processing. An owner or agent with an insufficient application shall be notified by the director of community development within this time period of those additional items required for processing and the dates by which they must be received in order for the application to be heard at the meeting for which the application was made. 
(5)  Application processing. Applications deemed sufficient by the director of community development shall be acted upon within forty-five (45) days of the date on which they were deemed sufficient. Failure of the director of community development to review a sufficient application within this period shall result in a recommendation of approval without conditions. 
(6)  Written recommendation. The director of community development shall provide a written recommendation to the planning board and the findings upon which the recommendation is based, prior to the public hearing at which the application is to be considered by the planning board. Failure of the director of community development to provide such a recommendation shall result in a recommendation of approval without conditions. 
(7)  Public inspection of records. Applications submitted pursuant to the provisions of this section may be reviewed by the public or by any interested citizen, according to the provisions of F.S. ch. 119. 
(h)  Application requirements. An application for site plan review shall be made on forms provided by the director of community development for such purpose and shall include the following information and documentation, at a minimum: 
(1)  The name of the proposed development, if applicable. 
(2)  The location of the site by street address and Palm Beach County Property Appraiser Property Control Number. 
(3)  The name and signature of the legal owner of the development site, the nature or type of property ownership, and proof of ownership. 
(4)  The name and signature of the agent acting on behalf of the legal owner and a written power of attorney granted to the agent regarding the development application, if applicable. 
(5)  The size of the parcel in acres and square feet. 
(6)  The specific nature of the intended uses of the development site. 
(7)  The square footage of all existing and proposed uses on the development site individually and in aggregate. 
(8)  The gross density and/or intensity in dwelling units per acre and/or floor area ratio (FAR). 
(9)  The zoning classification and future land use designation of the site as shown on the official zoning map and the adopted future land use map. 
(10)  The maximum amount of lot coverage by structures permitted in accordance with article IV, and the amount proposed. 
(11)  The maximum amount of impermeable surface area permitted in accordance with article IV, and the amount proposed. 
(12)  The minimum amount of landscaped area required in accordance with article IV, and the amount proposed. 
(13)  The minimum number of parking spaces required to be provided in accordance with article VII, and the number proposed to be provided on-site and/or off-site. 
(14)  The minimum number of trees and shrubs required to be provided in accordance with article IX, and the number proposed to be provided on-site. 
(15)  A development schedule for all phases. 
(16)  A location map which delineates the project boundaries on the Palm Beach County Property Appraiser Maps. 
(17)  An aerial photograph of the site. 
(18)  A boundary and topographic survey, with contour lines at one (1) foot intervals, prepared, signed, and sealed by a registered Florida Land Surveyor which shall contain: 
a.  Acreage certification of all land above the elevation of mean high water (MHW); 
b.  The mean high water line, where applicable; 
c.  The location of all submerged lands, if applicable; and, 
d.  A legal description. 
(19)  A site plan drawing on a sheet size of at least 24" x 36" and at a scale no smaller than 1" = 50'. For large projects a smaller scale generalized plot plan may be submitted as a cover sheet; however, detail sheets will be required. Detail sheets shall include the following information: 
a.  Location of the property by lot number, block number, and street address, if any; 
b.  The boundary lines of the property, the dimensions of the property, existing subdivisions, easements, roadways, rail lines, and public rights-of-ways; 
c.  Boundaries depicting construction phases, if applicable; 
d.  Building identification and dimensions (number of dwelling units if residential; floor area if non-residential); 
e.  The location, height, and use of all proposed and existing buildings and structures; 
f.  The approximate location and dimension of all proposed lots and all yard requirements; 
g.  The location and dimension of parking lots and loading areas; 
h.  The location and dimension of all waste disposal and water supply facilities; 
i.  The location of all drainage retention areas and major drainage improvements; 
j.  The location of all transportation improvements; 
k.  The location and configuration of all public and private roadways for a distance of one hundred fifty (150) feet around the property; 
l.  The location, type and height of all existing or proposed fences and walls; 
m.  The location, size and arrangement of all existing or proposed signs and lighting; 
n.  Proposed lot lines and plot designs, if applicable; 
o.  The location and type of any structure or paved area within fifty (50) feet of the outside property boundaries; and, 
p.  Any other information deemed necessary by the director of community development or review body for the reasonable review of the proposed development. 
(20)  A landscape plan prepared in accordance with the requirements of article IX. 
(21)  All information required elsewhere in this chapter. 
(22)  Any other information deemed necessary by the director of community department or the planning board for the reasonable review of the proposed development. 
(i)  Withdrawal, continuation or resubmittal of applications. 
(1)  Withdrawal of applications. 
a.  An application for a site plan review may be withdrawn by an applicant or designated agent by giving written notice to the director of community development. An application may be withdrawn at a public hearing at the request of the applicant or designated agent. After the conclusion of the public hearing concerning an application, it may be withdrawn only upon a majority affirmative vote of the planning board. An application withdrawn after it has been deemed sufficient shall not be entitled to a refund of the application fee. 
b.  An application for a site plan review may be amended prior to the publication of notice of public hearing. A request for amendment to the application shall be made in writing to the director of community development. A request of this nature shall require an additional amendment processing fee. Such applications for change shall be considered new applications and shall be considered at the next appropriate public hearing. 
(2)  Continuation of applications. Any application may be continued for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days at the request of the planning board or director of community development if the authority requesting the continuation determines there is need for further study or information. 
(3)  Resubmittals. When a application for site plan review approval is denied by the planning board, an application requesting approval of a new site plan on the same property may be resubmitted at any time. 
(j)  Public hearing. 
(1)  Required hearing. The planning board shall hold a public hearing prior to acting upon an application for site plan review. 
(2)  Hearings schedule. The planning board shall approve a schedule of hearing dates. 
(3)  Hearings agenda. At least fifteen (15) days prior to a scheduled hearing, the director of community development shall establish an agenda for the hearing which shall include all of those applications which have qualified to be heard in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(4)  Notice for hearings. Public notice shall be advertised in a newspaper with a general circulation in the City of Pahokee at least ten (10) days in advance of the public hearing. Written notice shall be provided by mail and postmarked at least fourteen (14) days in advance of the public hearing to all affected property owners and all persons who own real property within two hundred (200) feet of the property to be affected by the proposed action and whose addresses are known by reference to the latest approved ad valorem tax roll. Notice shall by provided by the director of community development. 
(5)  Content of notices. Required notices shall indicate the date, time and location of the public hearing, a description of the substance of the subject matter that will be discussed, a legal description of the properties directly affected, a statement indicating the action the planning board is authorized to take, and a statement that the hearing may be continued from time to time as may be necessary. The advertisement shall also advise that interested parties may appear at the meeting and be heard regarding the proposed site plan. 
(6)  Conduct of the hearing. All public hearings for site plan review shall be conducted in accordance with the following: 
a.  Rights of all persons. Any person may appear at a public hearing and submit documents, materials, and other written or oral testimony individually or as a representative of an organization. Persons who appear at a public hearing shall state their names, addresses, and the names and mailing addresses of any organizations they represent. The planning board may place reasonable time restrictions on the presentation of testimony and the submission of documents and other materials. 
b.  Oaths. All persons presenting evidence at a public hearing shall swear or attest that their statements are true. During a public hearing, all parties shall have all of the following rights: 
1.  The right to be represented by counsel or by an agent. 
2.  The right to present witnesses. 
3.  The right to cross-examine all witnesses. 
4.  The right to examine and reproduce any documents produced at the hearing. 
Such rights shall be subject to the discretion of the planning board and may be limited if unwarranted or undue delay will result or where no new materials or testimony will be presented. 
c.  Failure to appear. An applicant's failure to appear or to be represented at a scheduled hearing shall be sufficient cause to deny the request. 
(k)  Records of proceedings. 
(1)  Records maintained by city. All records of any proceedings of the planning board shall be filed as a part of the public records of the city. 
(2)  Official minutes maintained. Minutes of proceedings shall be kept in which findings of fact, recommendations, and all determinations or decisions are to be recorded. These minutes shall be considered public records and maintained by the city. 
(3)  Use of recording devices. All proceedings of the planning board shall be recorded electronically. Upon request and during normal business hours, any person may listen to the recordings of any proceedings. Transcriptions of proceedings may be obtained at the expense of the individual requesting such information. 
(4)  Application records maintained. Application forms and all information submitted with each application shall be maintained by the community development department. The transcript of testimony, the minutes of proceedings, all applications, exhibits, documents, materials, and papers submitted to the community development department or the planning board, written reports of any municipal employee or consultant, and the decision and report of the director of community development and board of adjustment shall constitute the record. Persons may examine the record during normal business hours and obtain copies at their expense. 
(l)  Action by the planning board. The planning board shall render its decisions within a reasonable period as provided in this section. All actions of the director of community development or the planning board shall include the recommendation or decision and the reason for the action. 
(1)  Notification. Notification of the final decision on an application shall be mailed to the applicant and all interested parties. A copy of the final decision shall be filed in the community development department. 
(2)  Reconsideration of action. An action may be reconsidered by the planning board only upon a motion by a member who voted on the prevailing side of the original vote. The motion to reconsider may be seconded by any member. 
(3)  Notice. Action on a question pending reconsideration must follow the notice provisions in section 14-24(j). 
(m)  Status of site plan review applications. 
(1)  Status if approved. 
a.  Unless the decision of the planning board is appealed, a certificate of compliance, land clearing permit, building permit, sign permit, or certificate of occupancy may be issued providing all other applicable requirements of the comprehensive plan and this chapter are fulfilled. 
b.  All plans, specifications and statements submitted with the application for site plan review approval shall become, with any changes ordered by the planning board, a part of the conditions of any approval. 
c.  Conditions and requirements stated as part of the approval of a site plan shall be a continuing obligation of holders of approval. The director of community development shall make periodic inspections of developments with approved site plans to determine continuing compliance with all required conditions. 
(2)  Status if denied. Unless the decision of the planning board is appealed, the application is denied. When a application is denied, a certificate of compliance, land clearing permit, building permit, sign permit, or certificate of occupancy shall not be issued. 
(n)  Site plan approval effective period extension, and termination. 
(1)  Effective period of site plan approval. Site plan review approvals shall have an effective period of twelve (12) months from the date of approval during which period the recipient shall obtain building permits and commence construction of the approved use. Failure to obtain a building permit and commence construction within twelve (12) months from approval or failure to complete construction under the effective period of the first building permit obtained plus one (1) extension thereto shall result in the termination of the site plan review approval. Upon termination, no building permits shall be extended and no additional building permits shall be issued. 
(2)  Extension of site plan approval effective period. The planning board may grant up to a six (6) month extension of the effective period of an approved site plan upon a finding that all of the standards as provided in section 14-2(d) have been or will be met and that the use is consistent with the provisions of the comprehensive plan and this chapter. Only one (1) extension of each site plan approval shall be permitted. 
(3)  Termination of site plan approval. Site plan approval may be withheld or terminated upon a determination by the director of community development of the following: 
a.  Failure to comply with conditions or requirements of the site plan approval; or, 
b.  Failure to correct violations of conditions or requirements of site plan approval within thirty (30) days following issuance of a citation or notice of violation. 
(o)  Violations. Failure to complete and maintain all approved elements of an approved site plan, including landscape, appearance, and other site development features, shall be a violation of this section subject to enforcement and penalty procedures of this chapter. 
(p)  Appeals. 
(1)  Filing an appeal. Any person aggrieved or affected by a decision of the planning board may appeal to the city commission. Appeals shall be filed in writing with the director of community development within ten (10) days from the date of the decision by the planning board and shall include the appropriate fee. 
(2)  Appeal proceedings. Within sixty (60) days following receipt of an appeal by the director of community development, the city commission shall hold a public hearing to consider the appeal. Within sixty (60) days after the public hearing, the city commission shall act upon the appeal. At the public hearing, representation shall be limited to the affected or aggrieved person or a duly authorized attorney licensed to practice law in the state of Florida. To over turn a decision by the planning board shall require four (4) affirmative votes of the city commission. 
Sec. 14-25. - Conditional use review. 
(a)  Intent. This section sets forth procedures and standards for the board of adjustment review and approval, approval with conditions, or denial of conditional use applications. These procedures and standards are instituted to provide an opportunity to utilize property for an activity which, under usual circumstances, could be detrimental to other permitted land uses and which normally is not permitted within the same zoning district. A conditional use may be permitted under circumstances particular to the proposed location and subject to conditions which provide protection to adjacent land uses. These procedures and standards are adopted for the board of adjustment to follow in arriving at any conditional use decision. 
(b)  Applicability. The procedures and standards established in this section shall be applicable to all uses which require conditional use approval as identified in article V. 
(c)  Conditional use review authority. The board of adjustment shall review each application for conditional use approval and the findings and recommendations of the director of community development, and within sixty (60) days after the close of the public hearing shall do one (1) of the following: 
(1)  Grant the application in full. 
(2)  Deny the application in full. 
(3)  Grant the application in part. 
(4)  Grant a modification of the application in such form as the board of adjustment deems proper and consistent with the applicable standards for conditional use review and the comprehensive plan. 
(5)  Return the application to the director of community development with specific instructions as to additional information, evidence, or testimony desired in order to make a decision consistent with standards for conditional use review and the comprehensive plan. 
(6)  Authorize withdrawal of the application without prejudice, allowing the application to be resubmitted prior to the twelve (12) month time limitation. 
(7)  Continue the consideration of the application to a special date. 
(8)  Establish such conditions as the board of adjustment deems necessary to ensure conformance with the conditional use standards. 
Failure to take action within the sixty (60) day period shall constitute approval of an application. 
(d)  Conditional use review standards. 
(1)  Interpretation of conditional use standards. Uses set forth in this chapter as conditional uses shall be deemed to be adverse to the public interest except in specific instances when the board of adjustment finds that all chapter standards for approval of such uses have been or will be met. In those instances when the board of adjustment finds that all chapter standards for approval of a particular conditional use at a specific location have been met, then the board of adjustment shall approve the use. 
(2)  Specific standards. The specific standards to be applied to each conditional use within each zoning district are set forth in article V. These standards shall be the minimum standards necessary for approval. of a conditional use. 
(3)  General standards. The site plan review standards listed in section 14-24(d) shall be applied to all applications for a conditional use approval. 
(4)  Standards for conditional uses in residential districts. Prior to approving any non-residential conditional use in any residential zoning district and prior to approving any more intensive residential conditional use in a less intensive residential zoning district, the board of adjustment will find, based on competent substantial evidence, that the proposed conditional use shall be consistent with all of the following requirements: 
a.  Location. The location of the conditional use will not be hazardous to or inconvenient to the residential character of the area in which it is to be located or to the long-range development of the district for the residential purposes intended. 
b.  Size and intensity. The size of the conditional use and the nature and intensity of the operations involved will not be hazardous or inconvenient to the residential character of the area in which it is to be located. The long-range development and maintenance of the district for residential purposes shall not be affected adversely. 
c.  Contiguous residential uses. The location of the conditional use will not result in the isolation of a small existing or planned residential area from other residential developments by its being completely or largely surrounded by arterial streets or nonresidential land uses. 
d.  Residential character. Buildings for the conditional use in a residential zoning district shall be designed and constructed in a manner similar to neighborhood residential structures. Design factors shall include building mass, height, materials, window arrangement, yards, and similar considerations. 
(e)  Conditions and safeguards for conditional use approval. Conditional uses may be approved subject to additional reasonable conditions or limitations upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance, or operation as may be necessary to protect the public interest. 
(f)  Determination if conditional use review required. Prior to issuance of a certificate of compliance, the director of community development shall make a determination whether or not the proposed use is a conditional use in a zoning district and subject to review as provided in this section. If a conditional use review is required, the applicant or applicant's agent shall be notified in writing and be permitted to withdraw the request. 
(g)  Procedures for submitting and processing applications. The director of community development shall receive, review and process applications for conditional use review in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Optional pre-application conference. A pre-application conference is suggested to all applicants to avoid unnecessary delays or confusion in the application and review processes. If requested, an informal meeting will be arranged among the applicant, community development department staff and other appropriate city staff to discuss the proposal and to review any preliminary plans the applicant may wish to present. 
(2)  Simultaneous comprehensive plan amendment application permitted. An application for conditional use approval may be accompanied by an application for an amendment to the text of the comprehensive plan or future land use map series, where such amendment is necessary for consideration of the conditional use. Approval of the conditional use must be consistent with the provisions of this chapter, the official zoning map, or must be conditioned upon the approval of any necessary amendments thereto and the approval of any necessary amendments to the text of the comprehensive plan or future land use map series. 
(3)  Simultaneous development code and official zoning map amendment application permitted. An application for conditional use approval may be accompanied by an application for an amendment to the text of this chapter or the official zoning map, where such amendment is necessary for the consideration of the conditional use. Approval of the conditional use shall be conditioned upon the approval of the necessary amendment to the text of this chapter or official zoning map. 
(4)  Application deadlines. The board of adjustment shall approve a schedule of conditional use review meetings and their corresponding application deadlines. 
(5)  Application fee. Applications shall include all appropriate processing fees as approved by the city commission. 
(6)  Application sufficiency. Within ten (10) days of receipt, the director of community development shall review an application to determine whether or not it contains sufficient information to commence processing. An owner or agent with an insufficient application shall be notified by the director of community development within this time period of those additional items required for processing and the dates by which they must be received in order for the application to be heard at the meeting for which the application was made. 
(7)  Application processing. Applications deemed sufficient by the director of community development shall be acted upon within forty-five (45) days of the date on which they were deemed sufficient. Failure of the director of community development to review a sufficient application within this period shall result in a recommendation of approval without conditions. 
(8)  Written recommendation. The director of community development shall provide a written recommendation to the board of adjustment and the findings upon which the recommendation is based, prior to the public hearing at which the application is to be considered by the board of adjustment. Failure of the director of community development to provide such a recommendation shall result in a recommendation of approval without conditions. 
(9)  Public inspection of records. Applications submitted pursuant to the provisions of this section may be reviewed by the public or by any interested citizen, according to the provisions of F.S. ch. 119. 
(h)  Application requirements. An application for conditional use review shall be made on forms provided by the director of community development for such purpose and shall include the following information and documentation, at a minimum: 
(1)  The name of the proposed development, if applicable. 
(2)  The location of the site by street address and Palm Beach County Property Appraiser Property Control Number. 
(3)  The name and signature of the legal owner of the development site, the nature or type of property ownership, and proof of ownership. 
(4)  The name of the agent acting on behalf of the legal owner and a written power of attorney granted to the agent regarding the development application, if applicable. 
(5)  The size of the parcel in acres and square feet. 
(6)  The specific nature of the intended uses of the development site. 
(7)  The square footage of all existing and proposed uses on the development site individually and in aggregate. 
(8)  The gross density and/or intensity in dwelling units per acre and/or floor area ratio (FAR). 
(9)  The zoning classification and future land use designation of the site as shown on the official zoning map and the adopted future land use map. 
(10)  The maximum amount of lot coverage by structures permitted in accordance with article IV, and the amount proposed. 
(11)  The maximum amount of impermeable surface area permitted in accordance with article IV, and the amount proposed. 
(12)  The minimum amount of landscaped area required in accordance with article IV, and the amount proposed. 
(13)  The minimum number of parking spaces required to be provided in accordance with article VII, and the number proposed to be provided on-site and/or off-site. 
(14)  The minimum number of trees and shrubs required to be provided in accordance with article IX, and the number proposed. 
(15)  A development schedule for all phases. 
(16)  A location map which delineates the project boundaries on the Palm Beach County Property Appraiser Maps. 
(17)  An aerial photograph of the site. 
(18)  A boundary and topographic survey, with contour lines at one (1) foot intervals, prepared, signed, and sealed by a registered Florida Land Surveyor which shall contain: 
a.  Acreage certification of all land above the elevation of mean high water (MHW); 
b.  The mean high water line, where applicable; 
c.  The location of all submerged lands, if applicable; and 
d.  A legal description. 
(19)  A site plan drawing prepared in accordance with the specifications in section 14-24(h)(19). 
(20)  A landscape plan prepared in accordance with the requirements of article IX. 
(21)  A written statement which demonstrates compliance with all of the conditional use standards applicable to the use pursuant to section 14-25(d). 
(22)  All information required elsewhere in this chapter. 
(23)  Any other information deemed necessary by the director of community department or board of adjustment for the reasonable review of the proposed development. 
(i)  Withdrawal, continuation or resubmittal of applications. 
(1)  Withdrawal of applications. 
a.  An application for a conditional use review may be withdrawn by an applicant or designated agent by giving written notice to the director of community development. An application may be withdrawn at a public hearing at the request of the applicant or designated agent. After the conclusion of the public hearing concerning an application, it may be withdrawn only upon a majority affirmative vote of the board of adjustment. An application withdrawn after it has been deemed sufficient shall not be entitled to a refund of the application fee. 
b.  An application for conditional use review may be amended prior to the publication of notice of public hearing. A request for amendment to the application shall be made in writing to the director of community development. A request of this nature shall require an additional amendment processing fee. Such applications for change shall be considered new applications and shall be considered at the next appropriate public hearing. 
(2)  Continuation of applications. Any application may be continued for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days at the request of the board of adjustment or director of community development if the authority requesting the continuation determines there is need for further study or information. 
(3)  Resubmittals. When a application for conditional use approval is denied by the board of adjustment, an application requesting approval of the same use on the same property shall not be resubmitted for a period of twelve (12) months following the date of denial. The board of adjustment may waive this provision if new circumstances or material changes affect the application. 
(j)  Public hearing. 
(1)  Required hearing. The board of adjustment shall hold a public hearing prior to acting upon an application for conditional use approval. 
(2)  Hearings schedule. The board of adjustment shall approve a schedule of hearing dates. 
(3)  Hearings agenda. At least fifteen (15) days prior to a scheduled hearing, the director of community development shall establish an agenda for the hearing which shall include all of those applications which have qualified to be heard in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(4)  Notice for hearings. Public notice shall be advertised in a newspaper with a general circulation in the City of Pahokee at least ten (10) days in advance of the public hearing. Written notice shall be provided by mail and postmarked at least fourteen (14) days in advance of the public hearing to all affected property owners and all persons who own real property within two hundred (200) feet of the property to be affected by the proposed action and whose addresses are known by reference to the latest approved ad valorem tax roll. Notice shall by provided by the director of community development. 
(5)  Content of notices. Required notices shall indicate the date, time and location of the public hearing, a description of the substance of the subject matter that will be discussed, a legal description of the properties directly affected, a statement indicating the action the board of adjustment is authorized to take, and a statement that the hearing may be continued from time to time as may be necessary. The advertisement shall also advise that interested parties may appear at the meeting and be heard regarding the proposed conditional use. 
(6)  Conduct of the hearing. All public hearings for conditional use approval shall be conducted in accordance with the following: 
a.  Rights of all persons. Any person may appear at a public hearing and submit documents, materials, and other written or oral testimony individually or as a representative of an organization. Persons who appear at a public hearing shall state their names, addresses, and the names and mailing addresses of any organizations they represent. The board of adjustment may place reasonable time restrictions on the presentation of testimony and the submission of documents and other materials. 
b.  Oaths. All persons presenting evidence at a public hearing shall swear or attest that their statements are true. During a public hearing, all parties shall have all of the following rights: 
1.  The right to be represented by counsel or by an agent. 
2.  The right to present witnesses. 
3.  The right to cross-examine all witnesses. 
4.  The right to examine and reproduce any documents produced at the hearing. 
Such rights shall be subject to the discretion of the board of adjustment and may be limited if unwarranted or undue delay will result or where no new materials or testimony will be presented. 
c.  Failure to appear. An applicant's failure to appear or to be represented at a scheduled hearing shall be sufficient cause to deny the request. 
(k)  Records of proceedings. 
(1)  Records maintained by city. All records of any proceedings of the board of adjustment shall be filed as a part of the public records of the city. 
(2)  Official minutes maintained. Minutes of proceedings shall be kept in which findings of fact, recommendations, and all determinations or decisions are to be recorded. These minutes shall be considered public records and maintained by the city. 
(3)  Use of recording devices. All proceedings of the board of adjustment shall be recorded electronically. Upon request and during normal business hours, any person may listen to the recordings of any proceedings. Transcriptions of proceedings may be obtained at the expense of the individual requesting such information. 
(4)  Application records maintained. Application forms and all information submitted with each application shall be maintained by the community development department. The transcript of testimony, the minutes of proceedings, all applications, exhibits, documents, materials, and papers submitted to the community development department or board of adjustment, written reports of any municipal employee or consultant, and the decision and report of the director of community development and board of adjustment constitute the record. Persons may examine the record during normal business hours and obtain copies at their expense. 
(l)  Action by board of adjustment. The board of adjustment shall render its decision within a reasonable period as provided in this section. All actions of the director of community development and board of adjustment shall include the recommendation or decision and the reason for the action. 
(1)  Notification. Notification of the final decision on an application shall be mailed to the applicant and all interested parties. A copy of the final decision shall be filed in the community development department. 
(2)  Reconsideration of action. An action may be reconsidered by the board of adjustment only upon a motion by a member who voted on the prevailing side of the original vote. The motion to reconsider may be seconded by any member. 
(3)  Notice. Action on a question pending reconsideration must follow the notice provisions in section 14-25(j). 
(m)  Status of conditional use review applications. 
(1)  Status if approved. 
a.  Unless the decision of the board of adjustment is appealed, a certificate of compliance, land clearing permit, building permit, sign permit, or certificate of occupancy may be issued providing all other applicable requirements of the comprehensive plan and this chapter are fulfilled. 
b.  All plans, specifications and statements submitted with the application for conditional use approval shall become, with any changes ordered by the board of adjustment, a part of the conditions of any approval. 
c.  Conditions and requirements stated as part of the approval of a conditional use shall be a continuing obligation of holders of approval. The director of community development shall make periodic inspections of conditional uses to determine continuing compliance with all required conditions. 
(2)  Status if denied. Unless the decision of the board of adjustment is appealed, the application is denied. When an application is denied, a certificate of compliance, land clearing permit, building permit, sign permit, or certificate of occupancy shall not be issued. 
(n)  Conditional use approval effective period extension, and termination. 
(1)  Effective period of conditional use approval. Conditional use approvals shall have an effective period of twelve (12) months from the date of approval during which period the recipient shall obtain building permits and commence construction of the approved conditional use. Failure to obtain a building permit and commence construction within twelve (12) months from approval or failure to complete construction under the effective period of the first building permit obtained plus one (1) extension thereto shall result in the termination of the conditional use approval. Upon termination, no building permits shall be extended and no additional building permits shall be issued. 
(2)  Extension of conditional use approval effective period. The board of adjustment may grant up to a six (6) month extension of the effective period of a conditional use approval upon a finding that all of the standards as provided in section 14-25(d) have been or will be met and that the use is consistent with the provisions of the comprehensive plan and this chapter. Only one (1) extension of each conditional use approval shall be permitted. 
(3)  Termination of conditional use approval. Conditional use approval may be withheld or terminated upon a determination by the director of community development of the following: 
a.  Failure to comply with conditions or requirements of the conditional use approval; or 
b.  Failure to correct violations of conditions or requirements of conditional use approval within thirty (30) days following issuance of a citation or notice of violation. 
(o)  Violations. Failure to abide by all restrictions, stipulations, and safeguards required by the board of adjustment for approval or to complete and maintain all approved elements or an approved site plan, including landscape, appearance, and other site development features or failure to maintain operations in accordance with any requirements, shall be a violation of this section subject to enforcement and penalty procedures of this chapter. 
(p)  Appeals. 
(1)  Filing an appeal. Any person aggrieved or affected by a decision of the board of adjustment may appeal to the city commission. Appeals shall be filed in writing with the director of community development within ten (10) days from the date of the decision by the board of adjustment and shall include the appropriate fee. 
(2)  Appeal proceedings. Within sixty (60) days following receipt of an appeal by the director of community development, the city commission shall hold a public hearing to consider the appeal. Within sixty (60) days after the public hearing, the city commission shall act upon the appeal. At the public hearing, representation shall be limited to the affected or aggrieved person or a duly authorized attorney licensed to practice law in the state of Florida. To over turn a decision by the board of adjustment shall require four (4) affirmative votes of the city commission. 
Sec. 14-26. - Variances. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. A variance is a departure from the dimensional or numerical requirements of the chapter where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not as a result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. A variance is authorized only for height, area, and size of structure or size of yards, lot coverage by structures, impervious surface area, or landscape requirements. Establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted due to the presence of nonconformities in the zoning district or adjoining zoning districts. 
(b)  Authorized variances. The board of adjustment shall have the authority to grant the following variances: 
(1)  A variance in the development standards of any district where there are unusual and practical difficulties in carrying out these provisions due to an irregular shape of the lot, topography, or other conditions. However, such variance shall not seriously affect any adjoining property or the general welfare. 
(2)  A variance when an owner can demonstrate that a strict application of the terms of this chapter relating to the construction or alteration of buildings or structures, the use of or relating to the use of the land will impose unusual and impractical difficulties, but not reduced financial value alone. 
(c)  Unauthorized variances. 
(1)  Use variance. A variance shall not be granted which would permit the establishment or expansion of a use in a district in which such use is not permitted by this chapter, or permit any use in a district expressly or by implication prohibited by the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Conditional uses. A variance shall not be granted which would permit the establishment or expansion of a conditional use in any zoning district. 
(3)  Nonconforming and noncomplying uses. Except as otherwise provided herein, a variance shall not be granted which relates in any way to a noncomplying or nonconforming use. 
(4)  Definitions. A variance shall not be granted which modifies any definitions contained within this chapter. 
(5)  Density. A variance shall not be granted which would result in an increase in density greater than that permitted in the applicable zoning district regulations. 
(6)  Consistency with comprehensive plan. A variance shall not be granted which would be inconsistent with the comprehensive plan. 
(7)  Parking. A variance from the parking requirements of this chapter shall not be granted. 
(d)  Variance review authority. The board of adjustment shall review each application for a variance and the findings and recommendations of the director of community development, and within sixty (60) days after the close of the public hearing shall do one (1) of the following: 
(1)  Grant the application in full. 
(2)  Deny the application in full. 
(3)  Grant the application in part. 
(4)  Grant a modification of the application in such form as the board of adjustment deems proper and consistent with the applicable criteria for variance approval and the comprehensive plan. 
(5)  Return the application to the director of community development with specific instructions as to additional information, evidence, or testimony desired in order to make a decision consistent with the criteria for variance approval and the comprehensive plan. 
(6)  Authorize withdrawal of the application without prejudice, allowing the application to be resubmitted prior to the twelve (12) month time limitation. 
(7)  Continue the consideration of the application to a special date. 
(8)  Establish such conditions as the board of adjustment deems necessary to ensure conformance with the criteria for granting variances. 
An affirmative vote of six (6) members of the board of adjustment shall be required to grant an application in full, in part, or with conditions. Failure to take action within the sixty (60) day period shall constitute approval of an application. 
(e)  Criteria for granting variances. As provided in F.S. ch. 166, to authorize any variance from the provisions of this chapter, the board of adjustment shall find all of the following: 
(1)  Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same zoning district. 
(2)  The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action of the applicant. 
(3)  Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied to other lands, buildings, or structures in the same zoning district. 
(4)  Literal interpretation of the provision of the regulations would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same zoning district and would work unnecessary and undue hardship on the applicant. 
(5)  The variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or structure. 
(6)  The grant of a variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of these regulations and the comprehensive plan. 
(7)  The variance will not be injurious to the area involved or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
(8)  The property cannot be put to a reasonable use which fully complies with the requirements of this code. 
(9)  Nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same zoning district and the permitted use of lands, structures, or buildings in other zoning districts shall not be considered grounds for the authorization of a variance. 
(10)  Financial hardship is not the only evidence of a hardship considered in the authorization of a variance. 
(f)  Determination if a variance is required. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of compliance, the director of community development shall determine whether or not a variance is required and permitted pursuant to the provisions of this section. If a variance is required, the applicant or applicant's agent shall be notified in writing and be permitted to withdraw the request. 
(g)  Restrictions, stipulations, and safeguards. The board of adjustment may make the authorization of a variance conditional upon such restrictions, stipulations and safeguards it deems necessary to insure its compliance with the purpose and intent of this chapter and its consistency with the comprehensive plan of the city. Violation of such conditions, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this section. Such conditions, restrictions, stipulations, and safeguards may include but are not limited to a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is sought shall begin or be completed or both, as well as provisions for extensions or renewals. 
(h)  Procedures for submitting and processing applications. The director of community development shall receive, review and process applications for variances in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Optional pre-application conference. A pre-application conference is suggested to all applicants to avoid unnecessary delays or confusion in the application and review processes. If requested, an informal meeting will be arranged among the applicant, community development department staff and other appropriate city staff to discuss the proposal and to review any preliminary plans the applicant may wish to present. 
(2)  Application deadlines. The board of adjustment shall approve a schedule of variance review meetings and their corresponding application deadlines. 
(3)  Application fee. Applications shall include all appropriate processing fees as approved by the city commission. 
(4)  Application sufficiency. Within ten (10) days of receipt, the director of community development shall review an application to determine whether or not it contains sufficient information to commence processing. An owner or agent with an insufficient application shall be notified by the director of community development within this time period of those additional items required for processing and the dates by which they must be received in order for the application to be heard at the meeting for which the application was made. 
(5)  Application processing. Applications deemed sufficient by the director of community development shall be acted upon within forty-five (45) days of the date on which they were deemed sufficient. Failure of the director of community development to review a sufficient application within this period shall result in a recommendation of approval without conditions. 
(6)  Written report. The director of community development shall provide a written recommendation to the board of adjustment and the findings upon which the recommendation is based, prior to the public hearing at which the application is to be considered by the board of adjustment. Failure of the director of community development to provide such a recommendation shall result in a recommendation of approval without conditions. 
(7)  Public inspection of records. Applications submitted pursuant to the provisions of this section may be reviewed by the public or by any interested citizen, according to the provisions of F.S. ch. 119. 
(i)  Application requirements. An application for a variance shall be made on forms provided by the director of community development for such purpose and shall include the following information and documentation. The director of community development may waive one (1) or more of these informational requirements if the information is deemed to be irrelevant in the review of a specific variance request. 
(1)  The name of the proposed development, if applicable. 
(2)  The location of the site by street address and Palm Beach County Property Appraiser Property Control Number. 
(3)  The name and signature of the legal owner of the development site, the nature or type of property ownership, and proof of ownership. 
(4)  The name and signature of the agent acting on behalf of the legal owner and a written power of attorney granted to the agent regarding the development application, if applicable. 
(5)  The size of the parcel in acres and square feet. 
(6)  The specific nature of the intended uses of the development site. 
(7)  The square footage of all existing and proposed uses on the development site individually and in aggregate. 
(8)  The gross density and/or intensity in dwelling units per acre and/or floor area ratio (FAR). 
(9)  The zoning classification and future land use designation of the site as shown on the official zoning map and the adopted future land use map. 
(10)  Identification of the specific provisions of this chapter from which a variance is sought. 
(11)  The nature and extent of the variance requested and an explanation of why it is necessary. 
(12)  The grounds relied upon to justify the proposed variance. 
(13)  A location map which delineates the project boundaries on the Palm Beach County Property Appraiser Maps. 
(14)  An aerial photograph of the site. 
(15)  A boundary and topographic survey, with contour lines at one (1) foot intervals, prepared, signed, and sealed by a registered Florida Land Surveyor which shall contain: 
a.  Acreage certification of all land above the elevation of mean high water (MHW); 
b.  The mean high water line, where applicable; 
c.  The location of all submerged lands, if applicable; and, 
d.  A legal description. 
(16)  A site plan drawing prepared in accordance with the specifications of section 14-24(h)(19). 
(17)  A landscape plan prepared in accordance with the requirements of article IX. 
(18)  All information required elsewhere in this chapter. 
(19)  Any other information deemed necessary by the director of community department or the board of adjustment for the reasonable review of the proposed variance. 
(j)  Withdrawal, continuation or resubmittal of applications. 
(1)  Withdrawal of applications. 
a.  An application for a variance may be withdrawn by an applicant or designated agent by giving written notice to the director of community development. An application may be withdrawn at a public hearing at the request of the applicant or designated agent. After the conclusion of the public hearing concerning an application, it may be withdrawn only upon a majority affirmative vote of the board of adjustment. An application withdrawn after it has been deemed sufficient shall not be entitled to a refund of the application fee. 
b.  An application for a variance as required by this section may be amended prior to the publication of notice of public hearing. A request for amendment to the application shall be made in writing to the director of community development. A request of this nature shall require an additional amendment processing fee. Such applications for change shall be considered new applications and shall be considered at the next appropriate public hearing. 
(2)  Continuation of applications. Any application may be continued for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days at the request of the board of adjustment or director of community development if the authority requesting the continuation determines there is need for further study or information. 
(3)  Resubmittals. When a application for a variance is denied by the board of adjustment, an application requesting a variance from the same requirement on the same property shall not be resubmitted for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of denial. The board of adjustment may waive this provision if new circumstances or material changes affect the application. 
(k)  Public hearing. 
(1)  Required hearing. The board of adjustment shall hold a public hearing prior to acting upon an application for a variance. 
(2)  Hearings schedule. The board of adjustment shall approve a schedule of hearing dates. 
(3)  Hearings agenda. At least fifteen (15) days prior to a scheduled hearing, the director of community development shall establish an agenda for the hearing which shall include all of those applications which have qualified to be heard in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(4)  Notice for hearings. Public notice shall be advertised in a newspaper with a general circulation in the City of Pahokee at least ten (10) days in advance of the public hearing. Written notice shall be provided by mail and postmarked at least fourteen (14) days in advance of the public hearing to all affected property owners and all persons who own real property within two hundred (200) feet of the property to be affected by the proposed action and whose addresses are known by reference to the latest approved ad valorem tax roll. Notice shall by provided by the director of community development. 
(5)  Content of notices. Required notices shall indicate the date, time and location of the public hearing, a description of the substance of the subject matter that will be discussed, a legal description of the properties directly affected, a statement indicating the action the board of adjustment is authorized to take, and a statement that the hearing may be continued from time to time as may be necessary. The advertisement shall also advise that interested parties may appear at the meeting and be heard regarding the proposed variance. 
(6)  Conduct of the hearing. All public hearings for variance review shall be conducted in accordance with the following: 
a.  Rights of all persons. Any person may appear at a public hearing and submit documents, materials, and other written or oral testimony individually or as a representative of an organization. Persons who appear at a public hearing shall state their names, addresses, and the names and mailing addresses of any organizations they represent. The board of adjustment may place reasonable time restrictions on the presentation of testimony and the submission of documents and other materials. 
b.  Oaths. All persons presenting evidence at a public hearing shall swear or attest that their statements are true. During a public hearing, all parties shall have all of the following rights: 
1.  The right to be represented by a counsel or by an agent. 
2.  The right to present witnesses. 
3.  The right to cross-examine all witnesses. 
4.  The right to examine and reproduce any documents produced at the hearing. 
Such rights shall be subject to the discretion of the board of adjustment and may be limited if unwarranted or undue delay will result or where no new materials or testimony will be presented. 
c.  Failure to appear. An applicant's failure to appear or to be represented at a scheduled hearing shall be sufficient cause to deny the request. 
(l)  Records of proceedings. 
(1)  Records maintained by city. All records of any proceedings of the board of adjustment shall be filed as a part of the public records of the city. 
(2)  Official minutes maintained. Minutes of proceedings shall be kept, in which findings of fact, recommendations, and all determinations or decisions are to be recorded. These minutes shall be considered public records and maintained by the city. 
(3)  Use of recording devices. All proceedings of the board of adjustment shall be recorded electronically. Upon request and during normal business hours, any person may listen to the recordings of any proceedings. Transcriptions of proceedings may be obtained at the expense of the individual requesting such information. 
(4)  Application records maintained. Application forms and all information submitted with each application shall be maintained by the community development department. The transcript of testimony, the minutes of proceedings, all applications, exhibits, documents, materials, and papers submitted to the community development department or the board of adjustment, written reports of any municipal employee or consultant, and the decision and report of the director of community development and board of adjustment shall constitute the record. Persons may examine the record during normal business hours and obtain copies at their expense. 
(M)  Action by the board of adjustment. The board of adjustment shall render its decision within a reasonable period as provided in this section. All actions of the director of community development and the board of adjustment shall include the recommendation or decision and the reason for the action. 
(1)  Notification. Notification of the final decision on an application shall be mailed to the applicant and all interested parties. A copy of the final decision shall be filed, in the community development department. 
(2)  Reconsideration of action. An action may be reconsidered by the board of adjustment only upon a motion by a member who voted on the prevailing side of the original vote. The motion to reconsider may be seconded by any member. 
(3)  Notice. Action on a question pending reconsideration must follow the notice provisions in section 14-26(k). 
(n)  Status of variance applications. 
(1)  Status if approved. 
a.  Unless the decision of the board of adjustment is appealed, a certificate of compliance, land clearing permit, building permit, sign permit, or certificate of occupancy may be issued providing all other applicable requirements of the comprehensive plan and this chapter are fulfilled. 
b.  All plans, specifications and statements submitted with the application for a variance shall become, with any changes ordered by the board of adjustment, a part of the conditions of any approval. 
c.  Conditions and requirements stated as part of the approval of a variance shall be a continuing obligation of holders of approval. 
(2)  Status if denied. Unless the decision of the board of adjustment is appealed, the application is denied. When an application is denied, a certificate of compliance, land clearing permit, building permit, sign permit, or certificate of occupancy shall not be issued. 
(o)  Variance approval effective period and extensions. 
(1)  Effective period of a variance approval. Variance approvals shall have an effective period of twelve (12) months from the date of approval during which period the recipient shall obtain building permits and commence construction. Failure to obtain a building permit and commence construction within twelve (12) months from approval, or failure to complete construction under the effective period of the first building permit obtained plus one (1) extension thereto shall result in the termination of the variance approval. Upon termination, no building permits shall be extended and no additional building permits shall be issued. 
(2)  Extension of variance approval effective period. The board of adjustment may grant up to a six (6) month extension of the effective period of a variance approval upon a finding that all of the criteria as provided in section 14-26(e) have been or will be met and that the use is consistent with the provisions of the comprehensive plan and this chapter. Only one (1) extension of each variance approval shall be permitted. 
(p)  Violations. Failure to abide by all restrictions, stipulations, and safeguards required by the board of adjustment for approval of a variance shall be a violation of this section subject to enforcement and penalty procedures of this chapter. 
(q)  Appeals. 
(1)  Filing an appeal. Any person aggrieved or affected by a decision of the board of adjustment may appeal to the city commission. Appeals shall be filed in writing with the director of community development within ten (10) days from the date of the decision by the board of adjustment and shall include the appropriate fee. 
(2)  Appeal proceedings. Within sixty (60) days following receipt of an appeal by the director of community development, the city commission shall hold a public hearing to consider the appeal. Within sixty (60) days after the public hearing, the city commission shall act upon the appeal. At the public hearing, representation shall be limited to the affected or aggrieved person or a duly authorized attorney licensed to practice law in the state of Florida. To over turn a decision by the board of adjustment shall require four (4) affirmative votes of the city commission. 
Sec. 14-27. - Chapter amendments and rezonings. 
(a)  Intent. The purpose of this section is to provide a means for changing the text of this chapter or the official zoning map. It is not intended to relieve particular hardships or confer special privileges or rights on any person. 
(b)  Persons entitled to propose amendments. 
(1)  Chapter text. Amendments to the text of this chapter may be proposed by the city commission, the planning board, or any other interested party. 
(2)  Official zoning map. Amendments to the official zoning map may be proposed by the city commission, the planning board, or over fifty (50) percent of the owners of the real property to be directly affected by the proposed amendment. 
(c)  Review authority. 
(1)  Planning board. The planning board shall review each application for an amendment to the text of this chapter or the official zoning map, review the findings of the director of community development, and within sixty (60) days after the close of the public hearing shall recommend that the city commission do one (1) of the following: 
a.  Grant the application in full; 
b.  Deny the application in full; 
c.  Grant the application in part; 
d.  Grant a modification of the application in such form as the planning board deems proper. However, if such modification involves a rezoning of a greater amount of land or permits a more intensive use of land than designated in the advertisement for the public hearing, the planning board then shall hold an additional public hearing on its recommended modification of the proposed amendment; 
e.  Return the application to the director of community development with specific instructions as to additional information, evidence, or testimony desired in order to make a decision consistent with amendment review standards and the comprehensive plan; 
f.  Authorize withdrawal of the application without prejudice, allowing the application to be resubmitted prior to the twelve (12) month time limitation; or 
g.  Continue the consideration of the application to a special date. 
Failure to take action within the sixty (60) day period shall constitute approval of an application. 
(2)  City commission. The city commission shall review each application for an amendment to the text of this chapter or the official zoning map, review the findings of the director of community development and the planning board, and within sixty (60) days after the close of the second public hearing shall do one (1) of the following: 
a.  Grant the application in full; 
b.  Deny the application in full; 
c.  Grant the application in part; 
d.  Grant a modification of the application in such form as the city commission deems proper. However, if such modification involves a rezoning of a greater amount of land or permits a more intensive use of land than designated in the advertisement for the public hearing, the city commission then shall request the director of community development to process a new application which includes the modification and authorize the withdraw of the application under consideration without prejudice; 
e.  Return the application to the director of community development with specific instructions as to additional information, evidence, or testimony desired in order to make a decision consistent with amendment review standards and the comprehensive plan; 
f.  Authorize withdrawal of the application without prejudice, allowing the application to be resubmitted prior to the twelve (12) month time limitation; or 
g.  Continue the consideration of the application to a special date. 
Failure to take action within the sixty (60) day period shall constitute approval of an application. 
(d)  Amendment review standards. In reviewing a proposed amendment to the text of this chapter or the Official Map, the city commission and planning board shall consider all of the following: 
(1)  Whether the proposed amendment is consistent with all elements of the City of Pahokee comprehensive plan. 
(2)  Whether there exist changed conditions which require an amendment. 
(3)  Whether the proposed amendment is in conformance with any applicable portions of this chapter. 
(4)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment is inconsistent with existing and proposed land uses. 
(5)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment would exceed the capacity of public facilities, including but not limited to transportation, sanitary sewerage, solid waste, drainage, potable water, parks, police, fire, emergency medical facilities, and schools. 
(6)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment would result in significantly adverse impacts on the natural environment. 
(7)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment would adversely affect property values in the area. 
(8)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment would result in an orderly and logical development pattern, and the specific identification of any negative effects on such pattern. 
(9)  Whether the proposed amendment would be in conflict with the public interest, and is in harmony with the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(10)  Any other matters that may be deemed appropriate by the city commission or planning board in review and consideration of the proposed amendment. 
(e)  Proposal by the city commission or the planning board. Proposals for an amendment to the text of this chapter of the official zoning map by the city commission or planning board shall be transmitted to the director of community development for application. Any interested party may request that the city commission or planning board initiate such an application. 
(f)  Proposals by others. Any person desiring to apply to the city commission for an amendment to the text of this chapter or the official zoning map shall submit an application to the director of community development in accordance with the provisions of subsection (g) below. 
(g)  Procedures for submitting and processing applications. The director of community development shall receive, review and process applications for amendments to the text of this chapter and the official zoning map in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Optional pre-application conference. A pre-application conference is suggested to all applicants to avoid unnecessary delays or confusion in the application and review processes. If requested, an informal meeting will be arranged among the applicant, community development department staff and other appropriate city staff to discuss the proposal and to review any preliminary plans the applicant may wish to present. 
(2)  Simultaneous comprehensive plan amendment application permitted. An application for an amendment to the text of this chapter or the official zoning map may be accompanied by an application for an amendment to the comprehensive plan, where such amendment to the comprehensive plan is necessary for the consideration of the amendment to the text of this chapter or official zoning map. Approval of the amendment to the text of this code or official zoning map must be conditioned upon the approval of the amendment to the comprehensive plan. 
(3)  Simultaneous conditional use application permitted. An application for an amendment to the text of this chapter or the official zoning map may be accompanied by an application for a conditional use permit, where such amendment is necessary for the consideration of the conditional use. Approval of the conditional use must be conditioned upon the approval of the amendment to the text of this chapter or official zoning map. 
(4)  Application deadlines. The planning board shall approve a schedule of amendment review meetings and their corresponding application deadlines. 
(5)  Application fee. Applications shall include all appropriate processing fees as approved by the city commission. 
(6)  Application sufficiency. Within ten (10) days of receipt, the director of community development shall review an application to determine whether or not it contains sufficient information to commence processing. An owner or agent with an insufficient application shall be notified by the director of community development within this time period of those additional items required for processing and the dates by which they must be received in order for the application to be heard at the meeting for which the application was made. 
(7)  Application processing. Applications deemed sufficient by the director of community development shall be acted upon by the planning board within sixty (60) days of the date on which they were deemed sufficient. 
(8)  Written recommendation. The director of community development shall provide a written recommendation to the planning board and the findings upon which the recommendation is based, prior to the public hearing at which the application is to be considered by the planning board. Failure of the director of community development to provide such a recommendation shall result in a recommendation of approval without conditions. 
(9)  Public inspection of records. Applications submitted pursuant to the provisions of this section may be reviewed by the public or by any interested citizen, according to the provisions of F.S. ch. 119. 
(h)  Application requirements. An application for an amendment to the text of this chapter or the official zoning map shall be made on forms provided by the director of community development for such purpose and shall include the following information and documentation, at a minimum: 
(1)  The applicant's name, address and signature. 
(2)  The name, address and signature of the agent acting on behalf of the applicant and a written power of attorney granted to the agent regarding the application, if applicable. 
(3)  If the application requests an amendment to the text of this chapter, the precise wording of any proposed amendment to the text of this chapter shall be provided, including an identification of those existing portions of the text to be revised, replaced, or omitted. 
(4)  If the application requests an amendment to the official zoning map, the applicant shall include: 
a.  The location of the property proposed to be rezoned by street address, Palm Beach County Property Appraiser Property Control Number, and legal description; 
b.  The applicant's interest in the subject property; 
c.  The property owner's name and address, if different than the applicant, and the signature of over fifty (50) percent of the owners of the real property to be rezoned by the proposed amendment, giving their consent to the filing of application, if applicable; 
d.  The current zoning classification and future land use designation of the subject property as shown on the official zoning map and the adopted future land use map; and, 
e.  The size of the property proposed to be rezoned in acres and square feet. 
(5)  A statement describing any changed conditions that would justify an amendment. 
(6)  A statement describing why there is a need for the proposed amendment. 
(7)  A statement describing whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment is consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
(8)  A statement outlining whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment: 
a.  Is compatible with existing land uses; 
b.  Affects the capacities and levels of service of public facilities, including but not limited to transportation, sanitary sewerage, solid waste, drainage, potable water, parks, police, fire, emergency medical facilities, and schools; 
c.  Affects the natural environment; and, 
d.  Will result in an orderly and logical development pattern. 
(9)  A location map which delineates the boundaries of the area to be rezoned on the Palm Beach County Property Appraiser Maps. 
(10)  An aerial photograph of the subject area. 
(11)  Any other information deemed necessary by the director of community department or review bodies for the reasonable review of the proposed amendment. 
(i)  Withdrawal, continuation or resubmittal of applications. 
(1)  Withdrawal of applications. 
a.  An application for an amendment to the text of this chapter or the official zoning map may be withdrawn by an applicant or designated agent by giving written notice to the director of community development. An application may be withdrawn at a public hearing at the request of the applicant or designated agent. After the conclusion of the public hearing concerning an application, it may be withdrawn only upon a majority affirmative vote of the city commission or planning board. An application withdrawn after it has been deemed sufficient shall not be entitled to a refund of the application fee. 
b.  An application for an amendment to the text of this chapter or the official zoning map may be amended prior to the publication of notice of public hearing. A request for amendment to the application shall be made in writing to the director of community development. A request of this nature shall require an additional amendment processing fee. Such applications for change shall be considered new applications and shall be considered at the next appropriate public hearing. 
(2)  Continuation of applications. Any application may be continued for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days at the request of the city commission, planning board or director of community development if the authority requesting the continuation determines there is need for further study or information. 
(3)  Resubmittals. When a application for an amendment to the text of this chapter or the official zoning map is denied by the city commission, an application requesting the same text amendment or same amendment to the official zoning map shall not be resubmitted for a period of twelve (12) months following the date of denial of the previous request. An application for rezoning the same parcel of land also shall not be resubmitted for twelve (12) months following the date of final action of the previous request. The review authority may waive these provisions if new circumstances or material changes affect the application. 
(j)  Planning board public hearing. 
(1)  Required hearing. The planning board shall advertise and hold a public hearing prior to making a recommendation to the city commission concerning an application for an amendment to the text of this chapter or the official zoning map. 
(2)  Notice for hearings. 
a.  Public notice for amendments to the text of this chapter or the official zoning map shall be advertised in a newspaper with a general paid circulation in the City of Pahokee at least ten (10) days in advance of the public hearing. Written notice shall be provided by mail and postmarked at least fourteen (14) days in advance of the public hearing to all affected property owners and all persons who own real property within two hundred (200) feet of the property to be affected by the proposed action and whose addresses are known by reference to the latest approved ad valorem tax roll. Notice shall by provided by the director of community development. 
b.  Required notices shall indicate the date, time and location of the public hearing, a description of the substance of the subject matter that will be discussed, a legal description of the properties directly affected, a statement indicating the action the planning board is authorized to take, and a statement that the hearing may be continued from time to time as may be necessary. The notice shall also advise that interested parties may appear at the meeting and be heard regarding the proposed amendment or rezoning. 
(3)  Conduct of the hearing. All public hearings for amendments to the text of this chapter or the official zoning map shall be conducted in accordance with the following: 
a.  Rights of all persons. Any person may appear at a public hearing and submit documents, materials, and other written or oral testimony individually or as a representative of an organization. Persons who appear at a public hearing shall state their names, addresses, and the names and mailing addresses of any organizations they represent. The planning board may place reasonable time restrictions on the presentation of testimony and the submission of documents and other materials. 
b.  Oaths. All persons presenting evidence at a public hearing shall swear or attest that their statements are true. During a public hearing, all parties shall have all of the following rights: 
1.  The right to be represented by counsel or by an agent. 
2.  The right to present witnesses. 
3.  The right to cross-examine all witnesses. 
4.  The right to examine and reproduce any documents produced at the hearing. 
Such rights shall be subject to the discretion of the planning board may be limited if unwarranted or undue delay will result or where no new materials or testimony will be presented. 
c.  Failure to appear. An applicant's failure to appear or to be represented at a scheduled hearing shall be sufficient cause to recommend denial of the request. 
(k)  City commission public hearing. 
(1)  Amendments and rezonings affecting less than five (5) percent of city land area. Following action by the planning board, the city commission shall, in accordance with F.S. § 166.041, advertise and hold a public hearing prior to acting upon an application for an amendment to the text of this chapter or the official zoning map which affects less than five (5) percent of the total land area of the City of Pahokee. Notice shall be provided by the city clerk as follows: 
a.  Public notice shall be advertised in a newspaper with a general paid circulation in the City of Pahokee at least thirty (30) days in advance of the public hearing. Written notice shall be provided by mail and postmarked at least thirty (30) days in advance of the public hearing to all affected property owners and all persons who own real property within two hundred (200) feet of the property to be affected by the proposed action and whose addresses are known by reference to the latest approved ad valorem tax roll. Notice shall by provided by the city clerk. 
b.  Required notices shall indicate the date, time and location of the public hearing, a description of the substance of the subject matter that will be discussed, a legal description of the properties directly affected, a statement indicating the action the city commission is authorized to take, and a statement that the hearing may be continued from time to time as may be necessary. The notice shall also advise that interested parties may appear at the meeting and be heard regarding the proposed amendment or rezoning. 
(2)  Amendments and rezonings affecting five (5) percent or more of city land area. Following action by the planning board, the city commission shall, in accordance with F.S. § 166.041, advertise and hold two (2) public hearings prior to acting upon an amendment to the text of this chapter or the official zoning map which affects five (5) percent or more of the total land area of the City of Pahokee. Both hearings shall be held after 5:00 p.m. on a weekday, and the first shall be held approximately seven (7) days after the day that the first advertisement is published. The second hearing shall be held approximately two (2) weeks after the first hearing and shall be advertised approximately five (5) days prior to the public hearing. The day, time, and place at which the second public hearing will be held shall be announced at the first public hearing. Written notice to affected property owners is not required. Notice shall be provided by the city clerk as follows. 
a.  The required advertisements shall be no less than one-quarter (1/4) page in a standard size or a tabloid size newspaper, and the headline in the advertisement shall be in a type no smaller than eighteen (18) point. The advertisement shall not be placed in that portion of a newspaper where legal notices and classified advertisements appear. The advertisements shall be published in a newspaper of general paid circulation in the city and of general interest and readership in the city, not one (1) of limited subject matter, pursuant to F.S. ch. 50. It is the intent that, whenever possible, the advertisements appear in a newspaper that is published at least five (5) days a week unless the only newspaper in the city is published less than five (5) days a week. 
1.  The advertisement shall be in the following form: 
NOTICE OF ZONING 
(PERMITTED USE) 
CHANGE 
The City of Pahokee proposes to rezone (change the permitted use of) the land within the area shown in the map in this advertisement. 
A public hearing on the rezoning will be held on (date and time at (meeting place. 
2.  The advertisement shall also contain a geographic location map which clearly indicates the area covered by the proposed ordinance. The map shall include major street names as a means of identification of the area. 
b.  In lieu of publishing the advertisement set out subsection (k)(2)a. above, the city may mail a notice to each person owning real property within the area covered by the ordinance. Such notice shall clearly explain the proposed ordinance and shall notify the person of the date, time and location of both public hearings on the proposed ordinance. 
(3)  Conduct of the hearing. All public hearings for amendments to the text of this chapter or the official zoning map shall be conducted in accordance with the following: 
a.  Rights of all persons. Any person may appear at a public hearing and submit documents, materials, and other written or oral testimony individually or as a representative of an organization. Persons who appear at a public hearing shall state their names, addresses, and the names and mailing addresses of any organizations they represent. The city commission may place reasonable time restrictions on the presentation of testimony and the submission of documents and other materials. 
b.  Oaths. All persons presenting evidence at a public hearing shall swear or attest that their statements are true. During a public hearing, all parties shall have all of the following rights: 
1.  The right to be represented by counsel or by an agent. 
2.  The right to present witnesses. 
3.  The right to cross-examine all witnesses. 
4.  The right to examine and reproduce any documents produced at the hearing. 
Such rights shall be subject to the discretion of the city commission and may be limited if unwarranted or undue delay will result or where no new materials or testimony will be presented. 
c.  Failure to appear. An applicant's failure to appear or to be represented at a scheduled hearing shall be sufficient cause to deny the request. 
(l)  Records of proceedings. 
(1)  Records maintained by city. All records of any proceedings of the city commission or planning board shall be filed as a part of the public records of the city. 
(2)  Official minutes maintained. Minutes of proceedings shall be kept in which findings of fact, recommendations, and all determinations or decisions are to be recorded. These minutes shall be considered public records and maintained by the city. 
(3)  Use of recording devices. All proceedings of the city commission and the planning board shall be recorded electronically. Upon request and during normal business hours, any person may listen to the recordings of any proceedings. Transcriptions of proceedings may be obtained at the expense of the individual requesting such information. 
(4)  Application records maintained. Application forms and all information submitted with each application shall be maintained by the community development department. The transcript of testimony, the minutes of proceedings, all applications, exhibits, documents, materials, and papers submitted to a reviewing or decision-making body, written reports of any municipal employee or consultant, and the decision and report of the reviewing or decision-making body shall constitute the record. Persons may examine the record during normal business hours and obtain copies at their expense. 
(m)  Action by decision making authority. All decision-making authorities shall render their decisions within a reasonable period as provided in this section. All actions of any reviewing or decision-making authority shall include the recommendation or decision and the reason for the action. 
(1)  Notification. Notification of the final decision on an application shall be mailed to the applicant and all interested parties. A copy of the final decision shall be filed, in the community development department. 
(n)  Reconsideration of action. 
(1)  City commission. An action may be reconsidered by the city commission under either of the following circumstances: 
a.  If only four (4) members vote on a decision and the vote is tied, a motion to reconsider may be made by any member of the commission at the next meeting at which all five (5) commissioners are present; or, 
b.  On any decision other than that described in subsection (n)(1)a. above, a motion to reconsider may be made only by a commission member who voted on the prevailing side. 
(2)  Planning board. An action may be reconsidered by the planning board only upon a motion by a member who voted on the prevailing side of the original vote. The motion must be made at the same or the next regular meeting. 
(3)  Notice. Action on a question pending reconsideration must follow the notice provisions in this section. 
(o)  Protest provisions. When an amendment to this chapter or the official zoning map is opposed by a petition containing the signatures of property owners controlling twenty (20) percent of the land area affected by the proposed amendment or within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed amendment, approval of the change requires the affirmative vote of four-fifths (?) of the city commission. 
Sec. 14-28. - Comprehensive plan amendments. 
(a)  Intent. The purpose of this section is to provide a means for changing the text of the comprehensive plan and the future land use map series in accordance with F.S. § 163.3187. It is not intended to relieve particular hardships or confer special privileges or rights on any person. 
(b)  Persons entitled to propose amendments. 
(1)  Plan text. Amendments to the text of the comprehensive plan may be proposed by the city commission, the planning board, or any other interested party. 
(2)  Future land use map series. Amendments to the future land use map series may be proposed by the city commission, the planning board, or over fifty (50) percent of the owners of the real property to be directly affected by the proposed amendment. 
(c)  Review authority. 
(1)  Planning board. The planning board shall review each application for an amendment to the text of the comprehensive plan or future land use map series, review the findings of the director of community development, and within sixty (60) days after the close of the public hearing shall recommend that the city commission do one (1) of the following: 
a.  Grant the application in full; 
b.  Deny the application in full; 
c.  Grant the application in part; 
d.  Grant a modification of the application in such form as the planning board deems proper. However, if such modification involves a change in land use for a greater amount of land or a more intensive use than designated in the advertisement for the public hearing, the planning board then shall hold an additional public hearing on its recommended modification of the proposed amendment; 
e.  Return the application to the director of community development with specific instructions as to additional information, evidence, or testimony desired in order to make a decision consistent with amendment review standards; 
f.  Authorize withdrawal of the application without prejudice, allowing the application to be resubmitted prior to the twelve (12) month time limitation; or 
g.  Continue the consideration of the application to a special date. 
Failure to take action within the sixty (60) day period shall constitute approval of an application. 
(2)  City commission. The city commission shall review each application for an amendment to the text of the comprehensive plan or the future land use map series, review the findings of the director of community development and the planning board, and within sixty (60) days after the close of the second public hearing shall do one (1) of the following: 
a.  Grant the application in full; 
b.  Deny the application in full; 
c.  Grant the application in part; 
d.  Grant a modification of the application in such form as the city commission deems proper. However, if such modification involves a change in land use for a greater amount of land or a more intensive use than designated in the advertisement for the public hearing, the city commission shall request the director of community development to process a new application which includes the modification and authorize the withdraw of the application under consideration without prejudice; 
e.  Return the application to the director of community development with specific instructions as to additional information, evidence, or testimony desired in order to make a decision consistent with amendment review standards; 
f.  Authorize withdrawal of the application without prejudice, allowing the application to be resubmitted prior to the twelve (12) month time limitation; or 
g.  Continue the consideration of the application to a special date. 
Failure to action within the sixty (60) day period shall constitute denial of an application. 
(d)  Statutory amendment requirements. All amendments to the text of the comprehensive plan or future land use map series shall be consistent with F.S. § 163.3187. 
(e)  Amendment review standards. In reviewing a proposed amendment to the text of the comprehensive plan or future land use map series, the city commission and planning board shall consider all of the following: 
(1)  Whether the proposed amendment is consistent with all other elements of the city comprehensive plan. 
(2)  Whether there exist changed conditions which require an amendment. 
(3)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment is inconsistent with existing and proposed land uses. 
(4)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment would exceed the capacity of public facilities, including but not limited to transportation, sanitary sewerage, solid waste, drainage, potable water, parks, police, fire, emergency medical facilities, and schools. 
(5)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment would result in significantly adverse impacts on the natural environment. 
(6)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment would adversely affect property values in the area. 
(7)  Whether and the extent to which the proposed amendment would result in an orderly and logical development pattern, and the specific identification of any negative effects on such pattern. 
(8)  Whether the proposed amendment would be in conflict with the public interest, and is in harmony with the purpose and intent of the comprehensive plan. 
(9)  Whether the amendment is to be processed as a small scale amendment pursuant to F.S. § 163.3187(1)(c). 
(10)  Any other matters that may be deemed appropriate by the city commission or planning board in review and consideration of the proposed amendment. 
(f)  Proposal by the city commission or the planning board. Proposals for an amendment to the text of the comprehensive plan or the future land use map series by the city commission or planning board shall be transmitted to the director of community development for application. Any interested party may request that the city commission or planning board initiate such an application. 
(g)  Proposals by others. Any person desiring to apply to the city commission for an amendment to the text of the comprehensive plan or future land use map series shall submit an application to the director of community development in accordance with the provisions of subsection (h) below. 
(h)  Procedures for submitting and processing applications. The director of community development shall receive, review and process applications for amendments to the text of the comprehensive plan and the future land use map series in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Optional pre-application conference. A pre-application conference is suggested to all applicants to avoid unnecessary delays or confusion in the application and review processes. If requested, an informal meeting will be arranged among the applicant, community development department staff and other appropriate city staff to discuss the proposal and to review any preliminary plans the applicant may wish to present. 
(2)  Simultaneous development code and official zoning map amendment application permitted. An application for an amendment to the text of the comprehensive plan or the future land use map series may be accompanied by an application for an amendment to this chapter or the official zoning map, where such amendment to the text of the comprehensive plan or future land use map series is necessary for the consideration of the amendment to the text of this chapter or official zoning map. Approval of the amendment to the text of this chapter or official zoning map must be conditioned upon the approval of the amendment to the text of the comprehensive plan or future land use map series. 
(3)  Simultaneous conditional use application permitted. An application for an amendment to the text of the comprehensive plan or future land use map series may be accompanied by an application for a conditional use permit, where such change is necessary for the consideration of the conditional use. Approval of the conditional use must be consistent with the provisions of this chapter, the official zoning map, or must be conditioned upon the approval of any necessary amendments thereto and the approval of any necessary amendments to the text of the comprehensive plan or future land use map series. 
(4)  Application deadlines. The planning board shall approve a schedule of amendment review meetings and their corresponding application deadlines. 
(5)  Application fee. Applications shall include all appropriate processing fees as approved by the city commission. 
(6)  Application sufficiency. Within twenty (20) days of receipt, the director of community development shall review an application to determine whether or not it contains sufficient information to commence processing. An owner or agent with an insufficient application shall be notified by the director of community development within this time period of those additional items required for processing and the dates by which they must be received in order for the application to be heard at the meeting for which the application was made. 
(7)  Application processing. Applications deemed sufficient by the director of community development shall be acted upon by the planning board within sixty (60) days of the date on which they were deemed sufficient. 
(8)  Written recommendation. The director of community development shall provide a written recommendation to the planning board and the findings upon which the recommendation is based, prior to the public hearing at which the application is to be considered by the planning board. Failure of the director of community development to provide such a recommendation shall result in a recommendation of approval without conditions. 
(9)  Public inspection of records. Applications submitted pursuant to the provisions of this section may be reviewed by the public or by any interested citizen, according to the provisions of F.S. ch. 119. 
(i)  Application requirements. An application for an amendment to the text of the comprehensive plan or future land use map series shall be made on forms provided by the director of community development for such purpose and shall include the following information and documentation, at a minimum: 
(1)  The applicant's name, address, and signature. 
(2)  The name, address and signature of the agent acting on behalf of the applicant and a written proof of any power of attorney granted to the agent regarding the application, if applicable. 
(3)  If the application requests an amendment to the text of the comprehensive plan, the precise wording of any proposed amendment to the text of the comprehensive plan shall be provided, including an identification of those existing portions of the text to be revised, replaced, or omitted. 
(4)  If the application requests an amendment to the future land use map series, the applicant shall include: 
a.  The location of the property proposed for a change in land use by street address, Palm Beach County Property Appraiser Property Control Number, and legal description; 
b.  The applicant's interest in the subject property; 
c.  The property owner's name and address, if different than the applicant, and the signature of over fifty (50) percent of the owners of the real property to be directly effected by the proposed amendment, giving their consent to the filing of application, if applicable; 
d.  The current zoning classification and future land use designation of the subject property as shown on the official zoning map and the adopted future land use map; and, 
e.  The size of the property in acres and square feet. 
(5)  A statement describing any changed conditions that would justify an amendment. 
(6)  A statement describing why there is a need for the proposed amendment. 
(7)  A statement describing whether and how the proposed amendment is consistent with the rest of the comprehensive plan. 
(8)  A statement outlining the extent to which the proposed amendment: 
a.  Is compatible with existing land uses; 
b.  Affects the capacities and levels of service of public facilities, including but not limited to transportation, sanitary sewerage, solid waste, drainage, potable water, parks, police, fire, emergency medical facilities, and schools; 
c.  Affects the natural environment; and, 
d.  Will result in an orderly and logical development pattern. 
(9)  A statement indicating whether the amendment is to be processed as a small scale amendment pursuant to F.S. § 163.3187(1)(c). 
(10)  A location map which delineates the boundaries of the area proposed to receive a change in land use on the Palm Beach County Property Appraiser Maps. 
(11)  An aerial photograph of the subject area. 
(12)  Any other information deemed necessary by the director of community department or review body for the reasonable review of the proposed amendment. 
(j)  Withdrawal, continuation or resubmittal of applications. 
(1)  Withdrawal of applications. 
a.  An application for an amendment to the text of the comprehensive plan or future land use map series may be withdrawn by an applicant or designated agent by giving written notice to the director of community development. An application may be withdrawn at a public hearing at the request of the applicant or designated agent. After the conclusion of the public hearing concerning an application, it may be withdrawn only upon a majority affirmative vote of the city commission or planning board. An application withdrawn after it has been deemed sufficient shall not be entitled to a refund of the application fee. 
b.  An application for an amendment to the text of the comprehensive plan or future land use map series may be amended prior to the publication of notice of public hearing. A request for amendment to the application shall be made in writing to the director of community development. A request of this nature shall require an additional amendment processing fee. Such applications for change shall be considered new applications and shall be considered at the next appropriate public hearing. 
(2)  Continuation of applications. Any application may be continued for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days at the request of the city commission, planning board or director of community development if the authority requesting the continuation determines there is need for further study or information. 
(3)  Resubmittals. When a application for an amendment to the text of the comprehensive plan or future land use map series is denied by the city commission, an application requesting the same text amendment or same amendment to the future land use map series shall not be resubmitted for a period of twelve (12) months following the date of denial of the previous request. An application for a change in land use for the same parcel of land also shall not be resubmitted for twelve (12) months following the date of final action of the previous request. The review authority may waive these provisions if new circumstances or material changes affect the application; however, the same parcel of property may not be the subject of a small scale amendment within a twelve (12) month period regardless of any new circumstances. 
(k)  Planning board public hearing. 
(1)  Required hearing. The planning board shall advertise and hold a public hearing prior to making a recommendation to the city commission concerning an application for an amendment to the text of the comprehensive plan or future land use map series. 
(2)  Notice for hearings. Public notice shall be given pursuant to F.S. § 163.3171, and shall not be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation with the first publication not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing and the second to be at least five (5) days prior to the hearing. Notice shall be provided by the director of community development. 
(3)  Content of notices. Required notices shall indicate the nature of the request, and the date, time and location of the public hearing for the consideration of the request. 
(4)  Conduct of the hearing. All public hearings for amendments to the text of the comprehensive plan or future land use map series shall be conducted in accordance with the following: 
a.  Rights of all persons. Any person may appear at a public hearing and submit documents, materials, and other written or oral testimony individually or as a representative of an organization. Persons who appear at a public hearing shall state their names, addresses, and the names and mailing addresses of any organizations they represent. The planning board may place reasonable time restrictions on the presentation of testimony and the submission of documents and other materials. 
b.  Oaths. All persons presenting evidence at a public hearing shall swear or attest that their statements are true. During a public hearing, all parties shall have all of the following rights: 
1.  The right to be represented by counsel or by an agent. 
2.  The right to present witnesses. 
4.  The right to cross-examine all witnesses. 
5.  The right to examine and reproduce any documents produced at the hearing. 
Such rights shall be subject to the discretion of the planning board conducting the hearing and may be limited if unwarranted or undue delay will result or where no new materials or testimony will be presented. 
c.  Failure to appear. An applicant's failure to appear or to be represented at a scheduled hearing shall be sufficient cause to recommend denial of the request. 
(l)  City commission public hearings. 
(1)  Required hearings. Following action by the planning board, the city commission shall, in accordance with F.S. § 163.3187, hold two (2) public hearings prior to taking final action on an application for an amendment to the text of the comprehensive plan or future land use map series. 
(2)  Hearings schedule. 
a.  The first public hearing shall be held at the transmittal stage pursuant to F.S. § 163.3184(3). It shall be held on a weekday approximately seven (7) days after the day that the first advertisement is published. The intention to hold and advertise a second public hearing shall be announced at the first public hearing. 
b.  The second public hearing shall be held at the adoption stage pursuant to F.S> § 163.3184(7). It shall be held on a weekday approximately five (5) days after the day that the second advertisement is published. 
(3)  Content of notices. 
a.  If the proposed amendment changes the permitted uses of land or changes land-use categories, the required advertisements shall be no less than one-quarter (1/4) page in standard size or a tabloid size newspaper, and the headline in the advertisement shall be in a type no smaller than eighteen (18) point. The advertisement shall not be placed in that portion of the newspaper where legal notices and classified advertisements appear. The advertisement shall be published in a newspaper of general paid circulation in the county and of general interest and readership in the city, not one (1) of limited subject matter, pursuant to F.S. ch. 50. Whenever possible, the advertisement shall appear in a newspaper that is published at least five (5) days a week. 
1.  The advertisement shall be in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE OF CHANGE 
OF LAND USE 
The City of Pahokee proposes to change the use of land within the area shown in the map in this advertisement. 
A public hearing on the proposal will be held on (date and time) at (meeting place). 
2.  The advertisement shall also contain a geographic location map which clearly indicates the area covered by the proposal. The map shall include major street names as a means of identification of the area. 
3.  Required notices shall state the place or places within the boundaries of the city where the proposed amendment may be inspected by the public. The advertisement shall also advise that interested parties may appear at the meeting and be heard regarding the transmittal or adoption of the amendment. 
b.  If the proposed amendment does not change the permitted uses of land or does not change land-use categories, the advertisement shall state the date, time, place of the meeting, the subject of the meeting, and the place or places within the boundaries of the city where the proposed amendment may be inspected by the public. The advertisement shall also advise that interested parties may appear at the meeting and be heard regarding the transmittal or adoption of the amendment. 
(4)  Small scale amendments. For those amendments to be processed as small scale amendments pursuant to F.S. § 163.3187(c), the advertising requirements of subsection (l)(3)a. above need not be followed if said requirements are met in a legal advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation within the city's jurisdiction. 
(5)  Conduct of the hearing. All public hearings for amendments to the text of the comprehensive plan or future land use map series shall be conducted in accordance with the following: 
a.  Rights of all persons. Any person may appear at a public hearing and submit documents, materials, and other written or oral testimony individually or as a representative of an organization. Persons who appear at a public hearing shall state their names, addresses, and the names and mailing addresses of any organizations they represent. The city commission may place reasonable time restrictions on the presentation of testimony and the submission of documents and other materials. 
b.  Oaths. All persons presenting evidence at a public hearing shall swear or attest that their statements are true. During a public hearing, all parties shall have all of the following rights: 
1.  The right to be represented by counsel or by an agent. 
2.  The right to present witnesses. 
3.  The right to cross-examine all witnesses. 
4.  The right to examine and reproduce any documents produced at the hearing. 
Such rights shall be subject to the discretion of the city commission may be limited if unwarranted or undue delay will result or where no new materials or testimony will be presented. 
c.  Failure to appear. An applicant's failure to appear or to be represented at a scheduled hearing shall be sufficient cause to deny the request. 
(m)  Records of proceedings. 
(1)  Records maintained by city. All records of any proceedings of the city commission or planning board shall be filed as a part of the public records of the city. 
(2)  Official minutes maintained. Minutes of proceedings shall be kept in which findings of fact, recommendations, and all determinations or decisions are to be recorded. These minutes shall be considered public records and maintained by the city. 
(3)  Use of recording devices. All proceedings of the city commission and the planning board shall be recorded electronically. Upon request and during normal business hours, any person may listen to the recordings of any proceedings. Transcriptions of proceedings may be obtained at the expense of the individual requesting such information. 
(4)  Application records maintained. Application forms and all information submitted with each application shall be maintained by the community development department. The transcript of testimony, the minutes of proceedings, all applications, exhibits, documents, materials, and papers submitted to a reviewing or decision-making body, written reports of any municipal employee or consultant, and the decision and report of the reviewing or decision-making body shall constitute the record. Persons may examine the record during normal business hours and obtain copies at their expense. 
(n)  Action by decision-making authority. All decision-making authorities shall render their decisions within a reasonable period as provided in this section. All actions of any reviewing or decision-making authority shall include the recommendation or decision and the reason for the action. 
(1)  Notification. Notification of the final decision on an application shall be mailed to the applicant and all interested parties. A copy of the final decision shall be filed, in the community development department. 
(o)  Reconsideration of action. 
(1)  City commission. An action may be reconsidered by the city commission under either of the following circumstances: 
a.  If only four (4) members vote, on a decision and the vote is tied, a motion to reconsider may be made by any member of the commission at the next meeting at which all five (5) commissioners are present; or, 
b.  On any decision other than that described in subsection (o)(1)a. above, a motion to reconsider may be made only by a commission member who voted on the prevailing side. 
(2)  Planning board. An action may be reconsidered by the planning board only upon a motion by a member who voted on the prevailing side of the original vote. The motion must be made at the same or the next regular meeting. 
(3)  Notice. Action on a question pending reconsideration must follow the notice provisions in this section. 
Sec. 14-29. - General application requirements. 
(a)  Applications required. Before an amendment, development activity or use shall be considered, an application for approval, using forms provided by the city, shall be filed with the director of community development. 
(B)  Optional pre-application conference. A pre-application conference is suggested to the applicant to avoid unnecessary delays or confusion in the application and review processes. If requested, an informal meeting will be arranged among the applicant, community development department staff and other appropriate city staff to discuss the proposal and to review any preliminary plans the applicant may wish to present. 
(c)  Application form. 
(1)  Format. The application shall be in accordance with the form prescribed by the director of community development and approved by the city manager, copies of which may be obtained from the community development department. All applications must be signed by the owner of the property for which any development rezoning or change of land use approval is sought or be accompanied by a written power of attorney authorizing a person other than the property owner to sign an application. 
(2)  Fees. Fees for all applications required by this chapter shall be established and amended by resolution of the city commission. Fees shall be charged in an amount to compensate the city for such costs incurred to process an application. Such costs include, but are not limited to, public notice advertisements, public notice postage; and planning, engineering, scientific, technical, and related professional and staff services necessary to process the application. 
(3)  Disclosure of ownership. All applications shall include a verified statement showing each person having a legal, equitable, or beneficial ownership interest in the property for which the application is submitted. However, corporations shall provide only the names and addressees of the corporation and principal executive officers. 
(4)  Submission of fee and application prior to action by city. Prior to action taken by a department or official body of the city concerning a specific amendment or development activity, an applicant must submit the proper fee and an official application to the director of community development. 
(5)  Application deadlines. Applications shall be submitted in accordance with the deadlines established in this chapter. 
(d)  Preliminary review for completeness. In accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the director of community development shall determine whether or not an application satisfies all of the requirements. If it is determined that there are deficiencies in the application, the applicant, or the applicant's agent, shall be notified of the deficient items. When one (1) or more deficiencies exist, the department shall take no further action on the application until the applicant submits the required information. 
(e)  Initiation of review. The director of community development shall commence review of the application after a determination that the application is complete. 
(f)  Review of appropriate standards and criteria. Subsequent to the submission of a complete application, the application shall be reviewed by the city based on the standards and criteria provided in this chapter. 
Sec. 14-30. - Code enforcement. 
(a)  Director of community development. The director of community development shall administer and enforce this chapter. The community development department shall serve as the coordinating and central intake agency for all applications, petitions, or administrative actions sought in pursuance of this chapter. The director community development shall perform other zoning- and comprehensive planning-related duties which are set forth in this chapter and which may be assigned by the city manager. 
The director of community development shall interpret and apply the provisions of these regulations as minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare. These regulations are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any lawful easement, covenants, or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that where these regulations impose a greater restriction, the provisions of these regulations shall prevail. 
(b)  Violations and enforcement procedures. 
(1)  Director of community development investigations. The director of community development shall have the authority to investigate alleged violations of this chapter by inspecting property, obtaining the signed statements of prospective witnesses, obtaining photographic documentation of violations, and performing such other activities as are lawful and necessary for the complete investigation of alleged violations. 
(2)  Violations. Where it is determined that a violation of this chapter exists, the director of community development shall notify the violator in writing and order compliance. The director of community development shall order discontinuance of an illegal use of land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures, or additions, alterations, or structural changes thereof; or discontinuance of any illegal work being done. If a violation of these regulations continues, the director of community development shall commence appropriate legal action. 
(3)  Cease and desist orders. The director of community development shall have the authority to issue cease and desist orders to the appropriate property owner or individual whenever a violation of this chapter has been committed or exists. 
Secs. 14-31-14-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONCURRENCY MANAGEMENT AND REVIEW 

Sec. 14-40. - Generally. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to describe the requirements and procedures for determination of consistency of proposed development projects with the city comprehensive plan, including meeting the concurrency requirements of the plan. 
(b)  Definition. 
    Concurrency. A condition where specified facilities and services have or will have the necessary capacity to meet the adopted level of service standard at the time of impact of the development project. 
(c)  Determination of consistency. 
Editor's note- State law mandates that the land development code be "consistent with and implement" the comprehensive plan, F.S. § 163.3202. The Director of community development shall review and confirm consistency with the goals, objectives and policies of the plan of all development projects on a case by case basis. The developed codes as adopted will implement the intent of the city's comprehensive plan. 
Sec. 14-41. - System for the management of concurrency. 
(a)  Generally. The following method of ensuring concurrency shall be know as the system for the management of concurrency (SYMCON). The SYMCON is based upon the city comprehensive plan, especially the capital improvements element and adopted level of service standards. The system is designed to ensure that the issuance of a final development order will not result in a degradation of the adopted levels of service for specified public facilities and services. The SYMCON also includes a monitoring system for determination of the availability of adequate capacity of public facilities and services to meet the adopted level of service standards. The SYNCOM program shall be coordinated by the director of community development with the city engineer and the public services director. Any related costs in the review process by city staff or consultants shall be paid by the developer. 
(b)  Adopted levels of service shall not be degraded. 
(1)  General rule. 
a.  All applications for development orders shall demonstrate that the proposed development does not degrade adopted levels of service in the city. 
b.  An application for a development permit shall demonstrate that the proposed development does not degrade adopted levels of service if there exists no development order under which the permit is sought, and no development order is required prior to the issuance of the permit, e.g. a residence on a parcel of unplatted land. 
c.  The latest point at which concurrency is determined is the final development order. If no development is required, the latest point to determine concurrency is the first development permit on a site. 
(2)  Exception. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the prescribed levels of service may be degraded during the actual construction of new facilities, if upon completion of the new facilities the prescribed levels of service will be met as determined and approved by city engineer. 
(c)  Determination of available capacity. For purposes of these regulations the available capacity of a facility shall be determined by: 
(1)  Adding together. 
a.  The total capacity of existing facilities operating at the required level of service; and 
b.  The total capacity of new facilities, if any, that will become available on or before the date of occupancy of the development. The capacity of new facilities may be counted only if one (1) or more of the following is shown: 
1.  Construction of the new facilities is under way at the time of issuance of the final development order. 
2.  The new facilities are the subject of a binding executed contract for the construction of the facilities or the provision of services at the time of issuance of the final development order. 
3.  The new facilities are guaranteed in an enforceable development agreement. An enforceable development agreement may include, but is not limited to, development agreements pursuant to F.S. § 163.3220, or an agreement or development order pursuant to F.S. ch. 380. Such facilities shall be consistent with the capital improvements element of the city comprehensive plan. The agreement must guarantee that the necessary facilities and services will be in place when the impacts of the development occur. All agreements shall be subject to city engineer and city attorney's review and recommendation to city commission. 
(2)  Subtracting from that number the sum of: 
a.  The demand for the service or facility created by existing development as documented in the city comprehensive plan; and 
b.  The demand for the service or facility created by the anticipated completion of other approved developments, redevelopment, or other development activity. 
(3)  Action upon failure to show available capacity. Where available capacity cannot be shown, the following methods may be used to maintain adopted level of service as approved by the city engineer: 
a.  The project owner or developer may provide the necessary improvements to maintain level of service. In such case the application shall include appropriate plans for improvements, documentation that such improvements are designed to provide the capacity necessary to achieve or maintain the level of service, and recordable instruments guaranteeing the construction, consistent with calculations of capacity above. 
b.  The proposed project may be altered such that projected level of service is no less than the adopted level of service. 
(d)  Burden of showing compliance on developer. The burden of showing compliance with these level of service requirements shall be upon the developer. In order to be approvable, applications for development approval shall provide sufficient information showing compliance with these standards. The director of community development and city engineer shall determined sufficiency of each application. 
(e)  Initial determination of concurrency. The initial determination of concurrency occurs during the review of the preliminary development plan, and shall include compliance with the level of service standards adopted by the city. 
(f)  Annual report. 
(1)  Contents. The city's (community development director in coordination with the city engineer and public services director) shall prepare an annual report on the SYMCON that includes: 
a.  A summary of actual development activity, including a summary of certificates of occupancy, indicating quantity of development represented by type and square footage. 
b.  A summary of building permit activity, indicating: 
1.  Those that expired without commencing construction; 
2.  Those that are active at the time of the report; 
3.  The quantity of development represented by the outstanding building permits; 
4.  Those that result from final development orders issued prior to the adoption of this code; and 
5.  Those that result from final development orders issued pursuant to the requirements of this code. 
c.  A summary of preliminary development orders issued, indicating: 
1.  Those that expired without subsequent final development orders; 
2.  Those that are valid at the time of the report; and 
3.  The phases and quantity of development represented by the outstanding preliminary development orders. 
d.  A summary of final development orders issued, indicating: 
1.  Those that expired without subsequent building permits; 
2.  Those that were completed during the reporting period; 
3.  Those that are valid at the time of the report but do have associated building permits or construction activity; and 
4.  The phases and quantity of development represented by the outstanding final development orders. 
e.  An evaluation of each facility and service indicating: 
1.  The capacity available for each at the beginning of the reporting period and the end of the reporting period; 
2.  The portion of the available capacity held for valid preliminary and final development orders; 
3.  A comparison of the actual capacity to calculated capacity resulting from approved preliminary development orders and final development orders; 
4.  A comparison of actual capacity and levels of service to adopted levels of service from the city comprehensive plan. 
5.  A forecast of the capacity for each based upon the most recently updated schedule of capital improvements in the city capital improvements element. 
(2)  Use of the annual report. The SYMCON annual report shall constitute prima facie evidence of the capacity and levels of service of public facilities for the purpose of issuing development orders during the twelve (12) months following completion of the annual report. 
Sec. 14-42. - Adopted levels of service. 
    The following sections are provided to establish a format, to indicate the incorporation of level of service standards within the code, and to provide examples of LOS standards. The City of Pahokee LOS standards are those adopted as part of the comprehensive plan. 
(1)  Potable water. Development activity shall not be approved unless there is sufficient available capacity to sustain the following levels of service for potable water as established in the potable water sub-element of the city comprehensive plan: 
Minimum design flow 93 gpd/p Storage capacity 53 hour reserve Pressure 48 psi to user  
The new development shall connect to available public water supply. New development shall meet or exceed minimum level of service requirements. 
(2)  Wastewater. Development activities shall not be approved unless there is sufficient available capacity to sustain the following levels of service for wastewater treatment as established in the sanitary sewer sub-element of the city comprehensive plan: 
LOS Type of Use Average Flow Peak Flow Residential 100 gpd/p 175 gpd/p Commercial    gpd*    gpd* Industrial    gpd*    gpd*  
* to be determined on case by case basis 
Any alternative wastewater treatment systems shall be reviewed by and have the recommendation of approval by city engineer with final approval determined by city commission. All costs related to study and staff reviews shall be paid by developers. 
(3)  Transportation system. 
a.  Level of service. Development activities shall not be approved unless there is sufficient available capacity to sustain the following levels of service for transportation systems as established in the transportation circulation element of the city comprehensive plan: 
Type of facility Peak Hour Level 
of Service Principle Arterials C Minor Arterials C Major Collectors C Minor Collectors C Other named roads C  
b.  Determination of project impact. The impact of proposed development activity on available capacity shall be determined as follows: 
1.  The area of impact of the development (a traffic shed) shall be determined. The traffic shed shall be that area where the primary impact of traffic to and from the site occurs. 
The determination of an area of impact on a case-by-case basis will require the use of a professional transportation planner or traffic engineer. Such determination is similar to that used for DRI projects. All costs related to traffic studies and reviews including city staff or consultant review shall be paid by developer. 
2.  The projected level of service for roads within the traffic shed shall be calculated based upon estimated trips to be generated by the project. Where the development will have access to more than one (1) road the calculations shall show the split in generated traffic and state the assumptions used in the assignment of traffic to each facility. 
(4)  Drainage system. Development activities shall not be approved unless there is sufficient available capacity to sustain the following levels of service for the drainage system as established in the drainage sub-element of the city comprehensive plan: 
Types of Use LOS Refer to city subdivision standards article XIV stormwater management section.  
(5)  Solid waste. Development activities shall not be approved unless there is sufficient available capacity to sustain the following levels of service for the solid waste as established in the solid waste sub-element of the city comprehensive plan: 
Types of Use LOS Residential 6.0 lbs. per capita 
per day Commercial 6.0 lbs. per capita 
per day Industrial 6.0 lbs. per capita 
per day Other users 6.0 lbs. per capita 
per day  
(6)  Recreation. Development activities shall not be approved unless there is sufficient available capacity to sustain the following levels of service for the recreational facilities as established in the recreation and open space element of the city comprehensive plan: 
Type of Park Facility Level of Service District N/A acres/1,000 
population Community N/A acres/1,000 
population Neighborhood 2 acres/1,000 
population Other facilities See comprehensive 
plan Section 6-III  
(7)  Mass transit. (Reserved) 
Secs. 14-43-14-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ZONING DISTRICTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Copies of Tables IV-1 through IV-7 referenced herein are located in city hall. 

Sec. 14-50. - General standards for residential districts. 
(a)  District regulations. Regulations governing the height, bulk, mass and placement of structures within all residential districts are provided in Table IV-1. 
(b)  Accessory structures. Accessory structures, or private recreational facilities shall include, but not be limited to, sheds, unattached garages, tennis courts, and swimming pools. Accessory structures shall be regulated pursuant to article V. Accessory garage apartments shall be regulated pursuant to article V. 
(c)  Outdoor storage in residential districts. Outdoor storage in residential districts for residential purposes shall be limited to domestic equipment and normal supplies necessary for residents. Storage shall not be permitted in any required or unrequired front setback, not in any required side setback. Storage shall be permitted in unrequired side setbacks when completely screened by a fence or landscaping. 
(d)  Lots of record. Lots within each residential zoning district must contain the minimum area and width requirements; however, in the event a lot does not meet the area or width requirements of the district within which it is located, one (1) single family home shall be allowed as a permitted use. 
(e)  Nonconformities. Nonconformities shall be regulated pursuant to article VI. 
(f)  Parking. Parking shall be provided pursuant to article VIII. 
(g)  Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided pursuant to article IX. 
(h)  Signs. Signs shall be regulated pursuant to article X. 
(i)  Fences and walls. Fences and walls shall be regulated pursuant to article XI. 
Sec. 14-51. - Single family residential, very low density (SF1) district. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the SF1 district is to promote the development of large lot, single family homes in areas where such development has occurred traditionally, or in areas where resource protection, promotion of aesthetics or limited public facilities and supporting services require the intensity of development to be limited. 
(b)  Development standards. 
(1)  Minimum lot dimensions. 
a.  Lot area: Forty-three thousand five hundred (43,500) square feet (one (1) acre) 
b.  Lot width: One hundred fifty (150) feet 
(2)  Minimum setbacks for principal structures. 
a.  Front: Fifty (50) feet 
b.  Corner: Twenty-five (25) feet 
c.  Rear: Fifty (50) feet 
d.  Side: Twenty-five (25) feet 
(3)  Maximum lot coverage by structures: Twenty-five (25) percent 
(4)  Maximum impervious surface area: Forty (40) percent 
(5)  Minimum landscaped area: 
(6)  Maximum building height: Thirty (30) feet 
(7)  Minimum living area: Two thousand (2,000) square feet 
(c)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted within this district are identified in article V. 
(d)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses and accessory use regulations are identified in article V. 
Sec. 14-52. - Single family residential, low density (SF5) district. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the SF5 district is to promote the development of single family home neighborhoods on near-quarter acre lots in existing areas of similar development, and in areas in which a low intensity of development is desired for compatibility with surrounding uses and available public facilities and supporting services. 
(b)  Development standards. 
(1)  Minimum lot dimensions. 
a.  Lot area: Nine thousand (9,000) square feet 
b.  Lot width: Seventy (70) feet 
(2)  Minimum setbacks for principal structures. 
a.  Front: Twenty-five (25) feet 
b.  Corner: Fifteen (15) feet 
c.  Rear: Fifteen (15) feet or ten (10) percent of lot depth, whichever is less 
d.  Side: Ten (10) feet 
(3)  Maximum lot coverage by structures: Thirty-five (35) percent 
(4)  Maximum impervious surface area: Forty-five (45) percent 
(5)  Minimum landscaped area: 
(6)  Maximum building height: Thirty (30) feet 
(7)  Minimum living area: One thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet 
(c)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted within this district are identified in article V. 
(d)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses and accessory use regulations are identified in article V. 
Sec. 14-53. - Single family residential, medium density (SF7) district. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the SF7 district is to promote the development of high quality, affordable homes in a traditional neighborhood setting in areas with available public facilities and within close proximity to supporting services. 
(b)  Development standards. 
(1)  Minimum lot dimensions. 
a.  Lot area: Six thousand (6,000) square feet 
b.  Lot width: Sixty (60) feet 
(2)  Minimum setbacks for principal structures. 
a.  Front: Twenty (20) feet 
b.  Corner: Twelve and one-half (12.5) feet 
c.  Rear: Fifteen (15) feet or ten (10) percent of lot depth, whichever is less 
d.  Side: Five (5) feet minimum, fifteen (15) feet total 
(3)  Maximum lot coverage by structures: Thirty-five (35) percent 
(4)  Maximum impervious surface area: Forty-five (45) percent 
(5)  Minimum landscaped area: 
(6)  Maximum building height: Thirty (30) feet 
(7)  Minimum living area: Eight hundred fifty (850) square feet 
(c)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted within this district are identified in article V. 
(d)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses and accessory use regulations are identified in article V. 
Sec. 14-54. - Single family residential, moderate density (SFMH) district. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the SFMH district is to promote the development of high quality, affordable housing in a variety of neighborhood settings that would consist primarily of either site built single family homes, manufactured homes, mobile home subdivisions, or mobile home and recreational vehicle parks. These neighborhoods are intended to be located in areas with available public facilities and within a close proximity to supporting services. 
(b)  Development standards. 
(1)  Minimum lot dimensions. 
a.  Lot area: Five thousand (5,000) square feet 
b.  Lot width: Fifty (50) feet 
(2)  Minimum setbacks for principal structures. 
a.  Front: Fifteen (15) feet 
b.  Corner: Ten (10) feet 
c.  Rear: Ten (10) feet or ten (10) percent of lot depth, whichever is less 
d.  Side: Five (5) feet 
(3)  Maximum lot coverage by structures: Thirty-five (35) percent 
(4)  Maximum impervious surface area: Forty-five (45) percent 
(5)  Minimum landscaped area: 
(6)  Maximum building height: Thirty (30) feet 
(c)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted within this district are identified in article V. 
(d)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses and accessory use regulations are identified in article V. 
Sec. 14-55. - Single family residential, mixed use (SFMU) district. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the SFMU district is to promote the development of high quality single family homes while providing an opportunity for expanded home occupations, small offices, or service operations in existing areas of similar development or areas in which such uses are compatible with surrounding uses and available public facilities and supporting services. 
(b)  Development standards for residential uses. 
(1)  Minimum lot dimensions. 
a.  Lot area: Fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet 
b.  Lot width: One hundred (100) feet 
(2)  Minimum setbacks for principal structures. 
a.  Front: Fifty (50) feet 
b.  Corner: Twenty-five (25) feet 
c.  Rear: Fifteen (15) feet or ten (10) percent of lot depth, whichever is less 
d.  Side: Fifteen (15) feet minimum 
(3)  Maximum lot coverage by structures: Thirty (30) percent 
(4)  Maximum impervious surface area: Forty (40) percent 
(5)  Minimum landscaped area: 
(6)  Maximum building height: Thirty (30) feet 
(7)  Minimum residential living area: One thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet 
(c)  Development standards for nonresidential uses. All nonresidential uses permitted in the SFMU district in accordance with article V shall meet the following minimum standards. 
(1)  Minimum lot dimensions. 
a.  Lot area: One-half (1/2) acre 
b.  Lot width: One hundred (100) feet 
(2)  Attachment to principal residential structure. All nonresidential uses, except uses which are customarily accessory to residential uses, shall be attached to the primary residential structure. 
(3)  Maximum size. All nonresidential uses, except uses which are customarily accessory to residential uses, shall have a maximum enclosed square footage of eight hundred fifty (850) square feet or consist of no more than twenty (20) percent of the enclosed floor area of the principal residential structure, whichever is less. 
(4)  Maximum number of nonresident employees. No more than three (3) nonresidents shall be employed on any site. 
(5)  Additional standards. Sites with nonresidential uses shall meet all of the requirements listed in subsection (b) above. 
(d)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted within this district are identified in article V. 
(e)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses and accessory use regulations are identified in article V. 
Sec. 14-56. - Multifamily residential, low density (MF12) district. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the MF12 district is to promote the development of low density, multifamily dwelling units in a high quality environment with high percentage of open space in areas with available public facilities and a close proximity to supporting services. The district is intended to include duplex, triplex and low intensity apartment and condominium developments. 
(b)  Development standards. 
(1)  Minimum lot dimensions. 
a.  Lot area for one (1) or two (2) dwelling units: Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet 
b.  Lot area for three (3) or more dwelling units: Three thousand six hundred (3,600) square feet per unit, not to exceed twelve and one tenth (12.1) dwelling units per acre 
c.  Lot width: Seventy (70) feet 
(2)  Minimum setbacks for principal structures. 
a.  Front: Twenty (20) feet 
b.  Corner: Twelve and one-half (12.5) feet 
c.  Rear: Fifteen (15) feet or ten (10) percent of lot depth, whichever is less 
d.  Side: Five (5) feet minimum, Fifteen (15) feet total 
(3)  Maximum lot coverage by structures: Thirty-five (35) percent 
(4)  Maximum impervious surface area: Fifty (50) percent 
(5)  Minimum landscaped area: 
(6)  Maximum building height: Thirty (30) feet 
(c)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted within this district are identified in article V. 
(d)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses and accessory use regulations are identified in article V. 
Sec. 14-57. - Multifamily residential, medium density (MF18) district. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the MF18 district is to promote the development of affordable, medium density, multifamily dwelling units in a high quality environment with an appropriate amount of open space in areas with a high level of available public facilities that are within a close proximity to supporting services. The primary purpose of the district is to provide high quality, medium- to large-scale multifamily developments while maintaining affordability. 
(b)  Development standards. 
(1)  Minimum lot dimensions. 
a.  Lot area for one (1) or two (2) dwelling units: Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet 
b.  Lot area for three (3) to six (6) dwelling units: Three thousand (3,000) square feet per unit 
c.  For lot area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or more: Two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet per unit, not to exceed 18.15 dwelling units per acre 
d.  Lot width: Seventy (70) feet 
(2)  Minimum setbacks for principal structures. 
a.  Front: Twenty (20) feet 
b.  Corner: Twelve and one-half (12.5) feet 
c.  Rear: Fifteen (15) feet or ten (10) percent of lot depth, whichever is less 
d.  Side: Five (5) feet minimum, fifteen (15) feet total 
(3)  Maximum lot coverage by structures: Forty-five (45) percent 
(4)  Maximum impervious surface area: (60) percent 
(5)  Minimum landscaped area: 
(6)  Maximum building height: Forty (40) feet or two (2) feet in height for each one (1) foot of setback from side and rear setbacks, whichever is greater 
(c)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted within this district are identified in article V. 
(d)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses and accessory use regulations are identified in article V. 
Sec. 14-58. - General development standards for commercial districts. 
(a)  District regulations. Regulations governing the height, bulk, mass, and placement of structures in all commercial districts are provided in Table IV-2. 
(b)  Use restrictions. Use restrictions in the commercial districts are set forth in article V. 
(c)  Nonconformities. Nonconformities shall be regulated pursuant to article VI. 
(d)  Parking and loading. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided pursuant to article VIII. 
(e)  Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided pursuant to article IX. 
(f)  Signs. Signs shall be regulated pursuant to article X. 
(g)  Fences and walls. Fences and walls shall be constructed pursuant to article XI. 
(h)  Installation of public utilities. All public utility service connections, including telephone, cable and electric distribution service, shall be installed underground on all sites of thirty thousand (30,000) square feet or more. In addition, all lots included within the site plan review overlay district (article XI) shall also install all utility service connections underground. 
TABLE IV-2 [3] 
(i)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided pursuant to article XIV. 
(j)  It shall be unlawful for thrift shops or salvage shops to display merchandise outside on the street or curb frontage of any retail, sales, rental, commercial business in any zoning district in the city. All thrift stores and salvage shops shall comply with this requirement within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03 , § 2, 4-25-17) 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- A copy of Table IV-2 is located in city hall. 

Sec. 14-59. - Neighborhood commercial (NC) district. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the NC district is to promote the development of small size, low intensity commercial uses which provide limited goods and services for a particular geographic area of the city. The district is intended to be located in areas with available public facilities in a manner compatible with surrounding uses and in close proximity to those residential areas which are to be served. 
(b)  Development standards. 
(1)  Minimum lot dimensions. 
a.  Lot area: Five thousand (5,000) square feet 
b.  Lot width: Fifty (50) feet 
(2)  Minimum setbacks for principal structures. 
a.  Front: Twenty (20) feet 
b.  Corner: Ten (10) feet 
c.  Rear: Five (5) feet or fifteen (15) feet when abutting a residential zoning district 
d.  Side: Five (5) feet or fifteen (15) feet when abutting a residential zoning district 
(3)  Maximum lot coverage by structures: Sixty (60) percent 
(4)  Maximum impervious surface area: Seventy-five (75) percent 
(5)  Minimum landscaped area: 
(6)  Maximum building height: Thirty (30) feet 
(7)  Minimum building separation: Zero (0) feet or not less than ten (10) feet 
(8)  Maximum FAR: Twenty-five hundredths (0.25) 
(c)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted within this district are identified in article V. 
(d)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses and accessory use regulations are identified in article V. 
Sec. 14-60. - General commercial (GC) district. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the GC district is to promote the development of commercial uses which provide a variety of basic goods and services for city residents. The district is intended to be located in areas with a high level of available public facilities in a manner compatible with surrounding uses. 
(b)  Development standards. 
(1)  Minimum lot dimensions. 
a.  Lot area: Five thousand (5,000) square feet 
b.  Lot width: Fifty (50) feet 
(2)  Minimum setbacks for principal structures. 
a.  Front: Five (5) feet 
b.  Corner: Five (5) feet 
c.  Rear: Five (5) feet or fifteen (15) feet when abutting a residential zoning district 
d.  Side: Five (5) feet or fifteen (15) feet when abutting a residential zoning district 
(3)  Maximum lot coverage by structures: Sixty (60) percent 
(4)  Maximum impervious surface area: Seventy-five (75) percent 
(5)  Minimum landscaped area: 
(6)  Maximum building height: Forty (40) feet 
(7)  Minimum building separation: Zero (0) feet or not less than ten (10) feet 
(8)  Maximum FAR: One-half (0.5) 
(c)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted within this district are identified in article V. 
(d)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses and accessory use regulations are identified in article V. 
Sec. 14-61. - Commercial office residential and entertainment (CORE) district. 
(a)  Intent. The CORE district is intended to be a clearly identifiable "downtown" or "central business district" for Pahokee. As such, the area is to serve as a focal point for a variety of local and regional activities including retail sales, personal and business services, public and private offices, and entertainment and residential opportunities. Further, the arrangement of structures, open space, landscaping and public plazas and parks are just as important as the uses to be located within the district. The district is intended to have a street-level focus and create an environment conducive to pedestrian activities. Finally, the incorporation of a consistent landscaping, signage, sidewalk and street design theme throughout the district is intended to be created to further delineate the boundaries of the district and emphasize its importance. 
(b)  General development standards. 
(1)  Underground placement of electrical, telephone and cable television lines. The following electrical, telephone, and cable television distribution lines shall be placed underground: 
a.  Those which provide service directly to an individual lot or structure. 
b.  Those electrical service lines which are less than twenty-three (23) kilovolts (KV) in capacity and located in an easement measuring at least two hundred (200) feet in length within one (1) unified lot, project or development. 
(2)  Minimum sidewalk widths. Minimum sidewalk widths within the CORE district are established by Figure IV-1. 
(3)  Sidewalk paving requirements. All sidewalks in the CORE district shall be paved with concrete or other equally durable impervious surface. Not less than twenty (20) percent of the surface area of any sidewalk required to be at least fifteen (15) feet wide shall be paved with brick or similar decorative materials approved pursuant to the applicable review process. 
(4)  Street front tree planting. One (1) tree shall be planted for every twenty-five (25) feet of street frontage. Tree trunks shall not be placed closer than twenty-five (25) feet to street light standards. All tree planting areas located within sidewalks and paved plazas shall be accented around their periphery with brick or equivalent decorative materials approved pursuant to the applicable review process. Trees shall conform to the specifications of this chapter, but as a minimum trees required under this section shall be street trees of Florida Number 1 Grade or better as outlined in "Florida Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants, Parts I, II," State of Florida Department of Agriculture. Shade trees planted shall have a height of at least fifteen (15) feet; however, if palm trees are planted, a clear wood height of at least eight (8) feet is required. 
FIGURE IV-I [4] 
(5)  Overhead weather protection. 
a.  Overhead weather protection shall be incorporated into building walls facing street segments designated on Figure IV-I as requiring sidewalks of a minimum width of fifteen (15) feet. Overhead weather protection shall extend along the entire street frontage. Overhead weather protection shall extend along the entire street frontage. Overhead weather protection may be provided by awnings, building overhangs, arcades, or similar structures. Overhead weather protection shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in depth and shall be at a height that conforms with existing protective structures. 
b.  Along street segments not designated on Figure IV-I as requiring sidewalks of a minimum width of fifteen (15) feet buildings shall provide either overhead weather protection along their entire street frontage or be designed so that such overhead weather protection can be added at a future date. Overhead weather protection may be provided by awnings, building overhangs, arcades or similar structures. Overhead weather protection shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in depth and shall be at a height that conforms with existing protective structures. 
(6)  Planter screening for parking structure facades. Facades of parking structures shall incorporate planters providing a total one (1) square foot of planting area for each linear foot of facade per parking level. Planting areas may be arranged in a linear fashion or clustered at intervals. Planters shall be provided with permanent irrigation to permit watering of plant materials. Planters shall be planted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(7)  Screening of building equipment. Building equipment shall be screened so that it cannot be seen from above or below. For the purposes of this section, building equipment shall include heat, ventilation and air conditioning equipment; radio, television and satellite reception devices; and other similar equipment. Required equipment screening shall be included as an integral element of the overall architectural design of a building or structure. 
(8)  Roof coverings. Roof areas shall be finished in a manner to present an attractive appearance; tar, tar and gravel, or ballast shall not be utilized as finishing materials. Roof areas may be landscaped; however, landscaped areas shall be provided with automatic irrigation to permit watering of plant materials. Landscaped areas shall be planted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(9)  Nonconformities. Nonconformities shall be regulated pursuant to article VI. 
(10)  Parking and loading. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided pursuant to article VIII. 
(11)  Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided pursuant to article IX. 
(12)  Signs. Signs shall be regulated pursuant to article X. 
(13)  Fences and walls. Fences and walls shall be constructed pursuant to article XI. 
(c)  Minimum lot dimensions. 
(1)  Lot area: Five thousand (5,000) square feet 
(2)  Lot width: Fifty (50) feet 
(d)  Minimum setbacks and separation between buildings. Regulations governing the height, bulk, mass, and placement of structures in the CORE district are provided in Table IV-3. 
(1)  Minimum setback from grade level to twenty-four (24) feet above grade level: 
a.  From property line adjoining a public right-of-way: at least five (5) feet but not more than ten (10) feet, excluding plazas. 
b.  From property line not adjoining a public right-of-way or residential zoning district: Zero (0) feet or at least fifteen (15) feet. 
c.  From property line adjoining a residential zoning district but not a public right-of-way: Fifteen (15) feet. 
(2)  Minimum setback above twenty-four (24) feet above grade level: 
a.  From property line adjoining public right-of-way: Twenty-five (25) feet. 
b.  From property line not adjoining a public right-of-way or residential zoning district: Zero (0) feet or at least fifteen (15) feet. 
c.  From property line adjoining a residential zoning district: Fifteen (15) feet. 
(e)  Development densities and intensities. 
(1)  Non-residential development. 
a.  Maximum FAR: One (1.0) 
b.  Maximum lot coverage by structures: Ninety (90) percent 
c.  Maximum impervious surface area: Ninety (90) percent 
d.  Minimum landscaped area: Ten (10) percent 
e.  Maximum building height: Forty (40) feet or two (2) feet in height for each one (1) foot of setback from side and rear setbacks, whichever is greater 
TABLE IV-3 [5] 
f.  Minimum building separation: Zero (0) feet or not less than ten (10) feet 
(2)  Residential development. 
a.  Lot size under seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet: Zero (0) dwelling units 
b.  Lot size of seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet: one (1) or two (2) dwelling units, not to exceed an FAR of one (1.0) 
c.  Lot area greater than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet but less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet: Three thousand (3,000) square feet per unit, not to exceed an FAR of one (1.0) 
d.  Lot area of two thousand (2,000) square feet or more: Two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet per unit, not to exceed 18.15 dwelling units per acre or an FAR of 1.0 
e.  Maximum lot coverage by structures: Sixty (60) percent 
f.  Maximum impervious surface area: Seventy-five (75) percent 
g.  Minimum landscaped area: 
h.  Maximum building height: Forty (40) feet or two (2) feet in height for each one (1) foot of setback from side and rear setbacks, whichever is greater 
i.  Minimum building separation: Zero (0) feet or not less than ten (10) feet 
(3)  Mixed uses. 
a.  Ten (10) dwelling units or less. 
1.  Lot size under seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet: Zero (0) dwelling units 
2.  Lot size of seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet: one (1) or two (2) dwelling units, not to exceed an FAR of 1.0 
3.  Lot area greater than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet but less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet: Three thousand (3,000) square feet per unit, not to exceed an FAR of 1.0 
4.  Lot area of two thousand (2,000) square feet or more: Two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet per unit, not to exceed 18.15 dwelling units per acre or an FAR of 1.0 
5.  Maximum lot coverage by structures: Ninety (90) percent 
6.  Maximum impervious surface area: Ninety (90) percent 
7.  Minimum landscaped area: Ten (10) percent 
8.  Maximum building height: Forty (40) feet or two (2) feet in height for each one (1) foot of setback from side and rear setbacks, whichever is greater 
9.  Minimum building separation: Zero (0) feet or not less than ten (10) feet 
b.  More than ten (10) dwelling units. 
1.  Maximum density/intensity: Two thousand four hundred (2,400) square feet per dwelling unit, not to exceed 18.15 dwelling units per acre or an FAR of 1.25 
2.  Maximum lot coverage by structures: Sixty (60) percent 
3.  Maximum impervious surface area: Seventy-five (75) percent 
4.  Minimum landscaped area: 
5.  Maximum building height: Forty (40) feet or two (2) feet in height for each one (1) foot of setback from side and rear setbacks, whichever is greater 
6.  Minimum building separation: Zero (0) feet or not less than ten (10) feet 
(f)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted within this district are identified in article V. 
(g)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses and accessory use regulations are identified in article V. 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- A copy of Figure IV-I is located in city hall. 

--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- A copy of Table IV-3 is located in city hall. 

Sec. 14-62. - General standards for industrial districts. 
(a)  District regulations. Regulations governing the height, bulk, mass, and placement of structures in all industrial districts are provided in Table IV-4. 
TABLE IV-4 [6] 
(b)  Use restrictions. Use restrictions in the industrial districts are set forth in article V. 
(c)  Nonconformities. Nonconformities shall be regulated pursuant to article VI. 
(d)  Parking and loading. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided pursuant to article VIII. 
(e)  Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided pursuant to article IX. 
(f)  Signs. Signs shall be regulated pursuant to article X. 
(g)  Fences and walls. Fences and walls shall be constructed pursuant to article XI. 
(h)  Installation of public utilities. All public utility service connections, including telephone, cable and electric distribution service, shall be installed underground on all sites of thirty thousand (30,000) square feet or more. In addition, all lots included within the site plan review overlay district (article XI) shall also install all utility service connections underground. 
(i)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided pursuant to article XIV. 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- A copy of Table IV-4 is located in city hall. 

Sec. 14-63. - Light industrial (LI) district. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the LI district is to promote the development of high quality warehousing, wholesale trade, research and development, and other industrial activities of a light nature in park type settings. The district is intended to be located in areas with a high level of available public facilities and in a manner compatible with surrounding uses. 
(b)  Development standards. 
(1)  Minimum lot dimensions. 
a.  Lot area: Five thousand (5,000) square feet 
b.  Lot width: Fifty (50) feet 
(2)  Minimum setbacks for principal structures. 
a.  Front: Twenty-five (25) feet 
b.  Corner: Twelve and one-half (12.5) feet 
c.  Rear: Five (5) feet or twenty-five (25) feet when abutting a residential zoning district 
d.  Side: Five (5) feet or twenty-five (25) when abutting a residential zoning district 
(3)  Maximum lot coverage by structures: Fifty (50) percent 
(4)  Maximum impervious surface area: Seventy-five (75) percent 
(5)  Minimum landscaped area: 
(6)  Maximum building height: Fifty (50) feet 
(7)  Minimum building separation: Zero (0) feet or not less than ten (10) feet 
(8)  Maximum FAR: 1.0 
(c)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted within this district are identified in article V. 
(d)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses and accessory use regulations are identified in article V. 
Sec. 14-64. - Heavy industrial (HI) district. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the HI district is to promote the development of a variety of industrial manufacturing, processing and related activities with a minimal amount of impact on nonindustrial uses. The district is intended to be located in areas of a high level of available public facilities in a manner that reduces external impacts on surrounding and near-by uses. 
(b)  Development standards. 
(1)  Minimum lot dimensions. 
a.  Lot area: Five thousand (5,000) square feet 
b.  Lot width: Fifty (50) feet 
(2)  Minimum setbacks for principal structures. 
a.  Front: Twenty-five (25) feet 
b.  Corner: Twelve and one-half (12.5) feet 
c.  Rear: Five (5) feet or thirty (30) feet when abutting a residential zoning district 
d.  Side: Five (5) feet or thirty (30) feet when abutting a residential zoning district 
(3)  Maximum lot coverage by structures: Sixty (60) percent 
(4)  Maximum impervious surface area: Eighty-five (85) percent 
(5)  Minimum landscaped area: 
(6)  Maximum building height: Fifty (50) feet 
(7)  Minimum building separation: Zero (0) feet or not less than ten (10) feet 
(8)  Maximum FAR: 1.0 
(c)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted within this district are identified in article V. 
(d)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses and accessory use regulations are identified in article V. 
Sec. 14-65. - Public facilities (PF) district. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the PF district is to promote the development of a variety of public and semi-public facilities necessary for the maintenance of a high quality of life within the city. 
(b)  District regulations. Regulations governing the height, bulk, mass, and placement of structures in the public facilities district are provided in Table IV-5. 
TABLE IV-5 [7] 
(c)  Use restrictions. Use restrictions in the public facilities district are set forth in article V. 
(d)  Nonconformities. Nonconformities shall be regulated pursuant to article VI. 
(e)  Parking and loading. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided pursuant to article VIII. 
(f)  Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided pursuant to article IX. 
(g)  Signs. Signs shall be regulated pursuant to article X. 
(h)  Fences and walls. Fences and walls shall be constructed pursuant to article XI. 
(i)  Installation of public utilities. All public utility service connections, including telephone, cable and electric distribution service, shall be installed underground on all sites of thirty thousand (30,000) square feet or more. In addition, all lots included within the site plan review overlay district (article XI) shall also install all utility service connections underground. 
(j)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided pursuant to article XI. 
(k)  Development standards. 
(1)  Minimum lot dimensions. 
a.  Lot area: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet 
b.  Lot width: Seventy-five (75) feet 
(2)  Minimum setbacks for principal structures. 
a.  Front: Twenty (20) feet 
b.  Corner: Ten (10) feet 
c.  Rear: Ten (10) feet or twenty-five (25) feet when abutting a residential zoning district 
d.  Side: Ten (10) feet or twenty-five (25) feet when abutting a residential zoning district 
(3)  Maximum lot coverage by structures: Sixty (60) percent 
(4)  Maximum impervious surface area: Eighty-five (85) percent 
(5)  Minimum landscaped area: 
(6)  Maximum building height: Fifty (50) feet 
(7)  Minimum building separation: Zero (0) feet or not less than ten (10) feet 
(8)  Maximum FAR: 0.75 
(l)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted within this district are identified in article V. 
(m)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses and accessory use regulations are identified in article V. 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- A copy of Table IV-5 is located in city hall. 

Sec. 14-66. - Recreation/open space (R/OS) district. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the R/OS district is to promote the development of public and private, active and passive recreation uses of all types. 
(b)  District regulations. Regulations governing the height, bulk, mass, and placement of structures in the recreation/open space district are provided in Table IV-6. 
TABLE IV-6 [8] 
(c)  Use restrictions. Use restrictions in the public facilities district are set forth in article V. 
(d)  Nonconformities. Nonconformities shall be regulated pursuant to article VI. 
(e)  Parking and loading. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided pursuant to article VIII. 
(f)  Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided pursuant to article IX. 
(g)  Signs. Signs shall be regulated pursuant to article X. 
(h)  Fences and walls. Fences and walls shall be constructed pursuant to article XI. 
(i)  Installation of public utilities. All public utility service connections, including telephone, cable and electric distribution service, shall be installed underground on all sites of thirty thousand (30,000) square feet or more. In addition, all lots included within the site plan review overlay district (article XI) shall also install all utility service connections underground. 
(j)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided pursuant to article XIV. 
(k)  Development standards. 
(1)  Minimum lot dimensions. 
a.  Lot area: Five thousand (5,000) square feet 
b.  Lot width: Fifty (50) feet 
(2)  Minimum setbacks for principal structures. 
a.  Front: Twenty-five (25) feet 
b.  Corner: Twenty-five (25) feet 
c.  Rear: Fifteen (15) feet or ten (10) percent of lot depth, whichever is less 
d.  Side: Ten (10) feet 
(3)  Maximum lot coverage by structures: Fifty (50) percent 
(4)  Maximum impervious surface area: Seventy-five (75) percent 
(5)  Minimum landscaped area: 
(6)  Maximum building height: Thirty (30) feet 
(7)  Minimum building separation: Zero (0) feet or not less than ten (10) feet 
(8)  Maximum FAR: 0.20 
(l)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted within this district are identified in article V. 
(m)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses and accessory use regulations are identified in article V. 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- A copy of Table IV-6 is located in city hall. 

Sec. 14-67. - Water oriented recreation (WOR) district. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the WOR district is to promote the full development of the Lake Okeechobee shoreline in a manner consistent with federal, state and local goals and objectives for the resource. 
(b)  District regulations. Regulations governing the height, bulk, mass, and placement of structures in the water oriented recreation district shall be governed pursuant to all applicable state and federal regulations. 
(c)  Use restrictions. Use restrictions in the public facilities district are set forth in article V. 
(d)  Nonconformities. Nonconformities shall be regulated pursuant to article VI and all applicable state and federal regulations. 
(e)  Parking and loading. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided pursuant to article VIII. 
(f)  Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided pursuant to article IX. 
(g)  Signs. Signs shall be regulated pursuant to article X and all applicable state and federal regulations. 
(h)  Fences and walls. Fences and walls shall be constructed pursuant to article XI and all applicable state and federal regulations. 
(i)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted within this district are identified in article V. 
(j)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses and accessory use regulations are identified in article V. 
Sec. 14-68. - Agriculture (AG) district. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the AG district is to promote the production of a variety of agricultural crops and animals consistent with the historical and future foundations of the city. 
(b)  District regulations. Regulations governing the height, bulk, mass, and placement of structures in the agriculture district are provided in Table IV-7. 
(c)  Use restrictions. Use restrictions in the agriculture district are set forth in article V. 
(d)  Nonconformities. Nonconformities shall be regulated pursuant to article VI. 
(e)  Parking and loading. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided pursuant to article VIII. 
(f)  Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided pursuant to article IX. 
TABLE IV-7 [9] 
(g)  Signs. Signs shall be regulated pursuant to article X. 
(h)  Fences and walls. Fences and walls shall be constructed pursuant to article XI. 
(i)  Development standards. 
(1)  Minimum lot dimensions. 
a.  Lot area: Twenty (20) acres 
b.  Lot width: Three hundred (300) feet 
(2)  Minimum setbacks for principal structures. 
a.  Front: Fifty (50) feet 
b.  Corner: Twenty-five (25) feet 
c.  Rear: Fifty (50) feet 
d.  Side: Twenty-five (25) feet 
(3)  Maximum lot coverage by structures: Twenty (20) percent 
(4)  Maximum impervious surface area: Thirty (30) percent 
(5)  Minimum landscaped area: 
(6)  Maximum building height: Thirty (30) feet 
(7)  Minimum building separation: Zero (0) feet or not less than ten (10) feet 
(j)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted within this district are identified in article V. 
(k)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses and accessory use regulations are identified in article V. 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- A copy of Table IV-7 is located at city hall for inspection. 

Sec. 14-69. - Residential medium (RM) district. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the RM district is to allow development of multifamily dwelling units and group homes/congregate living facilities. 
(b)  Development standards. 
(1)  Minimum lot dimension. 
a.  Lot area: Thirty thousand (30,000) square feet 
b.  Minimum lot width: One hundred (100) feet 
(2)  Minimum setbacks for principal structures. 
a.  Front: Twenty (20) feet 
b.  Rear: One (1) foot 
c.  Side: One (1) foot 
(3)  Maximum lot coverage by structure: Forty-five (45) percent 
(4)  Maximum building height: Forty (40) feet 
(c)  Permitted uses. Uses permitted within this district are identified in article V. 
(d)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses and accessory use regulations are identified in article V. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07 , § 1, 10-22-13) 
Sec. 14-70-14-73. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PERMITTED USES, USES PERMITTED WITH ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW, USES PERMITTED WITH SITE PLAN REVIEW, AND CONDITIONAL USES 

Sec. 14-74. - Intent. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this article is to provide a listing of uses permitted within the various zoning districts established by this chapter and certain extra review requirements for selected permitted uses and conditional uses. Uses permitted within the City of Pahokee may be classified in one (1) or more of the following categories: 
(1)  Uses permitted by right (P). 
(2)  Uses permitted by right subject to administrative review (AR). 
(3)  Uses permitted by right subject to site plan review (SPR). 
(4)  Conditional uses (CU). 
    Table V-1 of this article (permitted use table), indicates applicable zoning districts for the various uses and exact nature of the uses. Section 14-76 provides "requirements for uses," which specify permitted uses, and any additional application requirements and review or additional standards that may be necessary to justify and establish each use. Each use listed in this portion of the article is referenced by an item number corresponding to its location in the permitted use table. 
    Appendix B of this chapter (master use list) provides a listing of the uses categorized in this article. Each master use listed in appendix B is referenced by item number to its corresponding use in the permitted use table. 
Sec. 14-75. - Permitted use table. 
(a)  Permitted uses. Uses as regulated in this section shall be determined as provided in the Table V-1 (permitted use table). Uses in the permitted use table are classified as the following: 
(1)  Uses permitted by right . Uses allowed throughout a district, as a matter of right, are subject to all applicable provision of this chapter. These uses are designated by a "P" in Table V-1. 
(2)  Permitted by administrative review. These uses are compatible with uses permitted by right which have extra requirements imposed. Uses of this nature may be established subject to approval by the director of community development in accordance with article II. The extra requirements applicable to specific uses are presented in section 14-76. These uses are designated "AR" in Table V-I. 
(3)  Permitted by site plan review. Uses which are permitted by right, but because of their size, intensity or potential impact require additional review to insure the area in which they are located is not adversely affected. Uses of this nature may be established subject to approval by the planning board in accordance with article II. The applicable review criteria to specific uses are presented in section 14-76. These uses are designated "SPR" in Table V-I. 
(4)  Permitted as conditional use. Uses which are generally prohibited in a district, but may be permitted if certain additional standards are met. Uses of this nature may established subject to approval by the board of adjustment in accordance with article II. The additional standards applicable to specified conditional uses in specified zoning districts are presented in section 14-76. These uses are designated "CU" in Table V-1. 
(b)  Establishment of use regulations. Except as otherwise provided herein, regulations governing the use of land and structures are hereby established as shown in the permitted use table. Uses not expressly permitted are prohibited. 
(c)  Permitted uses within all districts. Within all districts there are certain uses permitted as a matter of right that are not listed on the permitted use table. These uses are above ground and buried utility lines for local distribution of electricity, telephone, cable television service; accessory and appurtenant apparatus such as poles, guy wires, transformers and switching boxes; public and private streets and roads; railroad right of way; water and sanitary sewer lines; and gas and liquid fuel distribution lines. 
Table V-1 
ZONING DISTRICTS 
[Table of Permitted Uses] USES SF1 SF5 SF7 SFMH SFMU MF12 MF18 RM NC GC CORE LI HI PF R/OS WOR AG  1  Accessory Dwelling Units AR AR AR AR AR AR AR SPR AR  2  Accessory Structures - Residential AR AR AR AR AR AR AR  3  Adult Entertainment Uses CU  4  Agriculture - Animal Production/Husbandry P  5  Agriculture - Crop, Citrus, etc. P  6  Airport, Landing Field, Heliopad - Private or Public CU CU CU CU  7  Apparel & Accessory Retail - Sales & Rental Stores P P SPR P P  8  Art Merchandising Studios SPR P P SPR P P  9  Art & Drafting Supply Stores including Picture Frames SPR P P SPR P P  9.1  Automotive painting P 10  Bait & Tackle Shops P P P P P 11  Barber & Beauty Shops P P SPR P P 12  Bars, Lounges & Related Entertainment CU P SPR P P P 13  Bathroom & Kitchen Contractor Showrooms SPR P SPR P P 13.1  Bed and Breakfast small homestay CU CU CU CU CU CU CU CU** CU** CU** CU** CU** CU** CU** 13.2  Bed and Breakfast large homestay CU** CU** CU** CU** CU** CU** CU** 14  Book & Stationery Stores P P SPR P P 15  Botanical Gardens & Accessory Offices AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR SPR P P P P 16  Business & Commercial Machine Sales P P SPR P P 17  Candy, Nut & Confectionary Stores P P SPR 18  Catering Establishments CU P P SPR P 19  Cemeteries, Public & Private P P 20  Churches, Synagogues & Other Houses of Worship CU CU CU SPR SPR SPR SPR 21  Clinics - Public or Private AR AR SPR P 22  Clubs & Lodges without Restaurant CU AR P SPR P 23  Coin & Philatetic Stores CU P P SPR P 24  Commercial, Comparison Shopping, except as otherwise listed P SPR 25  Commercial, Single Destination Uses except where otherwise listed P P SPR P 26  Commercial, Convenience Sales & Personal Service, except as otherwise listed P P SPR 27  Communication Towers AR AR CU SPR 28  Convenience Stores CU P SPR 29  Convent, Monasteries & Semenaries P P P P 30  Cultural Facilities - Public or Private SPR P P P AR 31  Daycare Facilities - Accessory Children, Family AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR P 32  Daycare Facilities - Adult CU CU CU P P P P SPR AR 33  Daycare Facilities - Children as Accessory in House of Worship & Schools, Public or Private AR AR AR AR AR SPR AR 34  Daycare Facilities - Children as Principal Use CU CU CU CU AR AR AR AR SPR AR 35  Delicatessen P P SPR P P 36  Department Stores - Major P SPR 37  Drive Through Facilities except Restaurants, as principal uses AR AR AR 38  Exercise Studios & Health Clubs P P SPR P 39  Facial & Scalp Treatment Services SPR P P SPR P 40  Financial Institutions, including Banks, Savings & Loans and Credit Unions AR AR SPR 41  Flower Shops and Florists SPR P P SPR P 42  Food & Beverage Related Uses, except as otherwise listed P P SPR 43  Food Stores or Supermarkets greater than 10,000 sq. ft. P SPR 44  Food Stores - Speciality P P SPR 45  Funeral Homes, Mortuaries & Crematories P P P 45.1  Funeral Homes P SPR P P 46  Furniture Refinishing & Repair P P 47  Game Arcades CU CU CU P 48  Gift, Novelty, Souvenir & Sundry Shops P P SPR 49  Government Facilities, not otherwise listed P SPR P P P 50  Greenhouses - Commercial P P 51  Group Homes - Type I (5 or less) AR AR AR AR AR AR AR P P AR 52  Group Homes - Type III (6 or more) CU CU CU CU CU AR AR P AR AR SPR P AR 53  Group Homes - Type V P CU CU 54  Gun Clubs & Shooting Ranges AR AR 55  Hardware, Paint, Glass and Wallpaper Stores P P SPR P 56  Home Occupations - Accessory to Residential Use AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR 57  Hospitals - Public or Private CU SPR SPR SPR 58  Hotels & Motels AR SPR AR 59  Industrial - Heavy, except where otherwise listed P 60  Industrial - Light, except where otherwise listed P P 61  Interior Decorators SPR P P SPR P 62  Junk, Scrap & Salvage Yards AR P 63  Laundry & Dry Cleaning establishments, cleaning on premises AR SPR P P 64  Laundry & Dry Cleaning establishments serving primarily the public AR AR SPR P P 65  Laundry and Dry Cleaning establishments, serving the public - coin operated, no cleaning on premises P P SPR P 66  Liquor & Party Stores AR P SPR P 67  Locksmith & Key Establishments SPR P P SPR P 68  Mailing Services P P SPR P 69  Marine - Industrial Establishments P P 70  Marine - Retail Sales & Service P P P 71  Martial Arts Studios P P SPR P 72  Mobile Home Park P AR 73  Mobile Home, Sales, Rental & Service Agencies P 74  Monument Sales Establishments P P P 75  Motion Picture Studios P P P 76  Motor Vehicles Fuel Sales & Service (Gas & Service Stations) AR AR SPR AR AR 77  Motor Vehicle Parts & Accessory Store P P SPR P 78  Motor Vehicle Repair - Heavy (including body repairs & painting) AR P 79  Motor Vehicle Repair - Light (including body repairs & painting) AR P P 80  Motor Vehicle - Sales & Rental (no service) P SPR P 81  Motor Vehicle Sales & Service Agencies AR SPR AR 82  Motor Vehicle Title & Tag Service P SPR 83  Motorcycle Sales and Service Establishments P SPR P 84  Music & Dance Studios SPR P P SPR 85  Newspaper Distributing Agencies P P P 86  Newspaper & Magazine Shops P P SPR P 87  Nurseries - Retail, for sale of plant materials grown off premises P P SPR P 88  Nurseries - Wholesale & Retail, for sale of plant materials grown on premises P P P 89  Office & Related Uses - including business services, except as otherwise listed P P SPR P 90  Office & Support Retail - not occupying more than 20% of gross square footage P P SPR P 91  Offices - Governmental Administration P P SPR P 92  Offices - Professional SPR P P SPR P 93  Offices or Facilities, quasi-public associations & organization, not for profit SPR P P SPR 94  Outdoor Storage Facilities for Families & Businesses P P 95  Parking Garages as Principal Use AR AR SPR SPR 96  Parking Lot as Principal - accessory or offsite uses AR AR SPR AR 97  Parking or Storage of Recreational Vehicles, accessory in residential districts P P P P P P P P 98  Pawn Shops P SPR P 99  Pet Grooming Establishments, but not kennels SPR P P SPR P P 100  Photocopying Services P P SPR P 101  Photographic Studios SPR P P SPR P 102  Post Office P P SPR P P P 103  Private Use on Public (City) land CU CU CU CU 104  Printing & Type Setting Serivces P SPR P P 105  Produce Markets P P SPR P 106  Public Safety Facilities - operated by private agencies CU CU CU CU CU CU CU CU CU CU CU CU CU CU CU CU 107  Public Safety Facilities - operated by public agencies P P P P P P P P P SPR P P P P P P 108  Radio & Television Broadcasting Studios & Facilities P SPR P P 109  Railroad Switching & Marshalling Yards CU P 110  Recreation - Indoors P SPR P 111  Recreation - Outdoors, General SPR SPR SPR SPR SPR SPR 112  Recreation - Outdoors, High Intensity CU CU SPR SPR CU 113  Recreation - Outdoors, Amusement Temporary CU CU CU CU CU CU CU CU CU CU CU CU CU CU CU 114  Recreation, Stadium & Sports Areans CU CU CU CU CU CU 115  Repair Shops for Household Appliances, Small Motors & Machines SPR P P SPR P 116  Research & Development Facilities - not of an industrial nature P SPR P 117  Research & Development Facilities - of an industrial nature P P 118  Residential, Fraternities & Sororities P P P 119  Residential, Multifamily P P P 120  Residential, Rooming & Boarding Houses P P P 120.1  Residential, Single Family Associated with an Industry P P 121  Residential - Single Family Detatched P P P P P P P P P 122  Residential - Single Family Attached & Detatched P P P 123  Residential - Townhouse P P P SPR 124  Restaurants serving a limited clientele (Private clubs & lodges) CU AR AR P SPR CU 125  Restaurants serving general public, but not drive in or drive through facilities AR P P SPR P P 126  Restaurants serving general public, drive in or drive through facilities AR AR AR CU AR 127  Retail Bakeries P P SPR 128  Retail Building Material Sales P SPR P 129  Retail Business P P SPR 130  Sandwich or Snack Shops P P SPR P 131  Satellite Reception Dishes - principal or accessory in non-residential districts AR AR P P AR 132  Satellite Reception Dishes - accessory to residential districts AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR P 133  Schools - Public & Private, Elementary, Intermediate, & Secondary CU CU CU CU CU CU P P P CU 134  Schools - Public Vocational & Trade involving industrial equipment P P P 135  Schools - Public Vocational & Trade not involving industrial equipment P SPR P P P P 136  Schools - Colleges & Universities Public & Private SPR P 137  Scrap, Waste & Reclaimed Materials Trade AR AR 138  Ship & Boat Building & Repair P P 138.1  Shelters AR 139  Special Non-commercial Events of Public Interest AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR 140  Swimming Pools, Accessory to Residential Uses AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR 141  Swimming Pool Sales P P 142  Tax Return Preparation Services SPR P P SPR 143  Taxidermists P P 144  Temporary Borrow Pits, Borrow Piles & Similar Excavation AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR 145  Temporary Manual Labor Hiring Offices P SPR P P P 146  Temporary Non-Manual Labor Hiring Offices P SPR P P 147  Temporary Model Dwelling or Sales Office CU CU CU CU CU CU CU AR AR SPR 148  Temporary Offices & Facilities for Construction, Storage, & Security AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR 149  Temporary Produce Stands CU CU CU CU 150  Theaters, Indoor, Motion Pictures Live Performances P SPR 151  Tobacco Shops P P SPR 151.1  Towing with Storage of Towed Vehicles to be Behind a Fenced Area and Storage not to Exceed 90 days P 152  Transit Storage & Maintenance Facilities for Passenger Transportation Operations AR AR AR 153  Transit, Passenger & Freight Terminal CU CU P P 154  Travel Agencies or Transportation Tickets SPR P P SPR 155  Upholstery, Cloth & Canvas Products Fabrication P P 156  Utility Facilities, Heavy Public & Private P P AR 157  Utility Facilities, Light Public & Private AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR AR 158  Veterinary Clinics & Hospitals, Animal Shelters Enclosed AR AR AR P AR P 159  Veterinary Clinics & Hospitals, Animal Shelters unenclosed AR P 160  Warehousing - Self Storage for Families & Small Business P P P 161  Warehousing having moderate external impact P P P 162  Warehousing having significant impact AR AR 163  Watch & Shoe Repair Establishments SPR P P P P 164  Wholesale having moderate external impacts P AR AR 165  Wholesale having significant extern impacts P P 166  Yard & Garage Sales AR AR AR AR AR AR AR  
*NOTE: All non-residential development greater than sixteen thousand (16,000) square feet and residential developments greater than twenty (20) units may only be permitted as a planned unit development. 
** Bed and breakfast small and large homestay may be allowed as a conditional use in all areas directly adjacent to or included in office, commercial, agriculture or industrial zones provided that all additional requirements are met. 
(Ord. No. 92-1 , § 1, 4-14-92; Ord. No. 96-9 , 9-10-96; Ord. No. 99-7 , § 2, 6-22-99; Ord. No. 99-17 , 1-25-00; Ord. No. 2011-03 , § 1, 10-11-11; Ord. No. 2012-09 , § 1, 7-24-12; Ord. No. 2013-04 , § 1, 1-8-13; Ord. No. 2013-07 , § 1, 10-22-13) 
Sec. 14-76. - Extra requirements for conditional uses or permitted uses. 
(a)  General requirements. The uses listed in this section are determined to be the uses permitted by right subject to administrative review, site plan review or conditional uses. Each use shall be required to conform to the following: 
(1)  Additional application requirements. These requirements are in addition to those required by other articles and sections of the chapter. All applications to establish each use shall submit all additional information listed in this section. 
(2)  Additional standards. These additional standards are required in addition to all other requirements listed in other articles and sections of this chapter. All applications shall conform to all such additional standards listed in this section unless the board of adjustment shall reduce the same upon a finding, based upon a preponderance of the evidence of record, that the proposed use nevertheless: 
a.  Will be consistent with the comprehensive plan; 
b.  Will be in harmony with the general character of the neighborhood considering population density, design, scale, and bulk of any proposed new structures, intensity and character of activity, traffic and parking conditions, and number of similar uses; 
c.  Will not be detrimental to the use, peaceful enjoyment, economic value, or development of surrounding properties or the general neighborhood; and will cause no objectionable noise, vibrations, fumes, odors, dust, glare or physical activity; 
d.  Will have no detrimental effect on vehicular or pedestrian traffic; 
e.  Will not adversely affect the health, safety, security, morals, or general welfare of residents, or workers in the area; 
f.  will not, in conjunction with existing development in the area and development permitted under existing zoning, overburden existing public services and facilities, including schools, police and fire protection, potable water, sanitary sewer, public roads, storm drainage, and other public improvements; 
g.  Otherwise meets the definition standards set forth elsewhere in this chapter for such particular use; and 
h.  Will provide alternative measures consistent with the intent of the additional standards to provide protection to adjacent properties and preserve neighborhood character. 
(b)  Waiver of administrative review standards. In the event of an application for a waiver of an additional standard affecting a use permitted with administrative review, such waiver shall require approval by the board of adjustment as a conditional use. 
(c)  Recommendation by the director of community development. The board of adjustment shall not act upon any application for a waiver of reduction of the additional standards pertaining to a conditional use or a use permitted with administrative review unless an advisory recommendation concerning the waiver or reduction is provided by the director of community development within the time limits specified by this chapter. 
(d)  Requirements and standards for uses permitted by administrative review and conditional uses. 
(1)  Accessory dwelling units (AR). 
a.  Additional application requirements: None. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Minimum site dimension: 
(i)  Minimum lot area: Six thousand five hundred (6,500) square feet. 
(ii)  Maximum height: Accessory dwelling units shall not exceed the maximum structure height permitted in the zoning district where located or the height of the principal structure, whichever is less. 
c.  Maximum unit size: Seven hundred fifty (750) Square feet. 
d.  Off-street parking: Off-street parking shall be provided for accessory dwelling units pursuant to the provisions of article VIII. 
e.  Accessory structure: Dwelling units must be accessory to and physically connected to a garage structure that is designed and used for the parking or storage of one (1) or more motor vehicles. 
f.  Setbacks: Accessory dwelling units shall meet or exceed all setbacks required for the main building or principal structure for the residential zoning district within which they are located. Accessory dwelling units shall meet the requirements for separation from and setback behind the main building or principal structure as provided in section IV. 
(2)  Accessory structures, residential (AR). 
a.  Additional application requirements: None. 
b.  Additional Standards: 
1.  Residential accessory structures shall be used only for uses which are accessory to residential uses. 
2.  Minimum setbacks: 
(i)  Accessory structures may be built in side and rear setbacks provided that they must be placed a minimum of five (5) feet from all side and rear lot lines. 
(ii)  Such structures may be built within front and corner setbacks. front wall of the main building, or between the main building and any street in a corner lot. 
3.  Accessory structures shall not exceed the maximum structure height permitted in the zoning district where located or the height of the principal structure, whichever is less. 
(3)  Adult entertainment uses (CU). 
a.  Additional application requirements: Proof of any licenses required by local, state, and other applicable authority. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Use limitations: Adult entertainment uses shall include bookstores which have more than ten (10) percent of their stock in trade in inventory units (books, magazines, or other publications) the sale of which is prohibited to minors; cabarets or bars with live topless and/or bottomless hostesses, waitresses, or other employees; adult massage parlors and nude photographic studios; adult motion picture theaters and mini-motion picture theaters which have more than ten (10) percent of their screening time over a six (6) month period devoted to motion pictures, the attendance at which is prohibited to minors; video tape or film sales and rental establishments which have more than ten (10) percent of their stock in trade in inventory units (video tapes or films), the sale or rental of which is prohibited to minors; any use or selling equipment or paraphernalia which might be used for the preparation or taking of prohibited or regulated substances. 
2.  Locational requirements: Adult entertainment uses as defined in this section shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet of any area in the City of Pahokee which is zoned for residential uses. It shall be unlawful to locate any adult entertainment use, as defined in this Section, within five hundred (500) feet of any adult entertainment use, unless such existing location is within the same building as such existing adult entertainment use. It shall be unlawful to locate any adult entertainment use as defined in this section within five hundred (500) feet of any pre-existing place of religious worship, public or private school, or any public park, playground, swimming pool, golf course or athletic field within the city which is under the control, operation, or jurisdiction or the city. For the purpose of measuring distances in the determination of locations for adult entertainment uses as defined in this section all distances shall be measured from property line to property line in a strait path, without regard to intervening structures or objects. 
3.  Advertisements, displays, or other promotional materials for adult entertainment uses shall not be shown or exhibited in any manner that permits observation from pedestrian sidewalks or walkways, or from other public or semipublic areas. 
4.  All doors, windows and other building openings to adult entertainment uses shall be located, covered, or screened in such a manner as to prevent a view into the interior from any public or semi-public area. 
5.  All adult entertainment uses shall meet all applicable codes. 
(4)  Agriculture: Animal production/husbandry (Reserved). 
(5)  Agriculture: Crops, citrus, etc. (Reserved). 
(6)  Airports, landing fields, helistops and helipads: Private or public (CU). 
a.  Additional application requirements: 
1.  A detailed traffic impact analysis prepared pursuant to article III, section 14-42(3) of this code. 
2.  A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airspace analysis. 
3.  A preliminary Florida Department of Transportation Airport License Report. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Minimum ground facilities, navigational aids, landing strip dimensions and related requirements of the Florida Department of Transportation for airports. 
2.  Heliport and helipad design guidelines adopted by the FAA. 
3.  Guidelines adopted by the FAA if a general aviation airport; adopted by the FAA. 
4.  Fencing and screening as required by the board of adjustments. 
5.  Minimum distances: 
(i)  All ends of runways: at least fifty (50) feet from any property line or as required by the Florida Department of Transportation, whichever is greater. 
(ii)  All principal and accessory uses: at least fifty (50) feet from any property line. 
(iii)  All runways and associated takeoff and landing facilities: at least fifty (50) feet from any property line. 
(7)  Apparel and accessory retail: Sales and rental services (Reserved). 
(8)  Art merchandising studios (Reserved). 
(9)  Art and drafting supply stores including picture frames (Reserved). 
(9.1)  Automotive painting (Reserved). 
(10)  Bait and tackle shops (Reserved). 
(11)  Barber and beauty shops (Reserved). 
(12)  Bars, lounges, and related entertainment (CU). 
a.  Additional application requirements: Proof of any licenses required by local, state, and other applicable authorities. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Minimum site dimensions: 
(i)  Minimum site area: Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet 
(ii)  Minimum lot width: One hundred (100) feet 
2.  Minimum distances: 
(i)  All principal and accessory structures: One hundred (100) feet from any residential zoning district ten (10) feet from all property lines. 
(ii)  All parking, loading, and vehicular circulation areas: Fifty (50) feet from any residential zoning district and ten (10) feet from all property lines. 
(iii)  Ingress into the bar or lounge shall be permitted only through the front door of the establishment, two hundred fifty (250) feet from any existing bar or lounge in a general commercial zoning district and five hundred (500) feet from any existing bar or lounge in a neighborhood commercial zoning district. Bars and lounges shall not be located within one hundred (100) feet of any place of religious worship, or public or private school. (section 4-2 of the city code prohibits sale of liquor, beer or wine within, "500 feet of a church or public, private or parochial school.") 
(13)  Bathroom and kitchen contractor showrooms (Reserved). 
(13.1 and 13.2) Bed and breakfast homestays. (CU) 
a.  Design standards. 
1.  Signs: One (1) sign not to exceed eight (8) square feet may be permitted to identify the establishment in residential zoning districts. The sign must be aesthetically pleasing. Neon signs are not allowed. 
2.  Exterior design standards: The exterior appearance of the structure shall not be altered from its single-family appearance. 
3.  Additional conditions: Other conditions that may be deemed necessary by the zoning, adjustment and planning board to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public may be imposed. 
(14)  Book and stationery stores (Reserved). 
(15)  Botanical gardens and accessory offices (AR). 
a.  Additional application requirements: None. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Minimum site dimensions: Five (5) acres. 
2.  All parking shall be contained on the site. 
3.  No on- or off-site advertising or signage shall be permitted other than a "home nameplate." 
4.  No commercial activities including but not limited to the sale of plants, plant-related products, or other services, shall be conducted on the property. 
5.  There shall be no tours of the premises. 
6.  Aside from greenhouses, buildings essential to the operation of the gardens, including research and administrative facilities, may be located on the parcel as an ancillary use, provided the total floor area of all buildings so used shall not exceed three (3) percent of the parcel. 
7.  There shall be no changes made to the property which would require a building permit, variance, conditional use, subdivision approval, or zoning change, without prior site plan approval by the city pursuant to article II, section 14-24. 
(16)  Business and commercial machine sales (Reserved). 
(17)  Candy, nut and confectionary stores (Reserved). 
(18)  Catering establishments (Reserved). 
(19)  Cemeteries: Public and private (Reserved). 
(20)  Churches, synagogues, and other houses of worship (CU). 
a.  Additional application requirements: None. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Minimum site dimensions: 
(i)  Minimum site area: One (1) acre. 
(ii)  Minimum lot width: One hundred (100) feet. 
2.  Minimum distances: 
(i)  All principal and accessory structures: Fifty (50) feet from a residential zoning district or fifty (50) feet from a residential property line if located in a residential zoning district. 
(ii)  All parking, loading and vehicular circulation areas: Fifty (50) feet from any residential property line if located in a residential zoning district. 
(21)  Clinics, public and private (AR). 
a.  Additional application requirements: None. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Minimum site dimensions: 
(i)  All principal and accessory structures: Fifty (50) feet from any residential zoning district. 
(ii)  All parking, loading and vehicular circulation area: Ten (10) feet from any residential zoning district. 
2.  Minimum distances: 
(i)  All principal and accessory structures: Fifty (50) feet from any residential zoning district. 
(ii)  All parking, loading and vehicular circulation area: Ten (10) feet from any residential zoning district. 
3.  Ingress and egress shall be provided only from a major or minor arterial or a collector or local street segment which does not pass through a residential zoning district. 
(22)  Clubs and lodges without a restaurant (CU). 
a.  Additional application requirements: None. 
b.  Additional standards: Clubs and lodges without a restaurant shall be permitted only on sites at least a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from the nearest residential zoning district as measured from property line to property line, without regard to intervening structures or objects. 
(23)  Coin and philatetic stores (Reserved). 
(24)  Commercial, comparison shopping, except as otherwise listed (Reserved). 
(25)  Commercial, single destination uses, except as otherwise listed (Reserved). 
(26)  Commercial, convenience sales and personal service, except as otherwise listed (Reserved). 
(27)  Communications towers (CU). 
a.  Additional application requirements: Verification of approval by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), and other state and federal requirements for tower site and design. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  The tower shall be landscaped to screen the base from adjacent residential uses, streets, parks and other public property. 
2.  The tower shall not be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any residential zoning district. 
3.  Operations and facilities shall comply with all applicable state and Federal agency requirements. 
4.  The tower shall conform with height, design or other building restrictions pursuant to this code. 
5.  The tower shall be set back from all property lines a distance equal to one hundred ten (110) percent of tower height. 
(28)  Convenience stores (CU). 
a.  Additional application requirements: None. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Minimum site dimensions: 
(i)  Minimum site area: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(ii)  Minimum lot width: One hundred (100) feet. 
2.  Minimum distances: 
(i)  All parking loading and vehicular circulation areas: Twenty-five (25) feet from any residential zoning district. 
(ii)  All convenience stores shall be located a minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet from any existing convenience store and one hundred (100) feet from any pre-existing place of religious worship, public or private school, or residential zoning district. Distance shall be measured from property line to property line, without regard to intervening structures or object. 
(29)  Convents, monasteries, and seminaries (Reserved). 
(30)  Cultural facilities, public and private (Reserved). 
(31)  Day care facilities, accessory, children, family and large family (AR). 
a.  Additional application standards: A written statement that the proposed family child day care facility or large family child care home will comply with all applicable county and state regulations. 
b.  Additional standards: All family child day care facilities and large family child care homes (F.S. 402.302(11) shall comply with the requirements of all Laws of Florida and county regulations. 
(32)  Day care facilities, adult (CU). 
a.  Additional application requirements: A written statement that the proposed adult day care facility will comply with all applicable county and state regulations. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Applications to establish adult day care centers shall comply with the requirements of F.S. ch. 400, pt. IV. 
2.  Minimum site dimensions: 
(i)  Minimum site area must conform to the requirements for the district within which the facility is to be located. 
(ii)  Minimum lot width: One hundred (100) feet. 
3.  Minimum Distances: All principal and accessory structures: Thirty (30) feet from any residential zoning district or thirty (30) feet from a residential property line if located in a residential zoning district. 
4.  At least one hundred (100) square feet of available outdoor activity area shall be provided for each adult. 
5.  Available activity areas shall not be located within the front setbacks. 
6.  Outdoor activity areas shall be screened with a solid wall or fence not less than five (5) feet in height. 
7.  Seventy-five (75) percent of all front yards in SF5, SF7, SFMU, MF12 and MF18 residential zoning districts shall be maintained and landscaped pursuant to article IX, of this code. 
(33)  Day care facilities, children, as accessory uses in houses of worship and schools (AR). 
a.  Additional application requirements: 
1.  A written statement that the proposed child day care center will comply with all applicable county and state regulations. 
2.  A written statement that the proposed child day care center will be operated and maintained solely by the church or in conjunction with a registered not-for-profit public agency or organization. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Applications to establish child day care centers in houses of worship and schools located in residential districts shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 59.1968, Special Acts, Laws of Florida, as amended. 
2.  Minimum site dimensions: 
(i)  Minimum site area: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(ii)  Minimum lot width: One hundred (100) feet. 
3.  Minimum distances: 
(i)  All principal structures: Fifty (50) feet from any residential zoning district or fifty (50) feet from a residential property line if located in a residential zoning district. 
(ii)  All parking, loading, and vehicular circulation areas: Thirty (30) feet from any residential zoning district or thirty (30) feet from a residential property line if located in a residential zoning district. 
(iii)  All outdoor play areas: Ten (10) feet from any residential zoning district or ten (10) feet from a residential property line if located in a residential zoning district. 
4.  Available play or activity areas shall not be located within the front setback. 
5.  Adequate off street pick-up and drop-off facilities shall be provided. Loading and unloading facilities for children such as circular driveways or similar circulation systems that allow for the stacking of three (3) standard size cars without interfering with the traffic flow of servicing right-of-way or the ingress and egress of the parking area. 
6.  Outdoor play and activity areas shall be screened with a solid wall or fence at least five (5) feet in height. 
(34)  Day care facilities, children, as principal uses (AR). 
a.  Additional application requirements: A statement that the proposed day care center will comply with all applicable county and state regulations. 
b.  Additional standards: Applications to establish child day care center shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 59.1968, Special Acts, Laws of Florida, as amended. 
Day care facilities, children, as principal uses (CU). 
(a)  (b)  Additional application requirements and standards. Applications to establish child day care center as a principal use in residential districts shall comply with the provisions of Article ____, Section ____, of this code. 
(35)  Delicatessens (Reserved). 
(36)  Department stores-Major (Reserved). 
(37)  Drive through facilities, except restaurants, as principal uses (AR). 
a.  Additional application requirements: None. 
b.  Additional standards. 
1.  Minimum distances: All principal and accessory structures: One hundred (100) feet from any residential zoning district; 
2.  Ingress and egress shall be provided only from a major or minor arterial, a collector or local street segment which does not pass through a residential zoning district. 
3.  No more than two (2) curb cuts shall be permitted on any single street's frontage. Curb cuts shall be limited to a maximum width of twenty-five (25) feet, shall be located no closer than thirty-five (35) feet to any intersection and shall be at least ten (10) feet removed from property lines. A fifteen (15) foot separation shall be maintained between curb cuts. 
(38)  Exercise studios and health clubs (Reserved). 
(39)  Facial and scalp treatment services (Reserved). 
(40)  Financial institutions, including banks, savings and loans and credit unions. (AR) 
a.  Additional application requirements: 
1.  A detailed traffic impact analysis study will be prepared pursuant to article III, section 14-42(3) of this code. 
2.  Landscaping will be provided pursuant to article IX, of this code. 
b.  Additional standards: Drive-through banking facilities shall be permitted pursuant to article VIII, of this code. 
(41)  Flowers shop and florist (Reserved). 
(42)  Food and beverage related uses, except as otherwise listed (Reserved). 
(43)  Food stores or supermarkets in excess of ten thousand (10,000) square feet (Reserved). 
(44)  Food stores-Specialty (Reserved). 
(45)  Funeral homes, mortuaries and crematories (Reserved). 
(46)  Furniture refinishing and repair (Reserved). 
(47)  Game arcades (CU). 
a.  Additional application requirements: None. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Minimum distances: All principal and accessory structures one hundred (100) feet from any residential zoning district. 
2.  The hours of operation of game arcades shall be no earlier than 10:00 a.m. and no later than 9:00 p.m. weekdays and midnight on weekends. 
3.  There shall be fifty (50) square feet of gross floor space for each video machine within the establishment. 
4.  An attendant shall be present during all hours of operation. 
(48)  Gift, novelty, souvenir and sundry shops (Reserved). 
(49)  Government facilities, not otherwise listed (Reserved). 
(50)  Greenhouses-Commercial (Reserved). 
(51 though 53) Group homes (AR and CU). 
a.  Intent and applicable zoning districts. It is the purpose of this section to set forth standards for the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of both the community and the residents of a group home facility. The term "group home," encompasses lodging, nursing homes, adult congregate living facilities (ACLF), group care home, recovery home, and residential treatment facilities; or other planned development, a group home is considered a conditional use in all zoning districts where permitted. HRS has classified five (5) types of group homes and for the purpose of this section, group homes are classified as follows: 
1.  Type I: Group homes of not more than five (5) residents. 
2.  Type III: Group homes of more than five (5) residents; and 
3.  Type V: Group homes for classed individuals such as former substance abusers, participants in inmate release programs, etc. 
b.  Additional application requirements: 
1.  Prior to issuance of an occupational license or building permit, whichever occurs first, evidence shall be provided that appropriate approvals or licenses from county, state, or federal regulatory agencies have been obtained. 
2.  In the event all or a portion of a group home consists of bonafide dwelling units, rather than sleeping quarters without personal care or service normally provided by licensed adult congregate living facilities, then the regulations of the applicable zoning districts shall apply. 
c.  Additional standards. 
1.  Residential character/district compatibility. If the facility is located within a residential district, it shall be maintained to conform to the character of that neighborhood. This standard applies to design, density, lot size, landscaping, or other factors affecting the neighborhood's character. This will prevent disruption of a dissimilar structure. 
2.  A group home facility shall be located a minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet from another such facility. 
3.  No signs denoting the name and/or purpose of a special residential use shall be allowed in any residential district. 
4.  Facilities located in nonresidential areas shall be maintained in the general character of the surrounding area. This standard applies to design, lot size, landscaping,, and other factors affecting the character of the area. 
5.  The total occupancy of a structure designed for a group home use shall not exceed that allowed in Section 16.1.7.1 of the Life Safety Code of (two hundred (200) square feet per occupant). For homes on a local street, occupancy shall not exceed two (2) clients per total number of bedrooms minus one(1) , or two (2) clients per bathroom, whichever is less. 
6.  The standards in the chapter which is entitled "Lodging or Rooming Houses," in the Life Safety Code (see subsection 3109 of this code) shall be the minimum standards for group homes. 
7.  Licensed nursing homes in residential districts may have two and one-half (2.5) times as many beds as dwelling units permitted in that district. 
8.  Parking shall be provided pursuant to article VIII of this code. 
9.  Dwelling units in group homes shall have a minimum living area of four hundred fifty (450) square feet. 
(54)  Gun clubs and shooting ranges (AR). 
a.  Additional application requirements: None. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  All facilities shall be located within an enclosed building. 
2.  Buildings shall be constructed and operated in such a manner that gunshots and related noise will not be detectable at adjoining property lines. Buildings shall be completely air conditioned. 
3.  Minimum distance: One thousand (1,000) feet from any residential zoning district as measured from property line to property line, without regard to intervening structures or objects. 
(55)  Hardware, paint, glass and wallpaper stores (Reserved). 
(56)  Home occupations, accessory to residential uses (AR). 
a.  Additional application requirements: 
1.  A floor plan showing the size, dimensions and space utilization for the proposed home occupation. 
2.  A signed affidavit from the applicant stating that the proposed home occupation will comply with all requirements of this section. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Home occupations shall be carried on entirely within a dwelling and only by members of the family permanently residing within the dwelling unit. 
2.  The use of the dwelling unit for a home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to this use for residential purposes and shall not result in a change to the residential character of the structure. 
3.  There shall be no visible evidence of the conduct of a home occupation within a dwelling unit. There shall be no display that would indicate from the exterior that the building is being utilized in part of any purpose other than a residence. 
4.  A home occupation shall not be conducted in any accessory building. 
5.  A home occupation shall not utilize more than twenty (20) percent of the first floor area of a residence, exclusive of the area contained in any open porch, attached garage, or similar space not intended for occupancy as living quarters. 
6.  Commodities shall not be sold upon the premises. 
7.  Traffic shall not be generated by a home occupation in greater volume than normally expected in residential neighborhood. Parking required by the conduct of a home occupation shall be provided off-street and shall not be located in the front setback. 
8.  Mechanical or electrical equipment shall not be employed other than machinery or equipment customarily found in the home associated with a hobby or vocation not conducted for profit, or machinery or equipment which is essential to normal domestic activities. 
9.  Equipment or processes shall not be used in conjunction with a home occupation which create noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses on property adjacent to such use. In the case of electrical interference, equipment or processes shall not be used which create visual or audible interference in the normal operation of radios, televisions, and similar equipment operated on property adjacent to such use. 
10.  A home occupation shall not provide services to more than two (2) clients on the premises at any one (1) time. 
11.  A home occupation shall be subject to all applicable city occupational licenses and other business taxes. 
12.  Permissible home occupations shall include but are not limited to the following: 
(i)  Artists and sculptors. 
(ii)  Authors and composers. 
(iii)  Family day care services as regulated by section 14-76(31) through (43). 
(iv)  Dressmakers, seamstresses and tailors; 
(v)  Home crafts, such as model making, rug weaving and ceramics. 
(vi)  Office facility of a minister, rabbi, priest, or other similar person associated with a church, temple, or other house of worship. 
(vii)  Office facility of a salesman, sales representative, or manufacturer's representative, provided no retail or wholesale transactions are conducted on the premises. 
(57)  Hospitals, public, and private (CU). 
a.  Additional application requirements: 
1.  A detailed traffic impact analysis prepared pursuant to article III, section 14-42(3) of this code. 
2.  An approved "Certificate of Need" issued by the Florida Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Minimum site dimensions: Five (5) acres. 
2.  The proposed site shall not abut any residential zoning district. 
3.  Minimum distances: All principal and accessory buildings: Thirty (30) feet from any property line. 
4.  Vehicular access shall be provided only from a major or minor arterial, or a collector. 
(58)  Hotels and motels (CU). 
a.  Additional application requirements: A detailed market study shall be prepared utilizing commonly accepted analysis techniques to demonstrate the economic feasibility of the proposed lodging facility. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Ingress and egress shall be provided only from a major or minor arterial, a collector, or a local street segment which does not pass through a residential zoning district. 
(i)  All principal and accessory structures: Twenty-five (25) feet from any residential zoning district. 
(ii)  All sites: Two hundred (200) feet from any existing hotel or motel, place of worship, or public or private school as measured from property line to property line without regard to intervening structures or objects. 
2.  Minimum site area: 
(i)  Minimum site size: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
(ii)  Minimum lot width: One hundred twenty-five (125) feet. 
3.  Hotel units in NC shall not contain cooking facilities. 
4.  The number of hotel units allowed in any zoning district shall be determined as follows: 
(i)  LI: Twenty-eight (28) units per acre. 
(ii)  GC and CORE: Forty (40) units per acre. 
(59)  Industrial, heavy: Uses having significant external impacts. 
a.  Additional application requirements: 
1.  A detailed traffic impact analysis prepared pursuant to article III, section 14-42(3) of this code. 
2.  A noise impact study prepared pursuant to the policies and standards of article XI, section 14-201, of this code. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  All sites shall not abut any residential zoning districts. 
2.  Minimum site dimensions. Minimum lot area: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet 
3.  Minimum distances: 
(i)  All principal and accessory structures and loading and unloading areas: one hundred (100) feet from any property line. 
(ii)  All principal and accessory structures and loading and unloading: two hundred (200) feet from any residential zoning district. 
4.  Walls or fences of appropriate height may be required to prevent unauthorized entries and departures. 
5.  Vehicular access to the site shall be provided only from a major or minor arterial. 
6.  Access shall be designated and constructed so that site-generated traffic will avoid travel through residential zoning districts. 
7.  Noise barriers shall be provided pursuant to article XI, section 14-201, of the city code. 
(60)  Industrial, light: except where otherwise listed (Reserved). 
(61)  Interior decorators (Reserved). 
(62)  Junk, scrap, and salvage yards (AR). 
a.  Additional application requirements: None. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  The site shall not abut any residential zoning district. 
2.  Minimum site dimensions: Five (5) acres. 
3.  Noise barriers shall be provided pursuant to article XI, section 14-201, of the city code. 
4.  Minimum distances: 
(i)  All principal and accessory structures: One hundred (100) feet from any property line. 
(ii)  All parking, loading and vehicular circulation areas: One hundred (100) feet from any property line. 
(iii)  All storage, sorting, disassembly and similar activities: Two hundred (200) feet from any residential zoning district. 
(iv)  Storage, sorting disassembly and similar activities: Fifty (50) Feet from any property line. 
5.  Adequate traffic facilities, such as intersection improvements, turn lanes, acceleration lanes, specialization, etc. shall be provided to minimize the impact of the facility on adjacent public thoroughfares. 
6.  The site shall be landscaped pursuant to article IX of this code. A landscape buffer at least five (5) feet wide shall be provided along property lines. 
7.  Walls or fences of appropriate height may be required to prevent unauthorized entries and departures. 
8.  Entrance to the site shall require a chain link or equivalent gate. 
(63)  Laundry and dry cleaning establishments, cleaning on premises (AR). 
a.  Additional application requirements: None. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Minimum distances: All principal and accessory structures: 
(i)  One hundred (100) feet from the nearest residential zoning district. 
(ii)  Twenty (20) feet from any side or rear property line; 
(iii)  Twenty (20) feet from any other building on the site. 
2.  Ingress and egress shall be provided only from a major or minor arterial, a collector or a local street which does not pass through any residential zoning district. 
3.  Establishments shall not employ more than twelve (12) persons on the premises. Delivery vehicle drivers and others who spend fewer than ten (10) hours per week on the premises shall not be considered to be employed on the premises. 
4.  Cleaning equipment shall be completely enclosed and equipped with solvent and vapor recovery units which prevent the emission of objectionable odors and effluents. 
(64)  Laundry and dry cleaning establishments serving primarily the public, coin-operated (AR). 
a.  Additional applications required: None. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Access shall be provided only from a major or minor arterial, a collector or a local street segment which does not pass through any residential zoning district. 
2.  Minimum distances: 
(i)  All principal and accessory structures twenty (20) feet from any side or rear property line. 
(ii)  All principal and accessory structures twenty (20) feet from any other building on the site. 
(iii)  All sites: One thousand (1,000) feet from any existing similar establishment as measured from property line to property line without regard to intervening structures or objects. 
(iv)  All sites: One hundred (100) feet from pre-existing place of religious worship, public or private school as measured from property line to property line without regard to intervening structures or objects. 
(v)  All sites: One hundred (100) feet as measured from any residential zoning district as measures from property line to property line without regard to intervening structures or objects. 
(65)  Laundry and dry cleaning establishments, serving the public - coin-operated, no dry cleaning on premises (Reserved). 
(66)  Liquor and party stores (AR). 
a.  Additional application requirements: Proof of any licenses required by local, state, and other applicable authorities. 
b.  Additional standards. 
1.  Minimum site dimensions: 
(i)  Minimum site area: Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. 
(ii)  Minimum lot width: Fifty (50) feet. 
2.  Minimum distances: 
(i)  All principal and accessory structures: One hundred (100) feet from any residential zoning district. 
(ii)  All parking, loading and vehicular circulation areas: Twenty-five (25) feet from all residential zoning districts. 
(iii)  All sites: One thousand (1,000) feet from any existing liquor or party store as measured from property line to property line without regard to intervening structures or objects. 
(iv)  All sites: One hundred (100) feet of any pre-existing place of religious worship, public or private school as measured from property line to property line without regard to intervening structures or objects. 
(67)  Locksmith and key establishments (Reserved). 
(68)  Mailing services (Reserved). 
(69)  Marine-Industrial establishments (Reserved). 
(70)  Marine-Retail sales and services (Reserved). 
(71)  Martial art studios (Reserved). 
(72)  Mobile home parks. 
(73)  Mobile homes, sales, rentals and service agencies (Reserved). 
(74)  Monument sales establishments (Reserved). 
(75)  Motion pictures studios (Reserved). 
(76)  Motor vehicle fuel sales and service (AR). 
a.  Additional application requirements: None. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Minimum distances: All principal and accessory structures: One hundred (100) feet from any residential zoning district. 
2.  Ingress and egress shall be provided only from a major or minor arterial, a collector or local street segment which does not pass through a residential zoning district. 
3.  Minimum site dimensions: 
(i)  Minimum site size: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(ii)  Minimum lot width: One hundred (100) feet. 
(iii)  Minimum lot width: One hundred (100) feet. 
(iv)  All buildings, signs, pumps, pump islands, minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from public right-of-way lines. 
4.  Not more than two (2) curb cuts shall be permitted to any one (1) street frontage. Curb cuts shall be restricted to a maximum width of fifty (50) feet, shall be no closer than thirty (30) feet to an intersection, and shall be at least ten (10) feet removed from perpendicular property lines. A fifteen (15) foot separation shall be maintained between curb cuts. 
5.  All receptacles, tanks, or facilities for the storage of combustibles in excess of two hundred (200) gallon quantities shall be located underground and within the building setback lines. All receptacles, tanks, or facilities for the storage of combustibles in two hundred (200) gallon or less amounts shall be located and maintained within building setback lines and in a manner acceptable to the city. 
6.  In the event a service station is vacant for a continuous period. exceeding one (1) year, the property owner shall be required to remove or treat, in a safe manner approved by the city all flammable material storage tanks on the site. A bond sufficient to cover the cost of removal shall be posted prior to the issuing of a building permit for the facility. 
7.  All pits and hydraulic hoists shall be located entirely within a building. Lubrication, washing, repair, and service shall be conducted within a building. Oil for use in motor vehicles may be displayed in or solo from outdoor racks or compartments located on pump islands. 
(76)  Motor vehicle parts and accessory store (Reserved). 
(77)  Motor vehicle repair, heavy (including body repair and painting) (AR). 
a.  Additional application requirements: None. 
b.  Additional standards. 
1.  Minimum site dimensions: 
(i)  Minimum site area: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
(ii)  Minimum lot width: One hundred (100) feet. 
(iii)  Minimum lot depth: One hundred (100) feet. 
2.  Minimum distances: 
(i)  All buildings, signs, pumps, pump islands, tanks, vents, and canopies shall be located a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from public right-of-way lines. 
(ii)  All buildings, signs, pumps, pump islands, tanks, vents, and canopies shall be located a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any residential zoning district. 
3.  Not more than two (2) curb cuts shall be permitted to any one (1) streets frontage. Curb cuts shall be restricted to a maximum width of fifty (50) feet, shall be located no closer than thirty(30) feet to an intersection, and shall be at least ten (10) feet removed from perpendicular property lines. A fifteen (15) foot separation shall be maintained between curb cuts. 
4.  All receptacles, tanks, or facilities for the storage of combustibles in quantities exceeding two hundred. (200) gallons shall be located underground and within the building setback lines. All receptacles, tanks, or facilities for the storage of combustibles in of two hundred (200) gallon or less shall be located and maintained within building setback lines and in a manner acceptable to the City. 
5.  In the event a heavy motor vehicle repair establishment is vacant for a continuous period exceeding one (1) year, the property owner shall be required to remove, or treat, in a safe manner approved by the City, all flammable material storage tanks on the site. A bond sufficient to cover the cost of removal shall be posted prior to the issuing of a building permit for the facility. 
6.  All pits and hydraulic hoists shall be located entirely within a building. Lubrication, washing, repair, and service shall be conducted within a building. Minor diagnostic and repair work may be performed at pump islands in the presence of a customer. 
7.  All merchandise and material for sale, except oil for use in motor vehicles, shall be displayed within an enclosed building. Oil for use in motor vehicles may be displayed in or sold from outdoor racks or compartments located on pump islands. 
8.  Ingress and egress shall be provided only from a major or minor arterial, a collector, or a local street segment which does not pass through a residential zoning district. 
(79)  Motor vehicle repair, light (excluding body repair and painting) (AR). 
a.  Additional application requirements: None. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Minimum site dimensions: 
(i)  Minimum site area: Seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. 
(ii)  Minimum lot width: Fifty (50) square feet. 
2.  Minimum distances: 
(i)  All principal and accessory structures: One hundred (100) feet from any residential zoning district. 
(ii)  All parking, loading and vehicular circulation areas: Twenty-five (25) feet from any residential zoning district. 
(80)  Motor vehicle sales and rental establishments (no service) (AR). 
a.  Additional application requirements: None. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Minimum site dimensions: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
2.  Minimum distances: 
(i)  All principal and accessory structures one hundred (100) feet from any residential zoning district. 
(ii)  Parking, loading, vehicular circulation and sales areas: Fifty (50) feet from any residential zoning district. 
3.  All outdoor sales lots shall be surfaced with a hard, durable surface and shall be properly drained. 
(81)  Motor vehicle sales and service agencies (AR). 
a.  Additional application requirements: None. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Minimum site dimensions: 20,000 square feet. 
2.  Minimum distances: 
(i)  All principal and accessory structures: One hundred (100) feet from any residential zoning district. 
(ii)  Parking, loading, vehicular circulation and sales areas: Fifty (50) feet from any residential zoning district. 
3.  All service facilities and activities shall be located within an enclosed structure. 
4.  All outdoor sales and vehicular circulation areas shall be surfaced pursuant to article ___, section ___, of this code. 
(82)  Motor vehicle title and tag service (Reserved). 
(83)  Motorcycle sales and service establishments (Reserved). 
(84)  Music and dance studios (Reserved). 
(85)  Newspaper distributing agencies (Reserved). 
(86)  Newspaper and magazine shops (Reserved). 
(87)  Nurseries - retail, for sale of plant materials grown off premises (Reserved). 
(88)  Nurseries - wholesale and retail, for sale of plant material grown on premises (Reserved). 
(89)  Office and related uses - including business services, except as otherwise listed (Reserved). 
(90)  Office and support retail - not occupying more than twenty (20) percent of gross floor space (Reserved). 
(91)  Offices-Governmental administration (Reserved). 
(92)  Offices-Professional (Reserved). 
(93)  Offices or facilities, quasi-public associations and organizations, not for profit (Reserved). 
(94)  Outdoor storage facilities for families and businesses (Reserved). 
(95)  Parking garages as principal uses (AR). 
a.  Additional application requirement. 
1.  A detailed traffic impact analysis study will be prepared pursuant to article III, section 14-42(3) of this code. 
2.  Landscaping will be provided pursuant to article IX, section 14-142, of this code. 
b.  Additional standards. 
1.  Curb cuts providing access to no more than twenty-five (25) parking spaces shall be located a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any intersection of two (2) or more public rights-of-way. 
2.  Curb cuts providing access to more than twenty-five (25) parking spaces shall be located a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet from any intersection of two (2) or more public rights-of-way. 
(96)  Parking lots as principal or off-site accessory uses (AR). 
a.  Additional application requirements: A landscape plan prepared pursuant to article IX, section 14-134, of this code. 
b.  Additional standards. 
1.  Storage of vehicles is prohibited. 
2.  All principal and accessory structures, unless specifically approved by the review authority, are prohibited. 
3.  Off-site parking lots shall be allowed only as an accessory to a permitted use. 
4.  Entrances and curb cuts shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any intersections of public rights-of-way. 
5.  The parking area shall be surfaced pursuant to article VIII, section 14-124(e). 
6.  All plans for parking lots shall be inspected by the city's engineer and must comply with all the above regulations in addition to sidewalks and concrete driveway approaches and in a manner as prescribed by the building code. When necessary, walls, swales, and/or planting areas shall be installed to protect adjoining property owners from flooding, glaring lights, and noise. 
7.  A landscape buffer at least five (5) feet wide, shall be provided along all property lines, however, the planning board may waive this requirement for property lines abutting a dedicated alley. All plants, shrubs, and trees shall be planted and maintained pursuant to article IX, section 14-141, of this code. 
8.  If the parking lot area is used for customer parking it shall be operated and open for use only during the customary business hours of the use of parking patrons passenger vehicles. No fee shall be charged for the use of such off street parking facility. 
9.  Lighting facilities, if provided, shall be so arranged as to reflect away from any adjacent residential zoning district or any residential use located in a city's CORE zoning district so as not to cause any annoying glare to the adjacent property. 
10.  An accessory parking lot to be located in any residential zoning district shall be contiguous to the principal use; however, the two (2) uses may be separated by a public street or alley. 
11.  An accessory parking lot to be located in any nonresidential zoning district shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of the principal use, measured along a direct line between the two (2) closest points of the separate uses. 
12.  Accessory parking lots shall be used strictly for the vehicles of clients, residents, employees, customers, and visitors of the principal uses. 
13.  For parking lots located in more than one (1) zoning district, entrances and exits shall only be located in those areas of the lot zoned for commercial use or in a lower zoning classification. 
14.  An opaque wall shall be erected to a height of no less than four (4) feet and no more than five (5) feet and not closer than six (6) inches to lot lines along the side and rear lot lines when such a parking lot or area adjoins a residential district, except that such wall shall not be required where the applicant for a permit shall secured and filed with application a notarial waiver duly signed under seal by all abutting landowners waiving objection to the existence of an unwalled parking lot or area. Said walls, where required, shall be erected in compliance with the city building code. 
15.  Ownership provisions of off-site parking spaces shall be made pursuant to article VIII, section 14-124(c), of this code. 
(97)  Parking or storage of recreational vehicles, accessory in residential districts (Reserved). 
(98)  Pawn shops (Reserved). 
(99)  Pet grooming establishments, but not kennels (Reserved). 
(100)  Photocopying services (Reserved). 
(101)  Photographic studios (Reserved). 
(102)  Post office (Reserved). 
(103)  Private uses on public (city-owned) lands (CU). 
a.  Additional application requirements: 
1.  A statement of the proposed use or structures to be located on public land and the benefits to be derived by the public from such use or structures. 
2.  A detailed site plan prepared pursuant to article II, section 14-24, of this code required by the director of community development. 
3.  A detailed traffic impact analysis, prepared pursuant to article III, section 14-42(3) of this code if required by the director of community development. 
b.  Additional standards: None. 
(104)  Printing and type setting services (Reserved). 
(105)  Produce markets (Reserved). 
(106)  Public safety facilities operated by private agencies (CU). 
a.  Additional application requirements: None. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Minimum distances: 
(i)  Minimum setback of buildings thirty (30) feet from any residential zoning district or thirty (30) feet from a residential property line if located in a residential zoning district. 
(ii)  Minimum setback of parking, loading and vehicular circulation areas: Twenty (20) feet from any residential zoning district or twenty (20) feet from a residential property line if located in a residential zoning district. 
(iii)  Minimum setback of outdoor activity areas: Thirty (30) feet from any residential zoning district or thirty (30) feet from a residential property line if located in a residential zoning district. 
2.  Access and egress shall be provided, where possible, only from a major or minor arterial, a collector, or a local street segment which does not pass through any residential zoning district. 
(107)  Public safety facilities operate by public agencies (Reserved). 
(108)  Radio and television broadcasting studios and facilities (Reserved). 
(109)  Railroad switching and marshalling yards (CU). 
a.  Additional application requirements. 
1.  Estimated number of daily switching operations and train cars that will be handled by the facility. 
2.  Estimated hours of operation and estimated times of heaviest operation on an average weekend. 
3.  A noise impact study pursuant to the policies and standards of article XI, section 14-201, of the City code. 
b.  Additional standards: None. 
(110)  Recreation, indoor (Reserved). 
(111)  Recreation: outdoors, general (Reserved). 
(112)  Recreation: outdoor, high intensity (CU). 
a.  Additional application requirements: A noise and accessory outdoor activity areas and parking and circulation: One hundred (100) feet from any residential zoning district. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Minimum distances: All principal and accessory outdoor activity areas and parking and circulation: One hundred (100) feet from any residential zoning district. 
2.  Access shall be provided only from a major or minor arterial, or from a collector road. 
3.  Operations and facilities shall comply with all applicable state and federal agency requirements. 
4.  Illumination shall comply with the provisions of article ____, section ____, of this code. 
5.  Adequate traffic facilities, such as intersection improvements, turn lanes, acceleration lanes, signalization, etc., shall be provided to minimize the impact of the facility on adjacent public thoroughfares. 
6.  Noise barriers shall be provided pursuant to article XI, section 14-201, of the City code. 
7.  Access and egress routes leading to and from a site shall be approved by the agency responsible for maintenance of the streets over which such routes run. 
(113)  Recreation: outdoor amusements, temporary (CU). 
a.  Additional application requirements: 
1.  Date(s) and time(s) of operation. 
2.  Description of activities and amusements to be provided. 
b.  Additional standards: None. 
(114)  Recreation: stadiums and sports arenas (CU). 
a.  Additional application requirements: A detailed market study shall be prepared utilizing commonly accepted techniques to demonstrate the economic feasibility of the proposed special use. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Minimum distances: 
(i)  All principal and accessory structures: One hundred (100) feet from any residential zoning district. 
(ii)  All principal and accessory structures: One hundred (100) feet from any property line. 
(iii)  All parking, loading, and vehicular circulation areas: One hundred (100) feet from any property line. 
(iv)  All outdoor activity areas: One hundred (100)feet from any property line 
(v)  All sites shall contain at least one hundred (100) foot wide landscaped, open space buffer adjacent to all residential zoning districts. 
2.  Vehicular access and egress shall be provided only from a major arterial. 
3.  Minimum site dimensions: Minimum lot area: Five (5) acres. 
4.  Adequate traffic facilities, such as intersection improvements, turn lanes, acceleration lanes, signalization etc., shall be provided to public to minimize the impacts of the facility on adjacent public thoroughfares. 
5.  Illumination shall comply with the provisions of article ____, section ____, of this code. 
6.  Operations and facilities shall be in accordance with all applicable state and federal agency requirements 
(115)  Repair shops for household appliances, small motors and machines (Reserved). 
(116)  Research and development facilities not of an industrial nature (Reserved). 
(117)  Research and development facilities of an industrial nature (Reserved). 
(118)  Residential, fraternities and sororities (Reserved). 
(119)  Residential, multi-family (Reserved). 
(120)  Residential, rooming and boarding (Reserved). 
(120.1)  Residential, single family associated with an industry (Reserved). 
(121)  Residential, single family detached (Reserved). 
(122)  Residential, single family attached and detached (Reserved). 
(123)  Residential, townhouse (Reserved). 
(124)  Restaurants serving a limited clientele (CU). 
a.  Additional application requirements: Proof of any licenses required by local, state and other applicable authorities. 
b.  Additional standards: Minimum distances: All principal and accessory structures, one hundred (100) feet from any residential zoning district. 
(125)  Restaurants serving the general public, but not drive-in or drive-through facilities (Reserved). 
(126)  Restaurants serving the general public, drive-in or drive-through facilities (AR). 
a.  Additional application requirements: Proof of any licenses required by local, state or other applicable authorities. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Minimum distances: All principal and accessory structures, one hundred (100) feet from any residential zoning district. 
2.  Ingress and egress shall be provided only from a major or minor arterial, a collector, or a local street segment which does not pass through a residential zoning district. 
3.  No more than two (2) curb cuts shall be permitted on any single street's frontage. Curb cuts shall be limited to a maximum width of twenty-five (25) feet, shall be located no closer than thirty-five (35) feet to any intersection, and shall be at least ten (10) feet perpendicular removed from property lines. 
(127)  Retail bakeries (Reserved). 
(128)  Retail building material sales (Reserved). 
(129)  Retail business (Reserved). 
(130)  Sandwich shops and snack bars (Reserved). 
(131)  Satellite reception dishes, accessory in residential districts (AR). 
a.  Additional application standards: None. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  A satellite reception dish shall not be placed in a required or unrequired front setback or year or in a required setback and shall not be placed on the rooftop of a principal or accessory residential structure. 
2.  A satellite reception dish located in an unrequired side of rear setback or yard shall be screened from any off-premise view through the use of landscaping, opaque walls, or similar techniques. 
(132)  Satellite reception dishes, principal or accessory use in non-residential districts (AR). 
a.  Additional application requirements: None. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  The height of the dish shall not exceed fifty (50) feet in height or the maximum permitted height of the zoning district by more than fifteen (15) feet. 
2.  Proper landscaping, screening, or other appropriate measures are required to screen the dish from an off-premise view. 
3.  The screening method, materials and design shall be architecturally harmonious and compatible with adjacent buildings. 
4.  The land area containing the dish shall not be designated as open space if placed on undeveloped commercial property. 
(133)  School, public and private; elementary, intermediate and secondary (CU). 
a.  Additional application requirements: Private schools must provide competent substantial evidence that their curriculum will be equivalent to that offered by public schools. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Minimum site dimensions: One (1) acre. 
2.  Minimum distances: All principal and accessory structures: One hundred (100) feet from any residential zoning district or ten (10) feet from any residential property line if located in a residential zoning district. 
3.  Vehicular access shall be provided from a major or minor arterial, or from a collector. 
(i)  All parking, loading and vehicular circulation areas: Ten (10) feet from any residential zoning district or ten (10) feet from any residential property line if located in a residential zoning district. 
(ii)  All outdoor activity areas: Fifty (50) feet from any residential zoning district or fifty (50) feet from a residential property line if located in a residential zoning district. 
4.  Adequate off-street student pick-up and delivery facilities, such as a circular driveway shall be provided. 
5.  Walls or fences of appropriate height may be required to prevent unauthorized entries and departures. 
6.  This section shall apply to schools operated by public or private educational agencies offering primary and secondary classes from kindergarten through twelfth (12th) grade. 
(134)  Schools-Public and commercial vocational and trade involving industrial equipment (Reserved). 
(135)  Schools-Public and commercial vocational and trade not involving industrial equipment (Reserved). 
(136)  Schools-Colleges and universities, public and private (Reserved). 
(137)  Scrap, waste and reclaimed materials trade (Reserved). 
(138)  Ship and boat building and repair (Reserved). 
(138.1)  Shelters (AR). 
(139)  Special noncommercial events of public interest (AR). 
a.  Additional application requirements: 
1.  Date(s) and time(s) of operation. 
2.  Description of activities and amusements to be provided. 
b.  Additional standards: Proof of any licenses required by local, state, and other applicable authorities. 
(140)  Swimming pools, accessory to residential uses (AR). 
a.  Additional application requirements: 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Swimming pools and appurtenances screen enclosures shall be permitted in any rear setback yard, provided they are at lest five (5) feet from any property line. At least ninety (90) percent of the surface area of screen enclosures shall be screening material 
2.  Every swimming pool shall be enclosed by a natural barrier, fence or similar structure installed to obstruct access by persons other than the owners or occupants of the residence within which a swimming pool is located. Barriers or fences shall be at least four (4) feet in height above grade. 
3.  Access to an accessory swimming pool must be through a building or through a self-closing and self-latching gate or screen enclosure door with latches placed at least four (4) feet above finished grade. 
4.  If a patio or paved area is provided adjacent to or surrounding pool, it shall be designed to drain away from the pool. 
(141)  Swimming pool sales (Reserved). 
(142)  Tax return preparation service (Reserved). 
(143)  Taxidermist (Reserved). 
(144)  Temporary borrow pits, borrow piles and similar excavations (AR). 
a.  Additional application requirements: None. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Borrow pits, borrow piles, and similar excavations shall be permitted provided all excavations are attendant to completion of development for which a site plan has been approved pursuant to the provisions of article XII, section ____, of this code. 
2.  Grading to contours which conform to the final contours shown of an approved site plan shall not be subject to the requirements of this section. 
3.  Soil erosion and sedimentation control: Borrow pits and borrow piles shall be subject to the soil erosion and sedimentation control provisions of Section ____, of this code and of the following: 
(i)  Maximum depth for borrow pits: Ten (10) feet. 
(ii)  Maximum height for borrow piles: Ten (10) feet. 
(iii)  All borrow pits and piles: Five hundred (500) feet from any residential zoning district. 
(iv)  Maximum slope of borrow pits, borrow piles, and canal and water body tanks shall be one (1) foot of vertical rise for each three (3) feet of horizontal run. 
(145)  Temporary manual labor hiring offices (Reserved). 
(146)  Temporary non-manual labor hiring offices (Reserved). 
(147)  Temporary model dwellings and sales offices (CU). 
a.  Additional application requirements: None. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Temporary model dwelling units and sales offices shall meet all district requirements. 
2.  Sales offices not located in model homes are permitted but shall not be used only by firms and their agents constructing or marketing dwelling units within a development or project. 
3.  Model dwelling units with or without a temporary sales office shall not be used for a period longer than two (2) years. However, the director of community development may grant an extension for a period not to exceed an additional two (2) years from the date the certificate of occupancy is issued for the model dwelling units. 
4.  Temporary sales offices not in model dwelling units shall not be used for more than eighteen (18) months and shall be removed at the end of that period. 
5.  Model dwelling units shall not be used to promote the sale of any lot or dwelling unit not located in the project being marked by the developer or agent. 
6.  At least five (5) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each temporary sales office and for each three (3) model dwelling units. Parking spaces shall not be located on the same or on a contiguous lot. 
7.  Temporary model dwelling units, sales offices and sign shall not be illuminated or used for any business activity later than 9:00 p.m. 
8.  A buffer at least twenty (20) feet wide shall be landscaped and maintained between any model dwelling unit, temporary sales office or parking area and any adjacent land not in the development, that is zoned for residential purposes. 
9.  Additional temporary sales offices, not to exceed seven hundred fifty (750) square feet, may be operated in the event a single development or project contains one (1) or more non-contiguous properties containing ten (10) or more lots or dwelling units. 
(148)  Temporary offices and facilities for construction, storage and security (AR). 
a.  Additional application requirements: None. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Temporary construction offices, storage buildings, trailers and watchmen's quarters shall be permitted to expedite construction on the property on which located. 
2.  All such structures, including trailers, shall be removed within seven (7) days of the final construction inspection by the city prior to the issuance of certificate of occupancy. 
(149)  Temporary produce standards (CU) . 
a.  Additional applications requirements: 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  A thirty (30) day permit will be required in order to operate any temporary produce stand. 
2.  Minimum distances: All principle and accessory structures: Fifty (50) feet from any intersection. 
3.  The temporary produce stand will be permitted to operate during the following hours: 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
(150)  Theaters, indoor; motion pictures, live performances (Reserved). 
(151)  Tobacco shop (Reserved). 
(151.1)  Towing with storage of towed vehicles to be behind a fenced area and storage not to exceed ninety (90) days (Reserved). 
(152)  Transit storage and maintenance facilities for passenger transportation operations (AR). 
a.  Additional application requirements: 
1.  A detailed traffic impact analysis prepared pursuant to article III, section 14-42(3) of this code. 
2.  A noise impact study shall be prepared pursuant to the policies and standards of article XI, section 14-201, of the city code. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Minimum distances: 
(i)  All principal and accessory structures: One hundred (100) feet from any residential zoning district. 
(ii)  All parking, loading and vehicular circulation: One hundred (100) feet from any residential zoning district. 
(iii)  All outdoor activity areas: One hundred (100) feet from any residential zoning district. 
2.  Walls or fences of appropriate height may be required to prevent unauthorized entries and departures. 
3.  Ingress and egress shall be provided only from a major or minor arterial which does not pass through a residential zoning district. 
4.  Adequate traffic facilities, such as intersection improvements, turn lanes, acceleration lanes, signalization, etc., shall be provided to minimize the impact of the facility on adjacent public thoroughfares. 
5.  Vehicular access to the site shall be provided only from a major or minor arterial. 
6.  Facilities shall be landscaped pursuant to article IX, of this code. 
(153)  Transit, passenger and freight terminals (CU). 
a.  Additional application requirements: A statement regarding proposed hours of operation, arrival and departure times of vehicles, and proposed freight operations. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Terminals shall not be located on or about properties zoned for residential purposes. 
2.  Vehicular access shall be provided only from major or minor arterials, or from collectors which do not pass through residential zoning districts. 
(154)  Travel agencies or transportation tickets (Reserved). 
(155)  Upholstery, cloth and canvas products fabrication (Reserved). 
(156)  Utility facilities, heavy, public and private (AR). 
a.  Additional application requirements: None. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Minimum distances: 
(i)  All parking, loading and vehicular circulation areas: Fifty (50) feet from any residential zoning district. 
(ii)  All outdoor activity, service and related areas: One hundred (100) feet from any residential zoning district. 
2.  Utility facilities such as electric substations, above ground natural gas or propane storage or transmission facilities, etc. shall be enclosed by a solid wall or fence eight (8) feet in height. 
3.  Entrance to utility facilities shall require a chain link or equivalent gate. 
4.  Utility facilities shall be landscaped pursuant to article IX of this code. 
(157)  Utility facilities, light, public and private (AR). 
a.  Additional application requirements: 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Minimum distances: 
(i)  All parking, loading and vehicular circulation areas: Fifty (50) feet from any residential zoning district or fifty (50) feet from a residential property line if located in a residential zoning district. 
(ii)  All outdoor activity, service and related areas: One hundred (100) feet from any residential zoning district or one hundred (100) feet from a residential property line if located in a residential zoning district. 
2.  Utility facilities shall be landscaped pursuant to article IX, section ____, of this code. 
3.  Adequate traffic facilities, such as intersection improvements, turn lanes, acceleration and deceleration lanes, signalization, etc., shall be provided to minimize the impact of the facility on adjacent public throughfares. 
(158)  Veterinary clinics and hospitals, animal shelters, enclosed (AR). 
a.  Additional application requirements: None. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  All facilities shall be located within an enclosed building. 
2.  Building shall be constructed and operated in a manner so that animal noise will not be detected at adjoining property lines. Buildings shall be completely air conditioned, and windows shall be opened only when air conditioning systems are not in working order. 
(159)  Veterinary clinics and hospitals, animal shelters, unenclosed (AR). 
a.  Additional application requirements: None. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  The proposed site shall not abut any property zoned for residential purposes. 
2.  Minimum distances: All principal and accessory structures and pens: Fifty (50) feet from any property line. 
3.  Unenclosed animal boarding pens shall be surrounded with fences at least six (6) feet in height. 
(160)  Warehousing-Self storage for families and small business (Reserved). 
(161)  Warehouses having moderate external impacts (Reserved). 
(162)  Warehouses having significant external impacts (AR). 
a.  Additional application requirements: None. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  The site shall not abut any residential zoning districts. 
2.  Minimum site dimension: Minimum lot area: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
3.  Minimum distances: All principal and accessory structures: 
(i)  Fifty (50) feet from any property line; and 
(ii)  Two hundred (200) feet from any residential zoning district. 
4.  Walls or fences of appropriate height may be required to prevent unauthorized entrees and departures. 
5.  Ingress and egress shall be provided only from a major or minor arterial and not through a residential zoning district. 
6.  Adequate traffic facilities, such as intersection improvements, turn lanes, acceleration and deceleration lanes, signalization, etc., shall be provided to minimize the impact of the facility on through traffic. 
(163)  Watch and shoe repair establishments (Reserved). 
(164)  Wholesale activities having a moderate external impact (Reserved). 
(165)  Wholesale activities having a significant external impact (AR). 
a.  Additional application requirements: 
1.  A detailed site plan prepared pursuant to article II, section 14-24, of this code. 
2.  A detailed traffic impact analysis study prepared pursuant to article III, section 14-42(3) of this code. 
3.  A noise abatement requirements adhering to chapter XI, article 14-201, of the city code. 
b.  Additional standards: 
1.  Minimum site dimensions: Minimum site area: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
2.  Minimum distances: 
(i)  All principal and accessory structures: One hundred (100) feet from any residential zoning district. 
(ii)  All parking, loading and vehicular circulation area: Twenty-five (25) feet from any residential zoning district. 
3.  Ingress and egress shall be provided only from a major or minor arterial or from a collector of local street and not pass through any residential zoning district. 
4.  Adequate traffic facilities, such as intersection improvements, turn lanes, acceleration and deceleration lanes, signalization, etc., shall be provided to minimize the impact of the facility on adjacent public throughfares. 
5.  Walls or fences of appropriate height may be required to prevent unauthorized entries and departures. 
(166)  Yard and garage sales, temporary (AR). 
a.  Additional application requirements: None. 
b.  Additional standards: A maximum number of two (2) yard and garage sales, lasting not more than two (2) days each, at the same location, shall be permitted during the calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 92-1 , § 1, 4-14-92; Ord. No. 96-9 , 9-10-96; Ord. No. 99-7 , § 3, 6-22-99; Ord. No. 99-17 , 1-25-00; Ord. No. 2015-02 , § 1, 5-12-15) 
Secs. 14-77-14-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - NONCOMFORMING LOTS, NONCOMFORMING STRUCTURES, NONCOMFORMING USES, AND NONCOMFORMING CHARACTERISTICS OF USES 

Sec. 14-80. - Intent. 
    Within the zoning districts established by this development code and amendments thereof, there may exist: Land parcels, structures, uses or characteristic of uses which were lawful before this code was enacted or amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted by the enactment of these regulations and the amendment thereof. It is the intent of these regulations to permit any such nonconformities to continue until they are voluntarily removed or discontinued, or removed as required by the adopted development code. It is not however the intent of this section to promote or encourage the survival of nonconformities. It is further intended, that nonconformities shall not be enlarged, expanded, intensified, or be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited in the zoning district. 
Sec. 14-81. - Existing nonconformities. 
    Nonconformities existing or development permits issued prior to the effective date of this code or its amendments shall be grandfathered. Existing nonconformities shall be grandfathered until such time that the original cost may be amortized over a reasonable time period as established by normal business and accounting practices. All illegal nonconformities existing on the effective date of this code and any amendment thereof shall remain illegal. 
Sec. 14-82. - Nonconformities adjoining lots of record within the same ownership. 
    If two (2) or more lots of record, portions of lots of record, or any combination, within the same ownership and having continuous frontage along the same street or right-of-way are of record as of the effective date of enactment or amendment and if all or part of said lots, portions of lots or combinations thereof do not meet the applicable area and/or width requirements, the said lots, portions of lots or combinations there of shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  If lots, portions of lots or combination thereof are occupied by one (1) or more structures and/or uses, the community development director shall determine and establish the effective allocation of the total land parcel to the structures and/or uses in a manner to provide for the maximum degree of compliance with all applicable requirements. The determined allocation shall constitute the land to be utilized for the existing individual structures and/or uses in the administration and enforcement of this code. 
(2)  If lots, portions of lots or combination thereof are vacant, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel and no portion of the parcel shall be used or transferred in ownership so as to diminish the degree of compliance with applicable area and/or width requirements; nor shall any division of any said parcel be made which creates a land parcel having an area and/or width not meeting the applicable land development regulations. 
    In the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this section, the burden of proof relating to ownership as of the effective date of enactment or amendment thereof shall lie with the owner or owners of the affected property. If violations of the provisions of the city development code are found to exist, irrespective of the elapsed time period following the date of the violation, no development permit of any type shall be issued by the city for the entirety or any portion of the affected property while the violation continues to exist, and the remedies therefore shall lie solely among the affected property owners or their successor in title. 
Sec. 14-83. - Enlargement or extension of nonconforming use or nonconforming characteristic of use prohibited. 
    A nonconforming use shall not be enlarged upon, extended, intensified, expanded or moved so as to utilize any other portion of the lot or parcel it occupies; nor shall any nonconforming characteristic or use be changed so as to increase the degree of nonconforming with the applicable requirements. 
Sec. 14-84. - Limitation on alterations, additions or repairs of existing nonconformities. 
    A building or structure constructed in a nonconforming manner or containing a nonconforming use shall not be altered in any manner. Repairs shall be only those reasonably required to maintain the building or structure in a safe and usable conditions and/or to conform with the applicable codes of the city. 
Sec. 14-85. - Discontinuance or change of a nonconforming use. 
    When a nonconforming use of land, building or structure ceases for any reason, except where government action impedes access to the premises or in adherence to good agricultural practices, for one hundred eighty (180) days, the nonconforming use shall not be re-established and subsequent use shall conform to the requirements of the city's Development code. However, if prior to the expiration of the one hundred eighty (180) day period, written application is made to the city commission for a change to another nonconforming use of the same character, or to a more restricted but nonconforming use, a change to another nonconforming use may be permitted, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The city commission shall find the proposed use is equally or more appropriate to the zoning district than the existing or discontinued nonconforming use and that any adverse effects upon the neighboring properties and residents will not be greater than those created by the existing or discontinued nonconforming use. 
(2)  In approving any said change, the city commission shall be authorized to impose appropriate conditions and safeguards in accordance with the intent and purpose of the development code. 
Sec. 14-86. - Removal or destruction of building(s) or structure(s) which is nonconforming or which contains a nonconforming use. 
    When a building(s) or structure(s) having a nonconforming use is removed from the premises, is destructed, or is destroyed to an extent equal to fifty (50) percent or greater of the replacement cost, the nonconforming status applying to said building(s) or structure(s) and for premises shall cease, and both the use of the premises and any building(s) or structure(s) erected or maintained there on shall conform in all respect to the code. 
Sec. 14-87. - Nonconforming use constitution a nuisance. 
    A nonconforming use shall not be continued if by reason of odors, noxious fumes, smoke, noise or a determination by a health official that unhealthy conditions exist and present a nuisance or health concern to residents of adjoining lands. 
Sec. 14-88. - Change in ownership or tenancy. 
    Changes in ownership, tenancy or management of land, building or structures involving nonconformities are allowed, provided that all provisions and requirements controlling nonconforming uses and structures apply fully without respect to any change of ownership tenancy or management. 
Sec. 14-89. - Casual, temporary, or illegal use. 
    The casual, temporary or illegal use of land or buildings or structures shall not be sufficient to establish the existence of a nonconforming use or to create rights in the continuance of such use. 
Sec. 14-90. - Existence of a nonconformity does not constitute grounds for establishment of additional nonconformities. 
    The existence of a nonconforming land parcel, building, structure, use or characteristic of use shall not constitute grounds for the obtainment of a variance to established nonconformities, either within the same zoning district or within a zoning district elsewhere in the city. 
Secs. 14-91-14-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT (PD) 

Sec. 14-100. - Scope, purpose and intent. 
(a)  Scope. Provisions of this section shall apply in all zoning districts. 
(b)  Purpose and intent. It is the intent and purpose of this district to provide, upon specific application and through the processes of unified planning and coordinated development, for creation of new neighborhood or community areas offering a physical, social, and economic environment of high quality. Specific objectives of the district include the establishment of an orderly pattern of land uses geared to accommodate both near-term and long-term community needs; the efficient and economical use of land; an appropriate and harmonious variety in physical development; creative design; a high level of living and working amenities, including plentiful open space and recreation opportunities efficient and effective systems of public facilities and services; a high degree of compatibility with adjacent and nearby existing and future development; appropriate conservation and preservation of natural features and resources; and the staging of development so as to best serve the general welfare and implementing the of the city comprehensive plan. 
Regulations for planned developments are intended to accomplish the purposes of zoning, subdivision regulation, and other applicable city regulations are intended to control development on a lot-by-lot basis rather than on a unified development approach. However, it is essential that the regulations and requirements applying to planned developments be sufficiently flexible in structure so as to encourage creative and imaginative design in planning and development. Where there are conflicts between the requirements of the general provisions of this chapter or other applicable codes of the city and the requirements established by official action upon a specific planned development, said latter requirements shall govern. 
Sec. 14-101. - Planned development. 
(a)  Planned development defined. For the purposes of this chapter a planned development (PD) is defined as land planned under unified control and developed in a coordinated manner in one (1) or more development phases for uses and structures well suited to the development itself and the surrounding area of which it is a part, according to an approved conceptual plan of development, and with programs for full maintenance and operation of any facilities and services, not to be dedicated to, and accepted by, a public agency for public ownership, operation and maintenance. 
Sec. 14-102. - Standards. 
(a)  General standards for district establishment. In reaching recommendations and decisions as to rezoning land to PD classification, the planning and zoning board and the city commission shall apply the following standards in addition to the standards and procedures of article XIII of this chapter applicable to the rezoning of land generally: 
(1)  Area requirements. In general, the area of a proposed planned development district will have to be of substantial size to permit its design and development as a cohesive unit fulfilling the stated purpose and objectives of these regulations and to establish the district as a meaningful segment of the larger community. Each proposed district shall therefore be evaluated as to its adequacy in size with respect to both the nature and character of its internal design and to its specific location within the city. The minimum size of a PD district to be considered for establishment shall be five (5) acres, unless the city commission, specifically, gives prior PD conceptual approval to proceed with the PD application process. 
Existing non-conforming uses and uses permitted within a given district by use permit are examples of potential uses that might be considered for PD district designation. 
(2)  Relation to major transportation facilities. 
Facilities: PD districts shall be so located with respect to arterial or major streets, highways, collector streets, or other transportation facilities as to provide suitable access to such district without creating or generating traffic along minor streets in residential areas or districts outside the PD districts. 
(3)  Relation to utilities. 
Public facilities and services: PD districts shall be so located in relation to sanitary sowers, water lines, storm and surface drainage systems, and other utilities systems and installations that neither extension nor enlargement of such systems will be required in manner, form, character, location, degree, scale, or timing resulting in higher net public cost or earlier incursion of public cost than would development in forms generally permitted under preexisting zoning in the area. Such districts shall be so located with respect to necessary public facilities (e.g., schools, parks and playgrounds) as to have access to such facilities in the same degree as would development permitted under preexisting zoning, and shall be so located, designed, and scaled that access for public services is equivalent to, and net cost for such services is not greater than, access and net costs for public services for development as permitted under preexisting zoning. 
However, if applicants will (1) provide private facilities, utilities, or services approved by appropriate public agencies as substituting on an equivalent basis, and assume their satisfactory continuing operation permanently, or until similar public utilities, facilities, or services are available for use; or (2) make provision acceptable to the city for offsetting any added net public costs shall be paid by the applicants. Determination shall be made by the city or by experts acceptable to the city. 
(4)  Physical character of the site: The site shall be suitable for development in the manner proposed without hazards to persons or property, on or off the tract, from probability of flooding, erosion, or other dangers, annoyance, or inconveniences. Condition of soil, ground water level, drainage and topography shall be appropriate to both kind and pattern of use intended. 
(5)  Consistency with the comprehensive plan: To be eligible for consideration, a PD rezoning proposal shall be found to be consistent with all applicable elements of the city's adopted comprehensive plan with respect to both its proposed internal design and its relationship to adjacent areas and the city as a whole. 
Sec. 14-103. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  In order to permit maximum flexibility in the design of a proposed planned development, no specific permitted uses established. Uses permitted within a PD district shall be only those residential, cultural, recreational, business, commercial, industrial, and related uses as are deemed by the city commission to be fully compatible with each other, with the context of the propose development as a whole, and with the zoning and land use patterns of surrounding areas. The type, general location, and extent of all proposed uses shall be clearly designated as part of the conceptual development plan, and approval of said uses or types of uses as part of a rezoning amendment shall constitute the permitted land use requirements of a particular PD district to the same intent and degree as were said permitted uses specifically included within these regulations. Any proposed change of approved land usage, other than necessary minor refinements in size, configuration, or location as may be required in the preparation of the detailed development plans, shall require a new hearing and approval action in accordance with the administrative review and approval procedures herein established. Accessory uses normally associated with the uses permitted as part of the approval action upon a specific PD proposal shall be permitted at such location and in such intensity as normally provided for such development within other zoning districts of the city, unless accessory uses are expressly prohibited within the approval action or are otherwise regulated by said action. 
Sec. 14-104. - Standards internal. 
(a)  Standards for internal PD design. 
(1)  Residential density: The number and type of residential dwelling units to be permitted within a PD district or within specific portions of a PD district shall be as determined by the city commission and stipulated within the approval action. Maximum gross residential density of a PD district shall be eighteen (18) units per acre. 
(2)  Access: Every dwelling unit or other use permitted within a PD district shall have access to a public street (of the type required for the PD under subsection section 14-102(a)(2) above) either directly or via an approved private road, pedestrian way, court or other area dedicated to public or private uses, or common element guaranteeing access. 
(3)  Internal lots and frontage: No minimum lot sizes or minimum yards are established for a PD district under these regulations. However, the applicable minimum lot size and yard size requirements of conventional zoning districts shall be utilized wherever proposed PD development is essentially equivalent to that development permitted under conventional zoning district classifications. In additional, wherever land within a PD district has frontage upon preexisting public roads, the front yard requirements of the conventional zoning district most apply and wherever yard within a PD district abut a conventional zoning district, said yard shall comply with the yard requirements of said conventional zoning district. Where appropriate, the city commission may stipulate minimum lot sizes and minimum yard requirements as part of the approval action. 
Land area which would normally be required for residential lots, but which is not so used under the permitted lot size reduction provisions of this section of the chapter, shall be devoted instead to common open space for the enjoyment and use by residents of the development and shall be preserved into perpetuity as open space. 
(4)  Minimum living area: The minimum living area requirements shall be as stipulated within the approval action. 
(5)  Maximum building height: The maximum height of all residential structures shall be forty (40) feet; however, aesthetic additions or utility structures may be exempted from the forty-foot limitation. 
(6)  Provision for vehicular and pedestrian circulation: The street and roadway pattern within PD shall be designed so as to take advantage of existing natural features and shall provide for a logical and orderly movement of vehicular traffic throughout the development. Provision shall be made for the reservation and/or dedication of all right-of-way needed for the improvement of existing streets or the construction of new streets indicated within the city's adopted comprehensive plan. The internal street system shall be properly coordinated with all existing streets and roadways at the project's boundaries, and all street shall be designed in accordance with city standards and requirements. 
Reductions of right-of-way widths below those normally required may be granted in specific cases when recommended for approval by the city engineer and the city commission finds lesser widths are appropriate due to the unique design of the PD. 
Provisions shall be made within a PD for the separation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, and a system of sidewalks and/or pedestrian ways shall be incorporated into the PD design for the exclusive use of pedestrians. 
(7)  Off-street parking and off-street requirements: Off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be provided as set forth within article VIII of this chapter. 
(8)  Provision for public facilities and services: Provision shall be made within a PD district for all public facilities and services deemed essential by the city commission for location and establishment within said district. Required sites for such facilities and service be of such sizes, proportions, and location so as to effectively serve their intended proposes in a manner beneficial to future residents of the development and to the city as a whole. Said sites shall be dedicated to the city or other applicable public body at no cost. 
(9)  Underground utilities: Within a PD all utilities, including telephone, television cable, and electrical systems shall be installed underground. Appurtenances to these systems which require above-ground installation shall be effectively screened and, thereby, may be excepted from this requirement. Primary facilities providing services to the site of the PD may be excepted. 
(10)  Protection of natural features: Provision shall be made within the design of a PD for the protection and conservation of significant natural features within or adjacent to the site. Where any alteration of said features is required as part of the development proposed within the PD district, the developer shall replace said altered features with natural features and/or areas accepted to the city. 
(11)  Buffering: Wherever essential to ensure compatibility, land use area within a PD shall be suitably screened from each other and from adjacent development and/or roadways outside the PD by appropriate buffering materials. Buffering shall be provided by use of natural vegetation, landscaping berms and/or decorative wood or masonry walls. 
(12)  Commercial and industrial development: Residential In general, commercial and/or industrial uses within a PD district shall be only those deemed essential to serve the needs of the PD residents and not the general needs of the surrounding area. However, where it is found by the city that the lands within a proposed PD district are appropriately located and of proper size and configuration so as to serve an existing or future need for commercial and/or industrial development of the larger community, provision for said development may be included within said proposed PD district. No commercial or industrial uses shall be approved as part of a PD unless the location, site size, and proposed intensity of said uses are found to be consistent with the city's adopted comprehensive plan. 
(13)  Commercial and industrial: Any commercial or industrial site within the City of Pahokee determined by the city commission to be of community benefit can be permitted to develop as a planned developed and in phases provided article VII procedures are followed. 
Sec. 14-105. - Rezoning. 
(a)  Procedures for rezoning of land to PD. The procedure for rezoning of land to PD classification is set forth within article III of this chapter and applying to the rezoning of land generally. However, due to the unique characteristics of PD design and development, the following procedures and requirements shall apply to applications for PD classification, in addition to the general requirements of article III of this chapter. 
(1)  Applications, material to be submitted: In addition to information required for application for rezoning generally under article XIII of this chapter, the applicant shall submit the following materials or data: 
a.  A statement presenting firm evidence of the unified control of the entire area within the proposed PD. The applicant shall state agreement to: 
1.  Proceed with the proposed development according to the provisions of these zoning regulations and such conditions as may be attached to the rezoning of the land to PD; 
2.  Provide agreements, contracts, deed restrictions, and sureties acceptable to the city for completion of the development according to the plans approved at the time of rezoning to PD, and for continuing operation and maintenances of such areas, functions and facilities as are not to be provided, operated, or maintained at public expense; and 
3.  Bind all successors in title to any commitments made under 1. and 2. preceding. All such agreements and evidence of unified control shall be examined by the city attorney and no rezoning of land to PD classification shall be adopted without a certification by the city attorney that such agreements and evidence of unified control meet the requirements of these zoning regulations. 
b.  A statement as to the density of development sought for the PD and such, supporting evidence or documentation as the applicant may feel is pertinent to enable the planning and zoning board and the city commission to determine whether or not the density of development requested is reasonable and proper. 
c.  A conceptual development plan at appropriate scale containing: 
1.  The title of the project and the names of the professional project planner and the developer; 
2.  Scale, date north arrow, and general location map; 
3.  boundaries of the property involved, all existing streets buildings, water courses, easements, section lines other existing important physical features in and adjoining the project; 
4.  conceptual plan location of the different us proposed by dwelling types, open space designations, recreational facilities, commercial uses, other proposed uses, and off-street parking and off-street loading locations; 
5.  conceptual plan showing access and traffic flow and how vehicular traffic will be separated from pedestrian and other types of traffic; 
6.  tabulations of total gross acreage in the development and the percentages thereof proposed to be devoted to the several dwelling types other proposed uses, recreational facilities, streets, parks, schools, and other reservations; 
7.  tabulations of the project density and the proposed numbers and types of dwelling units; tabulations of the amount of common open space and the amount of total impervious surfaces area. 
d.  Proposed zoning district regulations such as minimum rear, side and front yards, maximum building coverage, minimum building height (nonresidential only), permitted uses and accessory uses, minimum lot requirements, minimum internal rear, side or front yards, minimal living area, as be relevant to the PD proposed. 
e.  A statement showing proposed modifications of zoning or other applicable city regulations where it is intended by the applicant that such modification(s) serves the public interest to an equivalent degree. 
f.  Where necessary due to the unique character of the land involved, the size or intensity of the proposed development, or the types of proposed uses, the applicant may wish to submit and/or may be required by the city to submit one (1) or more of the following: An ecological survey; a comprehensive drainage study; a school impact study, including a letter from the Palm Beach County School Board in keeping with the provisions of F.S. § 235.193; a recreation impact study; a traffic impact study; or a marketability study. 
(2)  Procedures: On application for rezoning of land of PD classification, the planning and zoning board and the city commission shall proceed in general as for other applications for rezoning of land giving special consideration, however, to the following matters and requirements, and allowing changes in the rezoning board public hearing, as follows: 
a.  Prehearing conferences with applicant: The city staff site plan review committee shall meet with the applicant or his agent to review original application including all plans, maps, and documents submitted by the applicant. The purpose of such prehearing conference(s) shall be to assist in bringing the overall petition as nearly as possible into conformity with these or other regulations applying generally to the property involved and/or to define specifically those variations from application of general regulations which appear justified in view of equivalent services of the public purpose of such regulations. In the course of such prehearing conferences, any recommendations for change shall be recorded in writing and shall be come part of the record in the case. All such recommendations shall be supported by stated reasons for the proposal for change. The applicant shall state in writing his agreement to such recommendations, or his disagreement and if there is disagreement shall in writing indicating his reasons therefor, and such responses by the applicant shall be included in the record. At such time as further conferences appear unnecessary, or at any time on the request of the applicant, public notice shall be given and the public hearing before the planning and zoning board shall be held as for other application for rezoning, but the notice and hearing shall be on the petition as it any have been amended following the prehearing conference(s) rather than as originally submitted. 
b.  Planning and zoning board findings and recommendations: After public hearing, the planning and zoning board may recommend to the city commission that the PD rezoning be granted, subject to stated stipulations and conditions or be disapproved. In making its recommendation, the planning and zoning board shall find that the plans, maps, and documents submitted by the applicant and presented at the public hearing do or do not establish that the applicant has met the requirements of article XIII of this chapter applicable to rezoning generally, and in addition: 
1.  The requirements of unified control and agreement set out in section 14-105(a) above; 
2.  The general standards for district establishment set out in section 14-104(a) above; 
3.  The standards for internal PD design set forth in section 14-104(a) above are complied with or can be complied with at time of final development plan approval. 
4.  The tract for the proposed PD is suitable in terms of its relationship to the city's adopted comprehensive plan and that the area surrounding the proposed PD can continue to be developed in coordination with and in substantial compatibility with the PD proposed; 
5.  That the desired modification of general zoning or PD regulations as applied to the particular case justify such modification of regulations and meet to at least an equivalent degree the regulations modified, based on the design and amenities incorporated in the conceptual development plan; 
6.  That increased open space is provided for the occupants of the proposed PD and the general public, and desirable natural features indigenous to the site are protected and conserved in the development plan; 
7.  An adequate surface drainage system will be provided at not cost to the city. 
c.  Conditions and stipulations: In recommending rezoning of land to PD classification, the planning and zoning board may recommend and the city commission may attach suitable conditions, safeguards, and stipulations, including but not limited to the following: 
1.  Types and/or categories of land uses to be permitted within the district or specified portions thereof; 
2.  Residential density to be permitted within the district or specified portions thereof; 
3.  Minimum building lot sizes, required yards, building setbacks, floor area requirements, and maximum impervious surface area to be permitted within the district or specific portions thereof; 
4.  Intensity of nonresidential uses to be permitted within the district or specified portions thereof including square footage and floor area, height of structures, and amounts of land to be utilized for parking and other open space activities. 
5.  Amounts, location and types of recreational areas, parks, open spaces and facilities to be provided within district or specified portions thereof; with dedication thereof to the public at no cost. 
6.  Provisions to be made for necessary public facilities and/or services required by the district or specified portions thereof; with dedication thereof to the city or other applicable public body at no cost; 
7.  Method of staging of various development phases within the district, including both the sequence and timing of said phases and the required dates for filing of final development plans. 
In the application of said conditions and stipulations, applicable standards set forth within the conventional zoning districts of this code shall be utilized wherever possible. 
Any said conditions, safeguards, stipulations made at the time of rezoning to PD shall be binding upon the applicant or any successors in interest. Deviations from approved plans or failure to comply with any requirement, conditions, safeguarding, or stipulation shall constitute a violation of these zoning regulations. 
Sec. 14-106. - Establishment of PD district to be by ordinance. 
    Each establishment of a PD district shall be by the means of an ordinance duly adopted by the city commission in conformity with all procedures of law pertaining to rezoning of land within the city. Any said ordinance shall incorporate the conceptual plan and all stipulations and conditions embodied within the approval action. 
Sec. 14-107. - Time limitations for proceeding with final development plan. 
(a)  If the final development plan as set out in section 14-108 below has not been filed for approval within six (6) months of the date of rezoning of land to PD, or within six (6) month following a stipulated date for said filing in case of a phased PD development, then the PD classification shall remain on the land, but not plan approval that may be required by the city commission with procedure as for a new application shall have the effect of increasing the density or intensity of development previously approved. Extension of said time limits may be granted by the city commission upon due cause being shown. 
Sec. 14-108. - Final development plan. 
(a)  Plans: For development of land rezoned in PD shall be processed in accordance with procedures established in the city's subdivision regulations and/or site plan review requirements. The same information and data shall be furnished at each stage of plan submission. The final development plan required and submitted shall be in substantial compliance with the conceptual development plan submitted as part of the application for rezoning to PD. In addition to the provisions of the subdivision regulations and/or site plan review requirements found to be applicable, the following information shall be provided (where applicable, typical or standardized data may be provided for items 1, 2, 3, below: 
(1)  Building locations and architectural definitions of all structures proposed which are a part of the project shall be depicted upon the tentative plan or plat and the supplementary materials required. 
(2)  Master landscape plan depicting existing and proposed vegetation and locations thereof on the site. 
(3)  Walls and planting screens' locations, heights, and materials. 
(4)  Tabulations analyzing the number of total gross acres in the project and the percentages thereof proposed to be utilized by the several building types, other nonresidential uses, off-street parking and off-street loading, streets, recreation areas, parks schools and other reservations. Tabulations of total number of dwelling units in the project by types and the overall project density in dwelling units. 
(5)  Prior to approval of a final development plan, the developer shall file, as specified at the time of rezoning, a legally constituted maintenance association agreement for improving, perpetually operating, and maintaining the common facilities to be held in private ownership, including streets drives, parking areas and open space and recreation facilities; or he shall file such documents as are necessary to show how the said common areas to be improved, operated and maintained. Such documents shall be subject tot he approval of the city attorney. 
Sec. 14-109. - Variances. (Reserved) 
Sec. 14-110. - Building permits, certificates of occupancy. 
(a)  No building permit or certificate of occupancy or zoning compliance shall be issued in or for development in a PD district except in conformity with all provisions of the rezoning to PD classification and plans submitted and approved. 
Sec. 14-111. - Fees. 
(a)  For the filing of PD applications and final development plans shall be established by the city commission of City of Pahokee. All expenses incurred in the processing of PD application shall be paid by developer. 
Secs. 14-112-14-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 

Sec. 14-120. - Scope, purpose and intent. 
(a)  Scope. Provisions of this section shall apply in all zoning districts. 
(b)  Purpose and intent. The intent of these regulations is to ensure adequate and appropriately located off-street parking and loading, to avoid undue congestion on streets, to avoid unnecessary conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians, to preserve and enhance pedestrian activity areas within the city, and to facilitate vehicular access from public rights-of-way to off-street parking facilities. 
(c)  Off-street parking and loading facilities required. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for any structure or use unless required off-street parking spaces and loading facilities are provided. Any change in use of an existing structure or property will not require an increase in the number of parking or loading spaces. Any expansion, alteration, or improvement increasing the gross square feet of an existing structure which increases the required number of parking or loading spaces shall be accompanied by a corresponding increase in the number of spaces. 
Sec. 14-121. - Parking requirements for less than four residential dwelling units. 
(a)  Location. Required off-street parking spaces for less than four (4) residential units shall be located on the property on which the units are constructed. Required parking may be located in a front yard; however, the lesser of one thousand (1,000) square feet or seventy-five (75) percent of the front yard area must be landscaped. 
(b)  Configuration. Required off-street parking areas shall be consist of a parking bay, stall, driveway, garage, or combination thereof. 
(c)  Retention of required off-street parking spaces. Required off-street parking spaces shall not be replaced by any other on-site facility unless equal parking facilities are provided elsewhere. Off-street parking spaces existing on the effective date of this ordinance shall not be reduced to an amount less than required. 
Sec. 14-122. - Parking and loading requirements for multifamily and nonresidential uses. 
(a)  Site plan review for off-site parking facilities. No off-site parking facilities shall be constructed unless a site plan has been reviewed and approved in accordance with the provisions of article II. 
(b)  Retention of required parking and loading spaces. Required off-street parking and loading spaces shall not be replaced by any other use unless equal parking and loading facilities are provided elsewhere. Off-street parking and loading spaces, existing at the effective date of this article in connection with the operation of an existing building or use, shall not be reduced to an amount less than required for a similar new building or new use of the same type. 
(c)  Collective provision of parking and loading spaces. Two (2) or more buildings or uses on adjacent lots collectively may provide required off-street parking and loading facilities. In such cases, the required number of parking and loading spaces shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the individual uses computed separately. 
Sec. 14-123. - Shared parking requirements. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this section is to permit a reduction in the total number of required parking spaces when property is occupied by two (2) or more uses which typically do not experience peak parking demands at the same time. 
(b)  Calculation of shared parking requirements. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 14-125, when any land or building is used for two (2) or more distinguishable purposes as listed below, the minimum total number of required parking spaces shall be determined by the following procedure: 
(1)  Multiply the minimum parking requirement for each individual use as provided in section 14-125 by the appropriate percentage listed in Table VIII-1 for each of the five (5) designated time periods. 
(2)  Add the resulting sum for each of the five (5) vertical columns of the table. 
(3)  The minimum parking requirement is given by the highest sum resulting from subsection (b)(2) above. 
TABLE VIII-1 
SHARED PARKING REQUIREMENTS 
Weekday Weekend Uses Night Midnight- 
6 a.m. Day 
9 a.m.- 
4 p.m. Eve. 
6 p.m.- 
Midnight Day 
9 a.m.- 
6 p.m. Eve. 
6 p.m.- 
4 p.m. Residential 100% 60% 90% 80% 90% Office/industrial 5% 100% 10% 10% 5% Comm.-Retail (non-office) 5% 70% 90% 100% 70% Hotel (city center) 80% 80% 100% 80% 100% Hotel (non-city center) 70% 70% 100% 70% 100% Restaurant 10% 50% 100% 50% 100% Ent./Rec. (theaters bowling alleys, etc) 10% 40% 100% 80% 100% All others 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%  
(4)  Limitations. 
a.  Parking spaces which are reserved for use by specified individuals or classes of individuals shall not be counted toward meeting parking requirements. 
b.  The provisions in this section shall not result in a reduction of more than twenty-five (25) percent from the requirements which would apply in the absence of this section. 
Sec. 14-124. - General provisions. 
(a)  Restriction on use of parking and loading areas. The storage of merchandise, materials or motor vehicles, or the repair of motor vehicles or any other equipment is prohibited in all off-street parking and loading facilities. 
(b)  Location of parking and loading spaces. Required off-street parking and loading spaces shall be located on the same property on which the use or structure exists; however, required parking may be provided off-site as required by the following: 
(1)  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any nonresidential use or structure within the CORE district. 
(2)  Within three hundred (300) feet of any nonresidential use or structure in any other commercial zoning district. 
Required parking off-site shall be located only in the same or a less restrictive zoning district as the use served. The restrictive nature of zoning districts is established in Table VIII-2. Off-site parking also shall be permitted only as a conditional use and shall occur only in districts where parking facilities of this nature are permitted. 
TABLE VIII-2 
ZONING DISTRICTS IN 
DESCENDING ORDER OF 
RESTRICTIVENESS 
District Designation District Title HI Heavy Industrial LI Light Industrial CORE Commercial, Office, Residential, Entertainment GC General Commercial NC Neighborhood Commercial PF Public Facility MF18 Multifamily Residential, Medium Density MF12 Multifamily Residential, Low Density SFMU Single Family Residential, Mixed Use RMH Single Family Residential, Moderate Density SF7 Single Family Residential, Medium Density SF4 Single Family Residential, Low Density SF1 Single Family Residential, Very Low Density  
(c)  Ownership of parking and loading spaces. The title of all property on which required parking and loading is provided shall be unified with the title of all property on which the uses served are located. Deed restrictions and other documents which provide for title unification shall be recorded with the Palm Beach County Clerk of the Circuit Court prior to consideration of a site plan. Not withstanding the provisions of this section, required parking for any structure or use may be located on property obtained on a lease. rental, or similar contractual basis when the city is a third part to such agreement. Contractual agreements of this nature must be approved by the city commission following action by the board of adjustment and prior to the issuance of any building permit or certificate of occupancy. If required parking is obtained in this manner, sufficient numbers of spaces shall be maintained at all times. If required parking is obtained on a contractual, non-unity of title basis, deed restrictions, or other documents which limit the use of property to the provision parking, shall be recorded with the clerk of the circuit court, approved by the city attorney, and filed with the community development department prior to consideration of a site plan. Deed restrictions of this nature shall expire only after twenty-five (25) years or upon the termination of the use requiring the provision of parking. Parking provided on a non-unity of title basis shall be a conditional use and require approval by the board of adjustment. Required documents shall be recorded with the clerk of the circuit court prior to issuance of any building permit. 
(d)  Entrances and exits to parking and loading facilities. Entrances and exists to parking and loading spaces shall be located on one (1) or the other: 
(1)  Land in the same zoning district as the use served. 
(2)  Land in a less restrictive zoning district. For the purposes of this section, the zoning district listed first on Table VIII-2 shall be considered the least restrictive, and each succeeding district shall be considered more restrictive than the one (1) preceding it. 
(e)  Surfacing of parking and loading spaces. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, all parking and loading spaces, access drives, and maneuvering lanes shall be prepared with a smooth, non-dusting surface in compliance with standards specified by the department of community development. The director of community development may approve types of paving not specified upon a finding that such other types are equivalent in appearance, durability, and function. Parking surfaces shall be maintained free of all unapproved vegetation, dust, and accumulated trash. 
(f)  Reserve parking. Reductions of required parking spaces of up to fifty (50) to seventy-five (75) percent may be permitted as a conditional use for intermittently used facilities such as churches, cultural facilities, recreation facilities, private clubs and lodges, and civic centers. Applications shall include a site plan which delineates all required spaces pursuant to Table VIII-6 and identify those to be held in reserve. Approved reserve spaces shall be provided with a stabilized base and sodded. Sodded areas shall be maintained in accordance with the article IX. The director of community development shall review annually all sites with permitted reserve parking areas for erosion, production of nuisance dust, illegal access to public rights-of-way, and improper landscape maintenance. The presence of any of these factors, a change in use of the site, or a change in ownership shall void the reserve parking approval and require the paving of all spaces in accordance with subsection (e) above or the approval of a new conditional use. 
(g)  Storm drainage for parking and loading spaces. Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided with drainage systems adequately designed and maintained as required by the following: 
(1)  To prevent the accumulation of water from normal rainfall. 
(2)  To prevent the runoff of rainfall onto neighboring property at rates greater than would result if the site were undeveloped. Drainage systems shall be designed in accordance with article XII. 
(h)  Traffic control aids. Traffic control signs and pavement markings shall be used as necessary to ensure safe and efficient traffic operations within all parking and loading areas. Required off-street parking spaces shall be delineated by four (4) inch white double-striped lines. Curbs, wheel-stops, or bollards shall be installed to protect landscaped areas, or bollards shall be installed to protect landscaped areas, pedestrian areas, buildings, and property lines. All signs shall comply with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices Federal Highway Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation, 1987, as adopted by the Florida Department of Transportation, as revised. 
(i)  Required number of spaces when fractional space computed. When calculations determining the number of required parking spaces result in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half (1/2) shall be disregarded and fractions over one-half (1/2) shall require one (1) parking space. 
(j)  Developer's option to pay into city's parking trust fund in lieu of providing required nonresidential parking spaces. In lieu of providing all or a portion of the nonresidential parking spaces required for uses located in CORE district, a developer may pay into the CORE district parking trust fund a sum of money which is the product of the number of parking spaces required but not provided and the current cost of providing a parking space in the CORE district. Payment required by this subsection shall be made prior to the issuance of a building permit for any portion or phase of a development project to which the nonresidential parking spaces that are required but not provided relate. 
(k)  Configuration of parking and loading ingress and egress. Ingress to and egress from parking and loading spaces shall be provided in either of the following ways: 
(1)  Ingress and egress from parking and loading spaces shall be provided by means of clearly defined drives which lead from public rights-of-way to clearly defined maneuvering lanes which in turn provide access to individual parking or loading spaces. Configurations which require backing directly onto a street, excluding alleys, from a parking or loading space shall be prohibited in all non-residential zoning districts. There shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet separation between all access drives. The separation shall be measured along the curb line. 
(2)  Ingress and egress from parking stalls may be provided directly from public alleys. If existing alley width does not comply with minimum aisle requirements, additional parking space aisle or setbacks shall be required as indicated in Table VIII-3. 
(l)  Exceptions to general requirements for off-street core district parking. In the CORE district, off-street parking requirements for each use may be reduced by ten (10) percent with the exception of hotel and retail uses. This ten (10) percent reduction also shall apply to all federal, state, county, municipal, and other public agencies within the CORE district. 
(m)  Encroachments. Required off-street parking spaces shall not be encroached upon by electrical or mechanical equipment, pipes, or similar obstructions. Required off-street parking spaces may be encroached upon by structural support columns; however, such encroachments shall not interfere with the normal opening and closing of vehicle doors. Encroachments of this nature shall be reviewed and approved by the director of community development prior to issuance of a building permit. 
(n)  Vehicular movement. All vehicular movement and maneuvering that may be required to utilize off-street parking facilities shall be retained on-site. Public rights-of-way shall not be utilized to allow or enhance movement or maneuvering. 
(o)  Off-street parking dimensions. All parking spaces required by this article shall be designated either "standard" or "small car." Minimum dimensions are as follows: Standard car spaces shall be at least ten (10) feet in width and twenty (20) feet in length; and small car spaces shall be at least nine (9) feet in width and eighteen (18) feet in length. Minimum parking space and aisle dimensions are set forth in Table VIII-3 and Figure VIII-I. 
(1)  Small car space requirements. Small car parking spaces shall be permitted as follows: 
a.  If the total parking requirements of any use or structure is less than twenty (20) spaces, no small car spaces are permitted. 
b.  If the total parking requirement is twenty (20) to one hundred (100) spaces, twenty-five (25) percent of the spaces may by designated for small car use. 
c.  If the total parking requirement is more than one hundred (100) spaces, thirty (30) percent of the spaces may be designated for small car use. 
d.  All small car parking spaces shall be marked with individual signs stating "small cars only." 
e.  Small car spaces, to the extent feasible, shall not be concentrated at various locations within a parking structure or lot. Small and standard car spaces shall be distributed equally throughout a parking structure or lot, and the director of community development shall review the design of all proposed parking facilities to ensure that the intent of this section is satisfied. 
(2)  Dimensions and layout of parking facilities. Plans for the layout of off-street parking facilities shall be in accordance with the minimum requirements set forth in Table VIII-3 and Figure VIII-I. Parking spaces for the disabled shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of applicable state and federal legislation. 
TABLE VIII-3 
REQUIRED PARKING DIMENSIONS 
(In Feet) 
A 
Parking 
Angle B 
Stall 
Width C 
Stall 
Depth D(1) 
Aisle 
Width E 
Curb 
Length F 
Half 
Bay G 
Full 
Bay 0 ST(2) 10.00 10.00 12.00 23.00 22.00 32.00 0 SM 9.00 9.00 12.00 23.00 21.00 30.00 30 ST 10.00 18.66 12.00 20.00 30.66 49.32 30 SM 9.00 16.79 12.00 18.00 28.79 45.59 40 ST 10.00 20.52 12.00 15.56 32.52 53.03 40 SM 9.00 18.46 12.00 14.00 30.46 48.93 45 ST 10.00 21.21 13.00 14.14 34.21 55.43 45 SM 9.00 19.09 13.00 12.73 32.09 51.18 50 ST 10.00 21.75 15.00 13.05 36.75 58.50 50 SM 9.00 19.57 15.00 11.75 34.57 54.15 60 ST 10.00 22.32 18.00 11.55 40.32 62.64 60 SM 9.00 20.09 18.00 10.39 38.09 58.18 70 ST 10.00 22.21 20.00 10.64 42.21 64.43 70 SM 9.00 19.99 20.00 9.58 39.99 59.99 75 ST 10.00 21.91 22.00 10.35 43.91 65.81 75 SM 9.00 19.72 22.00 9.32 41.72 61.43 80 ST 10.00 21.43 24.00 10.15 45.43 66.87 80 SM 9.00 19.29 24.00 9.14 43.29 62.58 90 ST 10.00 20.00 24.00 10.00 44.00 64.00 90 SM 9.00 18.00 24.00 9.00 42.00 60.00  
(1)  Dimensions are for one-way direction movement. Two-way direction movement requires a minimum width of twenty-four (24) feet regardless of parking angle and dimensions shown. 
(2)  ST is Standard, SM is Small 

(p)  Parking spaces for the disabled. Spaces for the disabled shall be provided as set forth in applicable state legislation. 
(1)  Number of spaces for the disabled. Disabled parking spaces shall be provided as required in Table VIII-4. 
TABLE VIII-4 
REQUIRED PARKING FOR THE DISABLED 
Total Number of 
Required Spaces Total Number 
of Disabled 
Spaces Required Up to 25 1 26 to 50 2 51 to 75 3 76 to 100 4 101 to 150 5 151 to 200 6 201 to 300 7 301 to 400 8 401 to 500 9 501 to 1,000 2% of total Over 1,000 20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000  
Source: F.S. ch. 316.1955. 
(2)  Size and location of spaces for the disabled. Parking spaces for the disabled shall be designed as required by the following: 
a.  All spaces shall have access to a curb ramp or curb cut, when necessary, to allow entrance to the building served. Spaces shall be located so that users are not compelled to walk or otherwise move behind parked vehicles, excluding other vehicles parked in adjacent parking spaces for the disabled. 
b.  Diagonal or perpendicular parking spaces shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet wide and eighteen (18) feet long. 
c.  Parallel parking spaces shall be located either at the beginning or end of a block or adjacent to alley entrances. Curbs adjacent to such spaces shall be of a height which will not interfere with the opening and closing of motor vehicle doors. 
d.  Each disabled parking space shall be prominently outlined with paint and posted with a permanent sign of color and design approved by the Florida Department of Transportation. The sign shall contain the internationally accepted wheelchair symbol and the caption "Parking by Disabled Permit Only." 
(q)  Loading space requirements. Loading spaces shall be provided as required in Table VIII-5. 
TABLE VIII-5 
REQUIRED LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACES 
Use Gross 
Floor Area 
(square feet) Loading and 
Unloading Spaces 10' X 25' 10' X 50' Office use 0 to 1,000 0 0 1,001 to 99,999 1 0 100,000 to 149,999 0 1 150,000 to or more 0 2 Commercial and Industrial uses 0 to 1,000 0 0 1,001 to 19,999 1 0 20,000 to 49,999 0 1 50,000 to 99,999 0 2 100,000 or more 0 3  
(r)  Bicycle parking. Required Bicycle parking facilities shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  Approved parking facilities. Bicycle parking facilities shall include provision for the secure storage and locking of bicycles. All required bicycle parking facilities shall be from an approved list of bicycle parking devices maintained by the department of community development. Such approved list shall be adopted and amended by resolution of the city commission. Other bicycle parking devices may be used if it can be established to the satisfaction of the director of community development that they are equivalent to devices on the approved list in function, quality, and construction. 
(2)  Fixed objects. Fixed objects which are intended to serve as bicycle parking facilities shall be clearly labeled as available for bicycle parking. 
(3)  Storage rooms. If a room or common locker not divided into individual lockers or rack spaces is used, one (1) bicycle space shall consist of an area not less than twelve (12) square feet with locking devices. Adequate aisle widths shall be provided in rooms or common lockers so as to provide convenient access to users. 
Sec. 14-125. - Specific parking requirements. 
(a)  Parking space requirements for individual uses. Parking space requirements for individual uses shall be as set forth within Table VIII-6 and as follows: 
(1)  Minimum vehicle parking requirements. 
a.  All uses of five hundred (500) square feet or greater shall provide three (3) vehicle parking spaces or the number prescribed in Table VIII-6, whichever is greater. 
b.  All uses greater than five hundred (500) square feet shall provide five (5) vehicle parking spaces or the number prescribed in Table VIII-6, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Minimum bicycle parking requirements. 
a.  All uses shall provide a minimum of three (3) bicycle parking spaces or the number prescribed in Table VIII-6, whichever is greater, except where indicated as "None" on Table VIII-6. 
(3)  Sites with two of more uses. Whenever two (2) or more of the uses listed in Table VIII-6 are present on the same lot or in the same structure, the number of vehicle and bicycle parking spaces required shall be the sum of spaces calculated for each individual use. 
(4)  Uses not listed. For uses not specifically listed, requirements shall be the same as for the most similar use identified. 
Table VIII-6 Specific Parking Requirements Uses Motor Vehicles 
(spaces per gross 
square feet, unless 
otherwise noted) Bicycle Space 1  Accessory Dwelling Units 2 per unit None 2  Accessory Structures - Residential None None 3  Adult Entertainment Uses 1 per 250 10% of required number of vehicle parking 4  Agriculture - Animal Production/Husbandry None None 5  Agriculture - Crop, Citrus, etc. None None 6  Airport, Landing Field, Heliopad - Private or Public 1 per 1000 of terminal area 5% of required number of vehicle parking 7  Apparel & Accessory Retail - Sales & Rental Stores 1 per 250 10% of required number of vehicle parking 8  Art Merchandising Studios 1 per 250 10% of required number of vehicle parking 9  Art & Drafting Supply Stores including Picture Frames 1 per 250 10% of required number of vehicle parking 10  Bait & Tackle Shops 1 per 250 10% of required number of vehicle parking 11  Barber & Beauty Shops 1 per 275 10% of required number of vehicle parking 12  Bars, Lounges & Related Entertainment 1 per 100 10% of required number of vehicle parking 13  Bathroom & Kitchen Contractor Showrooms 1 per 500 5% of required number of vehicle parking 14  Book & Stationery Stores 1 per 250 10% of required number of vehicle parking 15  Botanical Gardens & Accessory Offices 1 per 300 of office 10% of required number of vehicle parking 16  Business & Commercial Machine Sales 1 per 500 5% of required number of vehicle parking 17  Candy, Nut & Confectionary Stores 1 per 250 10% of required number of vehicle parking 18  Catering Establishments 1 per 500 5% of required number of vehicle parking 19  Cemeteries, Public & Private 1 per employee 5 spaces 20  Churches, Synagogues & Other Houses of Worship 1 per every 4 seats in principal place of worship; plus, 1 per 1,000 of all places of assembly. 50% may be reserved spaces. 15% of required number of vehicle parking 21  Clinics - Public or Private 1 per 200 5% of required number of vehicle parking 22  Clubs & Lodges without Restaurant 1 per 200 5% of required number of vehicle parking 23  Coin & Philatetic Stores 1 per 250 10% of required number of vehicle parking 24  Commercial, Comparison Shopping, except as otherwise Listed 1 per 250 10% of required number of vehicle parking 25  Commercial, Single Destination Uses except where otherwise listed 1 per 250 10% of required number of vehicle parking 26  Commercial, Convenience Sales & Personal Service, except as otherwise listed 1 per 250 10% of required number of vehicle parking 27  Communication Towers 1 per employee None 28  Convenience Stores 1 per 250 5 spaces 29  Convent, Monasteries & Seminaries 1 per 4 seats in place of assembly; plus, 1 per 5 resident rooms None 30  Cultural Facilities - Public or Private 1 per 300 10% of required number of vehicle parking 31  Daycare Facilities - Accessory Children, Family None None 32  Daycare Facilities - Adult 1 per employee for shift with most employees; 5 spaces for visitors; plus, circulation/pickup area. 1 per 4 employees 33  Daycare Facilities - Children as Accessory in House of Worship & Schools, Public or Private Parking as required by principal use only. As required by principle use only 34  Daycare Facilities - Children as Principal Use 1 per employee for shift with most employees; 5 spaces for visitors; plus, circulation/pickup area. 1 per 4 employees 35  Delicatessen 1 per 100 10% of required number of vehicle parking 36  Department Stores - Major 1 per 250 10% of required number of vehicle parking 37  Drive Through Facilities except Restaurants, as principal uses 1 per employee for shift with most employees; plus stacking lane to accommodate 5 cars 10% of required number of vehicle parking 38  Exercise Studios & Health Clubs 1 per 500 25% of required number of vehicle parking 39  Facial & Scalp Treatment Services 1 per 275 10% of required number of vehicle parking 40  Financial Institutions, including Banks, Savings & Loans and Credit Unions 1 per 250; 1 per drive-in window; stacking lane of 5 cars per window 10% of required number of vehicle parking 41  Flower Shops and Florists 1 per 250 10% of required number of vehicle parking 42  Food & Beverage Related Uses, except as otherwise listed 1 per 200 10% of required number of vehicle parking 43  Food Stores or Supermarkets greater than 10,000 sq. ft. 1 per 250 10% of required number of vehicle parking 44  Food Stores - Specialty 1 per 250 10% of required number of vehicle parking 45  Funeral Homes, Mortuaries & Crematories 1 per 4 seats; plus, 1 per 275 office space and 1 per business vehicle. 50% of required number of vehicle parking space or 5 spaces, whichever is less. 46  Furniture Refinishing & Repair 1 per 500 5 spaces 47  Game Arcades 1 per 200 20% of required number of vehicle parking 48  Gift, Novelty, Souvenir & Sundry Shops 1 per 250 20% of required number of vehicle parking 49  Government Facilities, not otherwise listed 1 per 200 10% of required number of vehicle parking 50  Greenhouses - Commercial 1 per 1,000 5% of required number of vehicle parking 51  Group Homes - Type I (5 or less) 1 per six beds; 1 per 300 office, 50% reserved parking 25% of required number of vehicle parking 52  Group Homes - Type III (6 or more) 1 per six beds 1 per 300 office; 50% reserved parking 25% of required number of vehicle parking 53  Group Homes - Type V 1 per six beds 1 per 300 office; 50% reserved parking 25% of required number of vehicle parking 54  Gun Clubs & Shooting Ranges 1 per 500 5% of required number of vehicle parking 55  Hardware, Paint, Glass and Wallpaper Stores 1 per 250 10% of required number of vehicle parking 56  Home Occupations - Accessory to Residential Use None None 57  Hospitals- Public and Private 1 per 2 beds; 1 per 5 rooms for employees; plus, space to accommodate 2 ambulances at E.R. entrance; plus, 1 per staff doctor 5% of required number of vehicle parking 58  Hotels & Motels 1 per room; 1 per 5 rooms for employees; 1 per 100 of meeting space; 1 per 4 fixed seats; other uses as required 10% of required number of vehicle parking 59  Industrial - Heavy, except where otherwise listed 1 per 500 5% of required number of vehicle parking 60  Industrial - Light, except where otherwise listed 1 per 500 5% of required number of vehicle parking 61  Interior Decorators 1 per 275 5% of required number of vehicle parking 62  Junk, Scrap & Salvage Yards 1 per 10,000 site area; 1 per 300 office None 63  Laundry & Dry Cleaning establishments, cleaning on premises 1 per 300 5% of required number of vehicle parking 64  Laundry & Dry Cleaning establishments serving primarily the public 1 per 250 5% of required number of vehicle parking 65  Laundry and Dry Cleaning establishments, serving the public - coin operated, no cleaning on premises 1 per 250 5% of required number of vehicle parking 66  Liquor & Party Stores 1 per 250 10% of required number of vehicle parking 67  Locksmith & Key Establishments 1 per 250 5% of required number of vehicle parking 68  Mailing Services 1 per 250 5% of required number of vehicle parking 69  Marine - Industrial Establishments 1 per 500 5% of required number of vehicle parking 70  Marine - Retail Sales & Service 1 per 500 5% of required number of vehicle parking 71  Martial Arts Studios 1 per 250 5% of required number of vehicle parking 72  Mobile Home Park 2 per unit None 73  Mobile Home, Sales, Rental & Service Agencies 1 per 500 5% of required number of vehicle parking 74  Monument Sales Establishments 1 per 500 5% of required number of vehicle parking 75  Motion Picture Studios 1 per 1,000 5% of required number of vehicle parking 76  Motor Vehicles Fuel Sales & Service (Gas & Service Stations) 3 per service bay 5% of required number of vehicle parking 77  Motor Vehicle Parts & Accessory Store 1 per 250 5% of required number of vehicle parking 78  Motor Vehicle Repair - Heavy (including body repairs & painting) 3 per service bay; 1 per 500 enclosed area 5% of required number of vehicle parking 79  Motor Vehicle Repair - Light (including body repairs & painting) 3 per service bay; 1 per 500 enclosed area 5% of required number of vehicle parking 80  Motor Vehicle - Sales & Rental (no service) 1 per 500 enclosed area; 1 per 1,500 outdoor storage area 5% of required number of vehicle parking 81  Motor Vehicle Sales & Service Agencies 1 per 500 enclosed area; 1 per 1,500 outdoor storage area; 1 per 3 service bays 5% of required number of vehicle parking 82  Motor Vehicle Title & Tag Service 1 per 250 5% of required number of vehicle parking 83  Motorcycle Sales and Service Establishments 1 per 500 enclosed area 5% of required number of vehicle parking 84  Music & Dance Studios 1 per 500 10% of required number of vehicle parking 85  Newspaper Distributing Agencies 1 per 500 5% of required number of vehicle parking 86  Newspaper & Magazine Shops 1 per 250 10% of required number of vehicle parking 87  Nurseries - Retail, for sale of plant materials grown off premises 1 per 500 10% of required number of vehicle parking 88  Nurseries - Wholesale & Retail, for sale of plant materials grown on premises 1 per 500 10% of required number of vehicle parking 89  Office & Related Uses - including business services, except as otherwise listed 1 per 350 10% of required number of vehicle parking 90  Office & Support Retail - not occupying more than 20% of gross square footage 1 per 350 10% of required number of vehicle parking 91  Offices - Governmental Administration 1 per 200 10% of required number of vehicle parking 92  Offices - Professional A) Medical and Veterinary B) Professional & Business 1 per 350 1 per 300 10% of required number of vehicle parking 93  Offices or Facilities, quasi-public associations & organization, not for profit 1 per 350 10% of required number of vehicle parking 94  Outdoor Storage Facilities for Families & Businesses 1 per 500 None 95  Parking Garages as Principal Use None None 96  Parking Lot as Principal - accessory or offsite uses None None 97  Parking or Storage of Recreational Vehicles, accessory in residential districts None None 98  Pawn Shops 1 per 250 5% of required number of vehicle parking 99  Pet Grooming Establishments, but not kennels 1 per 250 5% of required number of vehicle parking 100  Photocopying Services 1 per 250 5% of required number of vehicle parking 101  Photographic Studios 1 per 250 5% of required number of vehicle parking 102  Post Office 1 per 300 20% of required number of vehicle parking 103  Private Use on Public (City) land Dependent on use Dependent on use 104  Printing & Type Setting Services 1 per 250 5% of required number of vehicle parking 105  Produce Markets 1 per 500 10% of required number of vehicle parking 106  Public Safety Facilities - operated by private agencies 1 per 500 5% of required number of vehicle parking 107  Public Safety Facilities - operated by public agencies 1 per 500 5% of required number of vehicle parking 108  Radio & Television Broadcasting Studios & Facilities 1 per 1,000 5% of required number of vehicle parking 109  Railroad Switching & Marshalling Yards 1 per 500 None 110  Recreation - Indoors Bowling Alleys: 5 spaces per lane, plus other uses 25% of required number of vehicle parking Other Recreation Uses: as required by Director of Community Development Other Recreation Uses: as required by Director of Community Development 111  Recreation - Outdoors, General Golf Courses: 4 per green; 1 per employee; 1 per 500 square feet of clubhouse excluding cart & bag storage 25% of required number of vehicle parking Other Recreation Uses: as required by Director of Community Development Other Recreation Uses: as required by Director of Community Development 112  Recreation - Outdoors, High Intensity As determined by Director of Community Development As determined by Director of Community Development 113  Recreation - Outdoors, Amusement Temporary As determined by Director of Community Development As determined by Director of Community Development 114  Recreation, Stadium & Sports Arenas 1 per 4 seats 10% of required number of vehicle parking 115  Repair Shops for Household Appliances, Small Motors & Machines 1 per 250 5% of required number of vehicle parking 116  Research & Development Facilities - not of an industrial nature 1 per 250 10% of required number of vehicle parking 117  Research & Development Facilities - of an industrial nature 1 per 250 5% of required number of vehicle parking 118  Residential, Fraternities & Sororities 1 per 2 beds; 1 per 10 beds for employees 50% of required number of vehicle parking 119  Residential, Multifamily Efficiency: 1.5 per unit 1BR: 1.75 per unit 2BR: 2.0 per unit 1 space per 10 eff. or BRs for guest 25% of required number of vehicle parking 120  Residential, Rooming and Houses 1 per rental room; 1 per 10 rooms for visitors 25% of required number of vehicle parking 121  Residential - Single Family Detached 2 per unit None 122  Residential - Single Family Attached & Detached 2 per unit None 123  Residential - Townhouse (See Residential, Multi Family) 25% of required number of vehicle parking 124  Restaurants serving a limited clientele (Private clubs & lodges) 1 per 200 10% of required number of vehicle parking 125  Restaurants serving general public, but not drive in or drive through facilities 1 per 100 10% of required number of vehicle parking 126  Restaurants serving general public, drive in or drive through facilities 1 per 100 10% of required number of vehicle parking 127  Retail Bakeries 1 per 250 10% of required number of vehicle parking 128  Retail Building Material Sales 1 per 500 5% of required number of vehicle parking 129  Retail Business 1 per 250 10% of required number of vehicle parking 130  Sandwich or Snack Shops 1 per 200 20% of required number of vehicle parking 131  Satellite Reception Dishes - principal or accessory in non-residential districts None None 132  Satellite Reception Dishes - accessory to residential districts None None 133  Schools - Public & Private, Elementary, Intermediate, & Secondary High School: 1 per 2 student stations above grade 9; 1 per faculty/staff; 15 for visitors High School: 100% of required number of vehicle parking Mid/Jr: 1 per faculty/staff; 15 for visitors Mid/Jr.: 200% of required number of vehicle parking Elem.: See Mid/Jr.; 5 for visitors Elem.: 100% of required number of vehicle parking 134  Schools - Public Vocational & Trade involving industrial equipment 1 per 4 student stations; 1 per faculty/staff; 1 per 4 seats in place of assembly; 20 for visitors. 10% of required number of vehicle parking 135  Schools - Public Vocational & Trade not involving industrial equipment 1 per 4 student stations; 1 per faculty/staff; 1 per 4 seats in place of assembly; 20 for visitors. 20% of required number of vehicle parking 136  Schools - Colleges & Universities Public & Private 1 per 4 student stations; 1 per faculty/staff; 1 per 4 seats in place of assembly; 20 for visitors. 50% of required number of vehicle parking 137  Scrap, Waste & Reclaimed Materials Trade 1 per 1,000 None 138  Ship & Boat Building & Repair 1 per 500 5% of required number of vehicle parking 139  Special Non-Commercial Events of Public Interest As required by Director of Community Development As required by Director of Community Development 140  Swimming Pools, Accessory to Residential Uses None None 141  Swimming Pool Sales 1 per 1,000 enclosed sales area 5% of required number of vehicle parking 142  Tax Return Preparation Services 1 per 350 10% of required number of vehicle parking 143  Taxidermists 1 per 500 5% of required number of vehicle parking 144  Temporary Borrow Pits, Borrow Piles & Similar Excavation None None 145  Temporary Manual Labor Hiring Offices 1 per 300 5% of required number of vehicle parking 146  Temporary Non-Manual Labor Hiring Offices 1 per 300 5% of required number of vehicle parking 147  Temporary Model Dwelling or Sales Office 1 per 300 10% of required number of vehicle parking 148  Temporary Offices & Facilities for Construction, Storage, & Security 1 per 300 5% of required number of vehicle parking 149  Temporary Produce Stands 1 per 100 None 150  Theaters, Indoor, Motion Pictures Live Performances 1 per 4 seats 10% of required number of vehicle parking 151  Tobacco Shops 1 per 250 5% of required number of vehicle parking 152  Transit Storage & Maintenance Facilities for Passenger Transportation Operations 1 per 1,000 5% of required number of vehicle parking 153  Transit, Passenger & Freight Terminal 1 per 1,000 5% of required number of vehicle parking 154  Travel Agencies or Transportation Tickets 1 per 250 10% of required number of vehicle parking 155  Upholstery, Cloth & Canvas Products Fabrication 1 per 500 5% of required number of vehicle parking 156  Utility Facilities, Heavy Public & Private 1 per 500 5% of required number of vehicle parking 157  Utility Facilities, Light Public & Private 1 per 500 5% of required number of vehicle parking 158  Veterinary Clinics & Hospitals, Animal Shelters Enclosed 1 per 200 5% of required number of vehicle parking 159  Veterinary Clinics & Hospitals, Animal Shelters unenclosed 1 per 200 5% of required number of vehicle parking 160  Warehousing - Self Storage for Families & Small Business 1 per 200 None 161  Warehousing having moderate external impact 1 per 1,000 5% of required number of vehicle parking 162  Warehousing having significant impact 1 per 1,000 5% of required number of vehicle parking 163  Watch & Shoe Repair Establishments 1 per 250 5% of required number of vehicle parking 164  Wholesale having moderate external impacts 1 per 1,000 5% of required number of vehicle parking 165  Wholesale having significant extern impacts 1 per 1,000 5% of required number of vehicle parking 166  Yard & Garage Sales None None  
* Note: All non-residential development greater than sixteen thousand (16,000) square feet and residential developments greater than twenty (20) acres may only be permitted as a planned unit development. 
Secs. 14-126-14-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - LANDSCAPING 

Sec. 14-130. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to improve the appearance of certain setback and yard areas, including off-street vehicular parking and open-lot sales and service areas, and to protect and preserve the appearance, character and value of the surrounding neighborhoods and thereby promote the general welfare by providing for installation and maintenance of landscaping for screening and aesthetic qualities, since the city commission finds that the individualistic characteristics and qualities of the city justify regulations to perpetuate its aesthetic appeal. 
Sec. 14-131. - Definitions. 
    Buffer means a landscape area which may include walls, fences, berms, trees, shrubs, hedges, ground cover and other plant material. 
    Ground cover means plants or species which normally reach an average height of twenty-four (24) inches upon maturity, installed in such a manner as to form a continuous cover over the ground. Sod shall not be considered ground cover. 
    Hedge means a row of closely-planted shrubs or other vegetative screening forming a boundary or restrictive barrier of a height of twenty-four (24) inches or more at planting which will be forty-two (42) inches in height and opaque within one (1) year thereafter. 
    Landscaping means any combination of living plants such as grass, ground cover, shrubs, vines, hedges, or trees, and non-living landscape material such as rocks, pebbles, sand, mulch, and decorative paving material. 
    Landscape plan means a plan prepared in accordance with professional standards that meets the requirements set forth in this section. 
    Mulch means non-living, organic or synthetic materials used in landscape design to retard erosion and retain moisture. 
    Native vegetation means any plant species with a geographic distribution indigenous to the western Palm Beach County area. 
    Parking area means all property used for off-street parking, vehicular aisles and accessways, loading zones, interior and perimeter Landscaping, and other outdoor vehicular use areas. 
    Shade tree means a hardwood tree that locally reaches a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet at maturity, and provides relief from direct sunlight for at least six (6) months of the year. 
    Shrub means any woody perennial plant of low height, characterized by multiple stems and branches continuous from the base. Shrubs shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches in height and have a minimum twelve (12) inch spread or be a three (3) gallon container size at planting. 
    Tree means any self supporting woody plant which locally grows to an overall height of fifteen (15) feet or greater with a minimum mature crown spread of ten (10) feet or greater and which has a trunk which can be maintained with over five (5) feet of clear wood. 
    Vine means any ornamental plant requiring physical support to grow upwards. 
    Xeriscape landscape means a set of design and maintenance principles which promote good horticultural practice and the economic and efficient use of water. 
Sec. 14-132. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Single family and two-family dwellings. 
(b)  Parking areas located entirely within a structure. 
(c)  Agricultural production activities. 
(d)  Existing development that does not entail a substantial change in land use. 
(e)  Uses which have planting requirements regulated by Federal or State law. 
Sec. 14-133. - Compliance required; property to which applicable. 
(a)  Open space at new multi-family and commercial buildings. 
(b)  All off-street parking areas used for the display or parking of any and all types of vehicles, boats or heavy construction equipment, whether such vehicles, boats or equipment are self-propelled or not, and all land upon which vehicles traverse the property as a function of the primary use, hereinafter referred to as "other vehicular uses," including but not limited to filling stations, grocery and dairy stores, banks, restaurants, and the like, shall conform to the minimum landscaping requirements hereinafter provided. 
Sec. 14-134. - Plan approval. 
    Prior to the issuance of any building permit which involves a multi-family building, commercial building or paving , a site plan shall be submitted to and approved by the building official, and subject to review by other committees or boards as may be appropriate. The site plan shall be drawn no less than 1:20, including dimensions and distances, and clearly delineate the existing and proposed parking spaces, or other vehicular use areas, access aisles, driveways, sprinklers or water outlet locations, and the location, size and description of all landscape materials, the location and size of buildings, if any, to be served, and shall designate by name and location the plant material to be installed or, if existing, to be used, in accordance with the requirements hereof. No permit shall be issued for such building or paving unless such site plan complies with the provisions hereof. 
Sec. 14-135. - Compliance prerequisite to occupancy. 
    No certificate of use and occupancy shall be issued until the landscaping is complete and it shall be unlawful to occupy the premises unless the landscaping is installed in accordance with the approved site plans and the requirements hereof. 
Sec. 14-136. - Plant material. 
(a)  General. Landscape design which uses trees and plants pursuant to this section shall be planted in soil and conditions which are appropriate for their growth habits, appropriate for the ecological setting in which they are to be planted, have non-invasive growth habits, encourage low maintenance and high quality landscape design, be commercially available, and be otherwise consistent with the purpose and intent of this section. Existing native plants shall be used as a reference to the species that should be installed on a site. 
(b)  Use of existing plant material. In instances where acceptable healthy plant material exists on a site prior to its development, in part or in whole, for purposes of off-street parking or other vehicular use area, and commercial building open space, the main street design committee may allow credit for such plant materials, if, in his opinion, such an adjustment is in keeping with, and will preserve the intent of this chapter. 
(c)  Use of native plant material. Native, well adapted drought resistant plant species are required. At least fifty (50) percent of all installed material must be native or drought tolerant as listed in the most recent edition of the South Florida Water Management District's "Xeriscape Plant Guide" or other industry recognized publication. No material listed as a prohibited plant species shall be acceptable for meeting this requirement. 
(d)  Installation. All landscaping shall be installed in a sound workmanlike manner and according to accepted good planting practices with the quality of plant materials as hereinafter described. 
(e)  Quality. Plant materials used in conformance with the provisions of this article shall conform to the minimum standards for Florida No. 1, as given in the most current edition of "Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants" Parts 1 and 11, prepared by the State of Florida, Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, Tallahassee. Sod shall be clean and reasonably free of weeds and noxious pests or diseases. Grass seed shall be delivered to the job site in bags with Florida Department of Agriculture tags attached indicating the seed grower's compliance with the department's quality control program. 
(f)  Trees. 
(1)  Trees shall be species having an average mature spread of crown greater than ten (10) feet and having trunk(s) which can be maintained in a clean condition over five (5) feet of clear wood. Trees having an average mature spread of crown less than ten (10) feet may be substituted by grouping the same so as to create the equivalent of a ten (10) foot crown spread. 
(2)  Trees shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet over all height. immediately after planting. Trees of species whose roots are known to cause damage to public roadways or other public works shall not be planted closer than twelve (12) feet to such public works, unless the tree root system is completely contained within a barrier for which the minimum interior containing dimensions shall be five (5) feet square and five (5) feet deep, and for which the construction requirements shall be four (4) inch thick concrete reinforced with #6 road mesh (6X6X6) or equivalent. 
(3)  Slash pines. Preserved slash pines may count as one (1) required tree when a minimum of sixteen (16) feet in height. 
(4)  Interior planting. A minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of all trees that are required in the interior of vehicular use areas shall be shade trees. 
(5)  Safe sight triangles. Trees located in required safe sight triangles shall have, at installation a minimum of eight (8) feet of clear trunk. 
(6)  Utilities. Trees that are to be planted within any easement with overhead utilities shall be consistent with FP&L's suggested tree list "Plant the Right Tree in the Right Place," taking into consideration the mature height and spread of the species beneath or adjacent to existing overhead utilities. Where overhead utilities exist, trees shall be maintained so that the mature canopy is a minimum of ten (10) feet from overhead lines. 
(7)  Tree protection. Trees to be preserved shall be protected from damage during the construction process. 
(g)  Palms. 
(1)  Palms shall have a minimum of eight (8) feet of clear trunk or twelve (12) feet in overall height at the time of installation. Preserved native palms with a minimum four (4) feet of clear trunk located within the interior of the site may be counted as one (1) required interior tree. 
(h)  Shrubs and hedges. Shrubs shall be a minimum of two (2) feet in height when measured immediately after planting, spaced at a maximum of twenty-four (24) inches on center. Hedges, where required, shall be a minimum of two (2) feet when planted and maintained so as to form a continuous, unbroken, solid, visual screen, with a minimum of forty-two (42) inches in height within a maximum of one (1) year after time of planting. Ornamental grasses may be used to satisfy the requirements of this section. 
(1)  Dwarf hedges and shrubs a minimum of eighteen (18) inches in height, may be installed in parking lot terminal islands, or safe sight triangles where clear visibility is required for vehicular circulation. These hedges and shrubs shall be maintained at a maximum of thirty (30) inches in height. 
(i)  Ground covers. Ground covers shall provide a minimum of fifty (50) percent coverage immediately upon planting and one hundred (100) percent coverage within (1) year. Sand, gravel, and shellrock, shall not be considered appropriate ground covers. 
(j)  Lawn grass. Because of their drought resistant characteristics, St. Augustine or Floratam grass species is recommended. Grass areas may be sodded, plugged, sprigged or seeded except that solid sod shall be used in swales or other areas subject to erosion, and provided that in areas where other than solid sod or grass seed is used, nurse grass seed shall sown for immediate effect and protection until coverage is otherwise achieved. 
(k)  Artificial plants. No artificial plants or vegetation shall be used to meet any standards of this section. 
(l)  Prohibited plant species: 
Casuarina equisetifolia Australian Pine Casuarina glauca Suckering Australian Pine Eichhornia crassipes Water hyacinth Hydrilla verticillata Hydrilla Hygrophila polysperma Green hygro Imperata cylindrica Cogon grass Ipomoea aquatica Water spinach Melaleuca quinquenervia Melaleuca broad leaf paper bark Mimosa pigra Catclaw mimosa Pistia stratiotes Water lettuce Schinus terebinthifolius Brazilian pepper Solanum torvum Turkey berry Solanum viarum Tropical soda apple  
(m)  Earth berms. Earth berms may be used as non-living landscape barriers only when installed in conjunction with plant materials. The slope of a berm shall not exceed three-to-one (3:1), and shall be minimum size of 2-5' X 2-5' (average). In areas where existing vegetation has been preserved, berms shall be located so that they do not negatively impact preserved trees and vegetation. 
Sec. 14-137. - Maintenance, water supply required. 
    The owner, tenant and their agent, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping, which shall be maintained in good condition so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance and shall be kept free from refuse and debris. All landscaped areas shall be provided with a readily available water supply with at least one (1) outlet located within one hundred (100) feet of all plant material to be maintained. 
Sec. 14-138. - Replacement. 
    Landscaping which becomes damaged or diseased, or is dead shall be replaced within thirty (30) days of notice to comply with the approved landscape plan. 
Sec. 14-139. - Landscaped commercial open space. 
(a)  Buildings less than four (4) stories in height when set back from the property line shall provide landscaped open space along the front of the building site of not less than five (5) feet and a landscaped open space along the side street of the building not less than three (3) feet. 
(b)  Buildings four (4) or more stories in height shall provide landscaped open space of not less than ten (10) percent of the area of the building site. Such landscaped area shall not be less in width or depth than ten (10) feet. 
(c)  All such landscaped open space shall be landscaped with trees, shrubbery, hedges, and other acceptable landscaped material. One (1) tree shall be provided for each one hundred (100) square feet of open space. No more than twenty-five (25) percent of the required landscape area may be grassed, the balance is to be landscaped in shrubs and ground covers. 
Sec. 14-140. - Landscaping adjacent to public rights-of-way. 
    On the site of a building or open lot use providing an off-street parking area or other vehicular use area where such area will not be entirely screened visually by an intervening building or structure from any abutting right-of-way, excluding dedicated alleys, there shall be provided landscaping between such area and such right-of-way as follows: 
(1)  A strip of land at least ten (10) feet in depth located between the abutting right-of-way and the off-street parking area or other vehicular use area which is exposed to an abutting right-of-way shall be landscaped, such landscaping to include: 
a.  One (1) tree for every fifty (50) lineal feet or fraction thereof. Such trees shall be located between the abutting right-of-way and off-street parking area or other vehicular use areas and shall be planted in planting area of at least twenty-five (25) square feet with a dimension of at least five (5) feet. Group trees where possible to prevent a line of trees. 
b.  A hedge, wall, or other durable landscape barrier of at least two (2) feet in height, shall be placed along only the perimeter of such landscaped strip. If such durable barrier is of non-living material, for every ten (10) feet thereof, one (1) shrub or vine shall be planted abutting such barrier, but need not be spaced ten (10) feet apart. Such shrubs or vines shall be planted along the street side of such barrier unless they are of sufficient height at the time of planting to be readily visible over the top of such a barrier. 
c.  The remainder of the required landscaped areas shall be landscaped with grass, ground cover, or other landscape treatment excluding paving. 
(2)  All property other than the required landscaped strip lying between the right-of-way and off-street parking area or other vehicular use area shall be landscaped with at least grass or other ground cover. 
(3)  Necessary accessways from the public right-of-way through all such landscaping shall be permitted to service the parking or other vehicular use areas and such accessways may be subtracted from the lineal dimension used to determine the number of trees required. 
Sec. 14-141. - Perimeter landscaping relating to abutting properties. 
(a)  On the site of a building, structure or open lot use providing an off-street parking area or other vehicular use area where such areas will not be entirely screened visually by an intervening building or structure from abutting property, that portion of such area not so screened shall be provided with a five (5) foot landscape area containing a wall, hedge or other durable landscape barrier not greater than eight (8) feet in height nor less than three and one-half (3 1/2) feet in height to form a continuous screen between the off-street parking area or other vehicular use area and such abutting property. 
    Such landscape barrier shall be located between the common lot line and the off-street parking area or other vehicular use area exposed to the abutting property so that the purpose of screening the off-street parking area and other vehicular use areas is accomplished. If such barrier consists of all or part plant materials, such plant materials shall be planted in a planting strip of not less than two and one-half (2 1/2) feet in width. 
(b)  In addition, one (1) tree shall be provided for every seventy-five (75) lineal feet of such landscape barrier or fractional part thereof. Such trees shall be located between the common lot line and the off-street parking area or other vehicular use area. Such trees shall be planted in at least twenty-five (25) square feet of planting area with a minimum dimension of at least five (5) feet. Each such planting area shall be landscaped with grass, ground cover or other landscaped material, excluding paving, in addition to the required tree. Group trees where possible to avoid a line of trees. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not be applicable in the following situations: 
(1)  When a property line abuts a dedicated alley or to those portions of the property that are opposite a building or other structure located on the abutting property. 
(2)  Where a proposed parking area or other vehicular use area abuts an existing hedge, wall or other durable landscape barrier on an abutting property, said existing barrier may be used to satisfy the landscape barrier requirements of this section, provided that the existing barrier meets all applicable standards of this article, and protection against vehicular encroachment is provided for hedges. 
(3)  Where the abutting property is zoned or used for nonresidential uses, only the tree provision with its planting area as prescribed in this section shall be required; however, the number of trees may be reduced to one (1) tree for every one hundred twenty-five (125) lineal feet or fraction thereof, but all perimeter requirements shall apply within the front setback area. 
(Note: See Exhibit "A") 
Sec. 14-142. - Parking area interior landscaping. 
(a)  (1)  Off-street parking areas shall have at least ten (10) square feet of interior landscaping for each parking space excluding those spaces abutting a perimeter for which landscaping is required by other sections hereof and excluding all parking spaces which are directly served by an aisle abutting and running parallel to such a perimeter. In addition, other vehicular use areas shall have one (1) square foot of landscape area for every one hundred (100) square feet or fraction thereof of paved area for the first fifty thousand (50,000) square feet, excluding the first five thousand (5,000) square feet of paved area, plus one (1) square foot of landscape area for every two hundred (200) square feet or fraction thereof of paved area for all paved area over fifty thousand (50,000) square feet. 
(2)  In areas zoned for industrial use, these requirements shall be reduced by fifty (50) percent. 
(3)  Where the property contains both parking areas and other vehicular use areas, the two (2) types of areas may be separated for the purpose of determining the other vehicular use area by first multiplying the total number of parking spaces by four hundred (400) and subtracting the resulting figure from the total square footage of the paved area. Each separate landscaped area shall contain a minimum of fifty (50) square feet and shall have a minimum dimension of at least five (5) feet and shall include at least one (1) tree having a clear trunk of at least five (5) feet with the remaining area adequately landscaped with shrubs, ground cover or other authorized landscaping material not to exceed three (3) feet in height. 
(b)  The total number of trees shall not be less than one (1) for every one hundred (100) square feet or fraction thereof of required interior landscaped area. Such landscaped areas shall be located in such a manner as to divide and break up the expanse of paving. 
(c)  In other vehicular use areas where the strict application of this section will seriously limit the function of the area, the required landscaping may be located near the perimeter of the paved area, including such perimeters which may be adjacent to a building on the site. Such required interior landscaping which is relocated as herein provided shall be in addition to the perimeter landscaping requirements. 
(d)  The front of a vehicle may encroach upon any interior landscaped area when said area is at least three and one-half (3 1/2) feet in depth per abutting parking space and protected by wheel stops or curbing. Two (2) feet of said landscaped area may be part of required depth of each abutting parking space. 
(Note: See Exhibit "A") 
Sec. 14-143. - Sight distance for landscaping adjacent to public rights-of-way and points of access. 
    When an accessway intersects a public right-of-way or where the subject property abuts the intersection of two (2) or more public rights-of-way, all landscaping within the triangular areas described below shall provide unobstructed cross-visibility at a level between three (3) feet and six (6) feet, provided however, trees or palms having limbs and foliage trimmed in such a manner that no limbs or foliage extend into the cross-visibility area shall be allowed, provided they are so located so as not to create a traffic hazard. Landscaping except required grass or ground cover shall not be located closer than three (3) feet from the edge of any accessway pavement. The triangular areas above referred to are: 
(1)  The triangular areas of property on both sides of an accessway formed by the intersection of each side of the accessway and the public right-of-way line with two (2) sides of each triangle being twenty-five (25) feet in length from the point of intersection and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the two (2) other sides. 
(2)  The triangular area of property located at a corner formed by the intersection of two (2) or more public rights-of-way with two (2) sides of the triangular area being thirty (30) feet in length along the abutting public right-of-way lines, measured from their point of intersection, and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the two (2) other sides. 
Sec. 14-144. - Adjustments of standards. 
(a)  The city manager, upon receipt of an application for adjustments of the landscaping requirements provided by this article, shall have the authority and duty to consider and act upon such application. The city manager shall act as expeditiously as possible on the application, and shall issue a concise statement of action taken. 
(b)  Major changes must receive variance approval by the zoning adjustment and planning board. The board may approve, modify or deny the requested adjustment, but shall approve or modify only if it determines that approval of any adjustment would not be contrary to the public interest and would be in keeping with and would preserve the intent of this article, and that literal enforcement would result in unreasonable and unnecessary hardship. The applicant shall, in the application, clearly and in detail state what adjustments are warranted, and shall accompany the application with such supplementary data, such as sketches, surveys and statistical information as is deemed necessary to substantiate the adjustment. 
Sec. 14-145. - Enforcement. 
    Failure to comply with the requirements of this section or any permit or approval granted or authorized hereunder shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(1)  Fines. Violation of the provisions of this section shall be punishable by: 
a.  Such fines and site improvements as are required by the code enforcement board. 
b.  Replacement of landscape material which has been damaged, or otherwise rendered unable to achieve its natural and intended form. 
(2)  Violations. The following deficiencies shall be considered a separate and continuing violation of this section: 
a.  Each tree or shrub which is not properly installed or properly maintained on site as required by this section; and 
b.  Each day in which landscaping is not properly installed or properly maintained on site as required by this section. 
Secs. 14-146-14-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - SIGNS 

Sec. 14-160. - General. 
(a)  Purpose. The City of Pahokee is a unique small town on the edge of Lake Okeechobee, and serves as a gateway to the lake's recreational opportunities. The visual beauty of the lake, and the character of the surrounding area, is a major factor in attracting vacationers, winter residents, and new residents to the area. 
    It is, therefore, the desire and purpose of the board of commissioners of the City of Pahokee to regulate signs and outdoor advertising throughout the zoning jurisdiction of the city; to limit the size, height, and location of signs and outdoor advertising erected therein; to eliminate hazards to pedestrians and motorists brought about by distracting sign displays; to ensure orderly development; to protect and stabilize property values; to preserve the scenic natural environment by allowing signs which are consistent with an attractive city appearance; to promote public health, prosperity, safety, and welfare; and to establish procedures through which these purposes can be fulfilled. 
(b)  Definitions. 
    Adverting structure means any structure erected for advertising purposes, with or without any advertisement display thereon, situated upon or attached to real property, upon which any poster, bill, printing, painting, device, or other advertisement of any kind whatsoever may be placed, posted, painted, tacked, nailed or otherwise fastened, affixed or displayed; providing that the term shall not include buildings. 
    Area: 
(1)  Area of copy (to be used when copy is on fascia or wall sign only) means the entire area within a single, continuous perimeter composed of squares or rectangles, which enclose the extreme limits of the advertising message, announcement or decoration on a fascia or wall sign. 
(2)  Area of sign (to be used only when (a) is not applicable) means the area of the largest single face of the sign within a perimeter which forms the outside shape including any frame, and which forms an integral part of the display, but excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which the sign may be placed. If the sign consists of more than one (1) section or module, all areas will be totalled. 
    Awning sign means letters or characters placed upon an awning or awning valance. 
    Balloon means a lighter than air sign or display tethered to the ground or structure. 
    Banner means any sign having the character, letters, illustrations or ornamentations applied to cloth, paper, balloons or fabric of any kind with only such material for a foundation. "Banner" shall include any animated, rotating or fluttering device designed to attract attention. 
    Billboard means a flat surface (such as a panel, wall or fence) on which bills are posted; specifically, a large panel designed to carry outdoor advertising, particularly for an off-premises sale. 
    Bulletin board means a board for posting notices. 
    Directory means a board or panel listing tenants or occupants of a building. 
    Flat sign; wall sign means any sign erected parallel to the face or on the outside wall of any building, and supported throughout its length by the wall of the building. 
    Free standing sign means any sign erected in a manner that is independent of any building for support. 
    Hanging sign means any sign projecting at an angle from the outside wall of any building, which is supported by only one (1) rigid support, irrespective of the number of guy wires used in connection therewith. 
    Lighted sign means any sign which is illuminated by any type of light from an artificial or man-made source, whether separate and apart from or contained within or on the sign, which is intended and used to make the sign visible or readable. 
    Marquee means a canopy or covered structure projecting from and supported by a building, when such canopy or covered structure extends beyond the building, building line or property line. 
    Marquee sign means any sign projecting from, attached to or hung from a marquee. 
    Off premises sign means any framework for signs, advertising merchandise, services or entertainment, sold, produced, manufactured or furnished at a place other than the location of such structure. 
    Painted wall sign means any sign painted on the outside wall of any building stationary or movable, regardless of material. 
    Political sign means any advertising structure or banner used in connection with a local, state or national election campaign, or other political activities. 
    Real estate sign means any sign erected by the owner or his agent, advertising the real property upon which the sign is located for rent or for sale. 
    Roof sign means an outdoor advertising display sign erected, constructed or maintained above the roof of any building. 
    Search light display means any intensified light used for identification, advertising or promotional purposes. 
    Sidewalk or sandwich sign means any moveable sign not secured or attached to the ground in any area of the city. 
    Sign means any display of characters, letters, illustrations or any ornamentations, or the complete structure on which any such characters, letters, illuminations or ornamentations are stated or applied (except buildings to which the same may be attached), used for identification, directional, advertising or promotional purposed; provided that the term shall not be construed to include self-contained fixtures approved by the National Fire Protection Association, or a non-electrical display wholly contained within a store building. 
    Shopping center means two (2) or more adjoining business establishments in sequence, the underlying ownership of land and building(s) being in a single entity. 
    Trailer sign means an advertising structure mounted on wheels or skids; the entire structure being designated primarily for portable use and constructed for the purpose of advertising, whether licensed or unlicensed as a trailer. 
    Window sign means any sign placed on the inside or outside of any window of any building or door and which is visible from any public right-of-way. This does not include merchandise on display. 
Sec. 14-161. - Exempt signs. 
    The following signs are exempt from the requirements herein. 
(1)  All classes of government signs including but not limited to traffic, health and public safety; crime control and prevention; official notices or advertisements related to any court action; the location of underground utilities; any other community service sign approved by the city. 
(2)  Flags, badges, or insignia of government or any charitable, civic, fraternal, patriotic, religious or other non-profit organization. 
(3)  Temporary lighting and displays as part of customary holiday decorations, provided strings of lights may be installed between November 15 and January 15 each year, and must be removed at the end of that period. 
(4)  Signs posted on private property related to trespassing or public safety, such as danger from animals. 
(5)  Signs denoting a product being sold out of a vending machine, telephone booth, or newspaper stand, and actually located on same. 
(6)  Signs displayed on the inside of a business that are not visible from any public street or walkway. 
(7)  For sale signs on private vehicles. 
(8)  Names and lettering on mail boxes and newspaper tubes. 
(9)  Manufacturer's signs displaying brand names or emblems located on gasoline pumps at service stations. 
Sec. 14-162. - Prohibited signs. 
    The following signs, as defined by this article, are prohibited. 
(1)  Off-premise signs, including outdoor advertising signs. Any sign which is not located on the premises that it identifies or advertises, with the exception of name plate signs permitted in sections 14-161(8) and 14-163(2)e., political signs permitted in section 14-163(1)h., and signs identifying businesses in shopping centers located other than at the actual building frontage of the individual business per section 14-164(b)(5)a. and 14-164(b)(6)a. Outdoor advertising signs shall be non-conforming in accordance with section 14-166(d). 
(2)  Roof signs. Any signs which are erected on a roof or which extend in height above the parapet or roof line of the building on which the sign is erected. 
(3)  Simulated traffic signs and obstructions. Any sign which may be confused with or obstruct the view of any authorized traffic signal or traffic sign, extend into the public right-of-way, obstruct the sight distance triangle at any street intersection, or in a any way constitute a hazard to traffic. 
(4)  Building obstructions. Any sign that obstructs or substantially interferes with any window, door, fire escape, stairway, ladder, or opening intended to provide light, air, ingress, or egress for any building. 
(5)  Signs posted within public rights-of-way. Any sign, other than governmental signs described in section 14-161(1), private residential signs described in section 14-161(8), and real estate signs permitted in section 14-163(1)c., posted on other officially placed signs, or on trees, rocks, ground, etc. within the public right-of-way. In the event a right-of-way is not defined among the public records of Palm Beach County, this prohibition shall apply to an area within fifteen (15) feet of the edge of the wear surface of any public thoroughfare. 
(6)  Portable signs. Any sign that is not permanently affixed to a building, stationary structure, or the ground. This shall not apply to Government signs described in section 14-161(1), or to vehicle for sale signs described in section 14-161(7). 
(7)  Message board signs. Any sign that uses changeable lettering or numbering, with the exception of church signs described in section 14-163(2)a., service station signs described in section 14-163(2)d., and restaurant message boards described in section 14-163(2)g. 
(8)  Animated and moving signs. Any moving sign or device to attract attention, all or any part of which moves by any means, including fluttering, rotating, or otherwise moving devices set in motion by the atmosphere, or by mechanical means, such as pennants, balloons, flags, propellers, or discs, whether or not any said device has a written message; traditional barber poles located at barber shops, however, shall not be prohibited. 
(9)  Flashing signs. Any sign or device displaying flashing lights, intermittent lights, or lights of changing degrees of intensity. Time and/or temperature signs, however, are permitted in commercial zones, provided that time and temperature displays alternate on no less than a five-second cycle and meet all other requirements of wall or free-standing signs in section 14-164(b). 
(10)  Searchlights. Searchlights used to advertise or promote a business or to attract customers to a property. 
(11)  String and tube lighting. Any illuminated tubing or string of lights whatsoever in commercial zoning districts, except for customary holiday decorations described in section 14-161(3). 
(12)  Oversized product facsimiles. The display of letters, logos, trademarks, emblems, pictures, etc. on oversized facsimiles or three (3) dimensional structures, such as chicken buckets, human figures, cans, or other containers or lettering. 
(13)  Internally illuminated signs. Any sign whose light source is within the sign, with the sign having a transparent or translucent background or cover which silhouettes opaque or translucent letters or designs. 
(14)  Neon signs. Any sign illuminated in whole or in part by neon lighting. 
(15)  Illuminated signs in proximity to residential zoning districts. Any sign, with the exception of those permitted for sub-divisions or multi-family developments per section 14-164(b)(1), which is illuminated between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. if located within three hundred (300) feet of a residential zoning district, or between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. if located within one hundred (100) feet of a residential zoning district. 
(16)  Vehicle signs. Any sign attached to or placed on a vehicle (including trailers) that are parked on public or private property. This provision is not to be construed as prohibiting the identification of a firm or its principal products on a vehicle operating during the normal hours of business, provided, however, that no such vehicle shall be parked on public or private property for the purpose of advertising a business or firm or calling attention to the location of a business or firm. 
(17)  Window signs. Window signs covering more than twenty-five (25) percent of the window surface. Displays of merchandise in windows, and photographs of homes or other properties in the windows of real estate offices may be placed in commercial windows in addition to the twenty-five (25) percent restriction. 
(18)  Bench, bus shelters, utility poles or waste receptacle signs. Any sign placed upon benches, bus shelters, telephone poles, or waste receptacles, except as may be authorized in writing by the city commission. 
Sec. 14-163. - Regulated signs not requiring a permit. 
    The following signs are permitted without a sign permit, provided they conform to the requirements of this article. 
(1)  Temporary signs. 
a.  One (1) temporary sign for church functions, not exceeding forty-two (42) inches in height nor nine (9) feet in surface area, and located on church property. 
b.  Temporary commercial signs on the interior of glass, indicating the opening or closing of a business provided they do not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the area of any given window or glass door, and are not illuminated except by normal interior business lighting or by soft indirect lighting of an entire window unit. Such message may be displayed for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days. 
c.  One (1) temporary on-premise sign advertising the rent, sale, or lease of a commercial or residential property, provided that the surface area does not exceed four (4) square feet in surface area per building and the sign is not illuminated. Such signs may not be erected within fifteen (15) feet of the wear surface of any public or private road. 
d.  Signs sponsored by municipal, school, civic, and other non-profit organizations, provided that the signs are only displayed in commercial zones, have a maximum surface area of nine (9) square feet, are posted in either commercial windows or in a secure fashion on private property, and are posted not more than thirty (30) days prior to a scheduled event and removed within twenty-four (24) hours after the event. 
e.  Signs advertising the sale of produce out of a home garden on the premises where the produce is being sold, not to exceed three (3) non-illuminated signs per premises, provided that such signs do not exceed four (4) square feet in surface area per sign face, and are not placed within the public right-of-way or within fifteen (15) of any road wear surface if not right-of-way is defined. 
f.  Residential yard sale signs, provided they do not exceed four (4) square feet in surface area per sign face, and the maximum time for display does not exceed forty-eight (48) hours. 
g.  Temporary sign denoting the architect, engineer, contractor, lending agency or subcontractor on the premises of work under construction, provided they meet the following requirements: 
1.  Each project site shall have no more than one (1) identification sign with one (1) sign face. 
2.  Identification signs shall be either attached to the building under construction or affixed to a secure temporary post, and located out of the public right-of-way or beyond fifteen (15) feet of any road wear surface if no right-of-way is defined. 
3.  Identification signs shall be no greater than four (4) square feet in residential zoning districts and sixteen (16) square feet in commercial zoning districts. 
h.  Political signs containing sixteen (16) square feet or less in area may be erected on private property in business zones only not more than forty-five (45) days prior to any election. Such signs must be removed within five (5) days after the election, shall be so constructed as not to create any hazardous or dangerous condition to the public, and shall not be erected within five (5) feet of any public street or sidewalk. 
(2)  Permanent signs. 
a.  One (1) permanent sign for churches, not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet per sign face nor more than eight (8) feet in height, and either non-illuminated or indirectly illuminated by white lighting only. Church signs may be of a message-board type that use changeable lettering. 
b.  Private commercial traffic signs, not exceeding three (3) square feet in surface area, indicating directions, entrances, or exits, which may also include the name and logo of the business. Such signs may be erected no closer than three (3) feet to the wear surface of the thoroughfare, and may not exceed a height of forty-two (42) inches or impair sight distance. 
c.  Private commercial signs indicating charge card information, or general instructions, restriction, etc., provided that they shall be limited to not more that three (3) per business site, shall not display the name of the business, and shall not exceed one (1) square foot in surface area. Such signs may be attached to a building and/or an existing permitted free-standing sign. 
d.  Signs for service stations, or any businesses selling gasoline, in addition to signs permitted in section 14-164(b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(5), and (b)(6),as follows: 
1.  One (1) gasoline price sign located and secured to each pump island, not exceeding four (4) square feet per sign face and eight (8) square feet per sign total; 
2.  Signs located at each pump island indicating self-service and all-service operation, not exceeding four (4) square feet per sign face; 
e.  Individual nameplate signs for residences, provided they do not exceed two (2) square feet per sign face and are placed no closer than three (3) feet to any road wear surface. In addition to containing the name of the resident, such signs may refer to home occupations carried on within the place of residence provided they comply with section 14-162(b). 
f.  Movie theatre marquees containing changeable lettering or numbering, provided such signs shall be considered part of the aggregate surface area based on building frontage for the movie theater per section 14-164(b)(3)a., (b)(4)a., (b)(5)b., and (b)(6)b. 
g.  Restaurant message boards on the wall or in window, as close to the main entrance of a restaurant as possible containing changeable lettering or numbering, provided such signs shall be considered part of the aggregate surface area based on building frontage if on the wall per section 14-164(b)(3)a., (b)(4)a., (b)(5)b., and (b)(6)b., or part of the maximum permissible area allowed on window glass per section 14-164(e). 
h.  Professional name plate not exceeding two (2) square feet in area, attached to a non-residential building. 
i.  Bulletin boards and directories for public, nonprofit or religious facilities, located on the premises of said facilities and not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area, attached to a building. 
j.  Memorial signs or tablets. 
k.  Names of buildings and dates of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other noncombustible material. 
l.  Signs not visible from a street which are inside a building. 
m.  Non-advertising wall murals when approved by the city commission. 
Sec. 14-164. - Regulated signs requiring a permit. 
(a)  Temporary signs. The following temporary signs are permitted, subject to the issuance of a permit by the city manager. Applications for temporary sign permits shall be made on the proper form obtainable at city hall; permit fees may be set at the discretion of the board of commissioners, as set forth in the fee schedule maintained in the city office by the city clerk. 
(1)  Temporary signs, flags, or banners advertising the initial openings of business establishments or special sales, not to exceed four (4) signs per year, are permitted provided the location of such signs if approved by the city manager administrator. Such signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in surface area on one (1) side and shall not be displayed longer than ten (10) days. 
(2)  Temporary banners for annual civic events and special holidays. Such banners may be strung across public rights-of-way, provided the location, height, and size are approved by the city manager, and of a period of time not to exceed seven (7) days. 
(b)  Permanent signs. The following permanent signs, are permitted, subject to the issuance of a permit by the city manager. Applications for permanent sign permits shall be made on the proper form obtainable at city hall, and shall include the name of the owner of the sign and the property, a drawing of the sign indicating its size and heights, a site plan drawing of the sign indicating its location on the business premises and relation to any adjacent rights-of-way, method of illumination, and whatever other information the city manager deems necessary to ensure compliance with these regulations. Fees for sign permits may be set at the discretion of the board of commissioners, as set forth in the fee schedule maintained in city hall by the city clerk. With the exception of outdoor advertising signs, any substantial change in the copy of a sign, such as change of the name of business, shall require application for a new sign permit at the prevailing permit fee; no permit shall be issued in the event of such a change in copy unless the sign complies with the current provisions of this article. 
(1)  Agricultural zoning districts. 
a.  Each ranch or farm is permitted one (1) free-standing sign at each major entrance, not to exceed two (2) free-standing signs for the entire ranch or farm development. Such signs shall be adequately secured, shall not be located within any public right-of-way, nor within fifteen (15) feet of the wear surface of any public thoroughfare if no right-of-way is defined among the public records of Palm Beach County; shall not exceed six (6) feet in height; shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in surface area per sign face; and may be either non-illuminated or indirectly illuminated by white lighting only. 
(2)  Residential zoning districts. 
a.  Each subdivision or multi-family development, as defined by this chapter, is permitted one (1) free-standing sign at each major entrance, not to exceed two (2) free-standing signs for the entire subdivision or multi-family development. Such signs shall be adequately secured, shall not be located within any public right-of-way, nor within fifteen (15) feet of the wear surface of any public thoroughfare if no right-of-way is defined among the public records of Palm Beach County; shall not exceed six (6) feet in height; shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in surface area per sign face; and may be either non-illuminated or indirectly illuminated, as defined by this Ordinance, by white lighting only. 
b.  Home occupations, as defined by this chapter, are permitted one (1) sign not exceeding four (4) square feet in surface area per sign face, which may be free-standing, wall, or hanging in type. 
c.  Tourist homes are permitted one (1) sign not exceeding four (4) square feet in surface area per sign face, which may be free-standing, wall, or hanging in type. 
(3)  Single businesses in the CORE and neighborhood business district. Each single business in the CORE and neighborhood business district, not located in a shopping center, is permitted the following signs: 
a.  One (1) or more wall signs, provided that the total aggregate surface area does not exceed a ratio of one-half (1/2) square foot for each one (1) linear foot of building frontage, as defined by this chapter, nor a maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet for any single sign. Consistent with section 14-162(2), no sign placed under these circumstances shall project above the mansard roof or project more than twelve (12) inches from the building wall at the base of the sign. 
b.  One (1) hanging sign, provided a clearance of at least seven (7) feet is established between the bottom of the sign and any pedestrian walking surface. Such signs may extend no more than four (4) feet from the right-of-way line over the walking surface, and may not exceed eight (8) square feet in surface area per sign face. 
c.  In construing the provisions of this section, signs erected within or upon show windows, cantilevers and marquees shall be considered in computing the number of signs on the building, provided however, that signs upon show windows, display windows, or doors containing letters not exceeding four (4) inches in height shall not be counted in computing the number of signs. 
(4)  Single businesses in the general commercial business districts. Each single business in the general and neighborhood business districts, not located in a shopping center, is permitted the following signs: 
a.  One (1) free-standing sign, provided it shall not be located within any public right-of-way, nor within fifteen (15) feet of the wear surface of any public thoroughfare if no right-of-way is defined among the public records of Palm Beach County; shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height; and shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in surface area per sign face. Businesses which adjoin more than one (1) of major highway serving Pahokee, and which are served by entrances from said highways, shall be permitted two (2) free-standing signs thirty-two (32) square feet in surface area per sign face, one (1) on each highway. 
b.  A choice between wall signs or one (1) hanging sign meeting the requirements of section 14-164(3), paragraphs a. and b. 
c.  In construing the provisions of this section, signs erected within or upon show windows, cantilevers and marquees shall be considered in computing the number of signs on the building, provided however, that signs upon show windows, display windows, or doors containing letters not exceeding four (4) inches in height shall not be counted in computing the number of signs. 
(5)  Shopping centers in the CORE and neighborhood business district. 
a.  Each shopping center in the CORE and neighborhood business district is permitted one (1) wall sign, as defined by this chapter, identifying the shopping center, provided it does not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in total surface area. Such sign may also contain the names of the individual businesses in the shopping center. 
b.  Each individual business located in a shopping center in the CORE and neighborhood business district shall be permitted the following: 
1.  One (1) or more wall signs, provided that the total aggregate surface area does not exceed a ratio of one-half (1/2) square foot for each one (1) linear foot of building frontage, as defined by this chapter nor a maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet for any single sign. Consistent with section 14-162(2), no sign placed under these circumstances shall project above the mansard roof or project more than twelve (12) inches from the building wall at the base of the sign. Individual businesses which are not readily visible from the main thoroughfare on which the shopping center is located may locate any portion of their wall signs on another exterior wall of the shopping center facing the thoroughfare. 
2.  One (1) hanging sign, as defined by this chapter, provided a clearance of at least seven (7) feet is established between the bottom of the sign and any pedestrian waling surface, such signs may extend no more than four (4) feet from the building wall over the walking surface, and may not exceed eight (8) square feet in surface area per sign face. 
3.  In construing the provisions of this section, signs erected within or upon show windows, cantilevers and marquees shall be considered in computing the number of signs on the building, provided however, that signs upon show windows, display windows, or doors containing letters not exceeding four (4) inches in height shall not be counted in computing the number of signs. 
(6)  Shopping centers in the general business districts. 
a.  Each shopping center in the general business districts is permitted one (1) free-standing sign identifying the shopping center, provided it shall not be located within any public right-of-way, on or within fifteen (15) feet of the wear surface of any public thoroughfare if no right-of-way is defined among the public records of Palm Beach County; shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height; and shall not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in surface area per sign face. Such sign may also contain the names of the individual businesses in the shopping center. Shopping centers which adjoin more than one (1) major highway serving Pahokee, and which are served by entrances from said highways shall be permitted two (2) free-standing signs sixty-four (64) square feet in surface area per sign face, one (1) on each highway. 
b.  Each individual business located in a shopping center in the general business districts shall be permitted wall signs and one (1) hanging sign meeting the requirements of section 14-164(b)(5)b, paragraphs 1. and 2. 
c.  In construing the provisions of this section, signs erected within or upon show windows, cantilevers and marquees shall be considered in computing the number of signs on the building, provided however, that signs upon show windows, display windows, or doors containing letters not exceeding four (4) inches in height shall not be counted in computing the number of signs. 
(7)  Light and heavy industrial zones. 
a.  Each industrial park in light and heavy industrial zones is permitted one (1) free-standing sign identifying the industrial park, provided it shall not be located within any public right-of-way, on or within fifteen (15) feet of the wear surface of any public thoroughfare if no right-of-way is defined among the public records of Palm Beach County; shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height; and shall not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in surface area per sign face. Such sign may also contain the names of the individual businesses in the industrial park. Industrial parks which adjoin more than one (1) major highway serving Pahokee, and which are served by entrances from said highways shall be permitted two (2) free-standing signs sixty-four (64) square feet in surface area per sign face, one (1) on each highway. 
b.  Each individual business located in a light or heavy industrial zone shall be permitted the following: 
1.  One (1) or more wall signs, provided that the total aggregate surface area does not exceed a ratio of one-half (1/2) square foot for each one (1) linear foot of building frontage, as defined by this chapter nor a maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet for any single sign. Consistent with section 14-162(2), no sign placed under these circumstances shall project above the mansard roof or project more than twelve (12) inches from the building wall at the base of the sign. 
2.  One (1) hanging sign, as defined by this chapter, provided a clearance of at least seven (7) feet is established between the bottom of the sign and any pedestrian waling surface. such signs may extend no more than four (4) feet from the building wall over the walking surface, and may not exceed eight (8) square feet in surface area per sign face. 
c.  In construing the provisions of this section, signs erected within or upon show windows, cantilevers and marquees shall be considered in computing the number of signs on the building, provided however, that signs upon show windows, display windows, or doors containing letters not exceeding four (4) inches in height shall not be counted in computing the number of signs. 
(c)  Historic signs. 
(1)  The design of any new or reproduction historic sign should be consistent with its corresponding facade in terms of style, size, placement, and materials. No building should be applied with signs which are of a style pre-dating the construction of the facade. For example, Victorian storefronts should not be adorned with "colonialized" signs. 
(2)  Historic markers shall be the size and design in accordance with the historical markers cast for the State of Florida's Bureau of Historical Sites and Properties as if the same were fully set forth herein. 
(d)  Signs on awnings. Signs shall be permitted to be painted, stamped, perforated, or stitched or otherwise applied on the valance of an awning subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Such signs shall be limited to the name of the owner or the trade name of the business, and the street number of the building; the business name or owner's name shall appear not more than once on any one (1) side valance or front valance of any awning, but street numbers may be placed before and after each statement of the business name or owner's name; the street name shall in no case be permitted upon any awning valance. 
(2)  All lettering on such signs shall be placed thereon in one (1) line and the letters or numerals shall not in any case exceed four (4) inches in height. 
(3)  Marks or insignia constituting or forming a decorative motif shall be permissible above the valance of any awnings under the following circumstances: the mark or insignia shall be approved by the main street design committee upon drawings or sketches submitted to it. Such decorative motifs shall not include trademarks, lettering, printing or signs of any kind but shall be limited strictly to a decorative motif. 
(e)  Window signs. Window signs may not cover more than twenty-five (25) percent of the window surface, displays of merchandise in windows, and photographs of homes or other properties in the widows of real estate offices may be placed in commercial windows in addition to the twenty-five (25) percent area restriction. 
Sec. 14-165. - Sign construction, design, and maintenance. 
(a)  Sign area. 
(1)  Area of copy (to be used when copy is on fascia or wall sign only) means the entire area within a single, continuous perimeter composed of squares or rectangles, which enclose the extreme limits of the advertising message, announcement or decoration on fascia or wall sign. 
(2)  Area of sign (to be used only when (a) is not applicable) means the area of the largest single face of the sign within a perimeter which forms the outside shape including any frame, and which forms an integral part of the display, but excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which the sign may be placed. If the sign consists of more than one (1) section or module, all area will be totalled. 
(b)  All signs, except those protected by glass or other transparent cover, shall be constructed of materials that will not rapidly deteriorate, fade, fall apart, or in any way become a hazard to the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(c)  Any sign permitted under this Ordinance must comply with applicable requirements of the South Florida Building code, National Electrical code, and other applicable federal, state, or local codes. 
(d)  Every sign and its supports, frames, guys, anchors, and electrical equipment shall be securely fastened and placed to withstand adverse weather conditions. 
(e)  All signs, unless otherwise stated or implied, shall have no more than two (2) faces, displayed on opposite sides and without a space or angled projection to one (1) another. Said signs shall have the same message and general design on both faces. 
(f)  All signs shall be kept free from defective or missing parts or peeling paint. The code enforcement officer shall possess the authority to order the painting, repair, or alteration of a sign which constitutes a hazard to the public health, safety, or general welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, or obsolescence. Notice of such repair shall be given to the owner by personal service or registered mail, return receipt requested. 
(g)  The immediate premises around a sign shall be kept free from litter and debris. However, no person other than persons authorized by the city shall damage, trim, destroy, or remove trees, shrubs, or other vegetation located within the public right-of-way of any street or road for the purpose of increasing or enhancing the visibility of a sign; nor shall such work be performed on property that is not under the ownership or control of the person performing or responsible for such work, unless done pursuant to the express authorization of the person owning the property where such trees or shrubs are located. 
Sec. 14-166. - Non-conforming signs. 
(a)  General. Any sign legally in existence prior to the effective date of this chapter, or any applicable amendment thereto, which does not satisfy the requirements of this ordinance, is declared non-conforming. The eventual elimination, as expeditiously and fairly as possible, of non-conforming signs is as much a subject of health, safety, and welfare as is the regulation of new signs. 
(b)  Conformance required. All non-conforming signs in existence prior to the effective date of this chapter shall either be made to conform to all provisions of this chapter or shall be removed within (7) years after the enactment of this chapter, unless explicitly prohibited by federal or state law. Any sign that does not conform at the end of the seven (7) year period shall be considered an illegal sign and must be removed by the owner at that time. 
(c)  Alterations and repairs to non-conforming signs. Non-conforming signs shall not be moved, altered, enlarged, or changed in any manner to increase the degree of non-conformity. Ordinary maintenance, such as re-painting or repairing, shall be permitted for non-conforming signs. However, no substantial change in the copy of the sign, such as change of the name of a business, shall be permitted, with the exception of outdoor advertising signs. Moreover, if, within any twelve (12) month period, alterations or repairs are anticipated to cost in excess of fifty (50) percent of the physical value of the existing sign, such sign shall be removed or made to conform with the current regulations of this chapter. 
(d)  Outdoor advertising signs (billboards). 
(1)  All outdoor advertising signs (billboards) legally in existence within the corporate limits of the City of Pahokee prior to the effective date of this chapter, are hereby declared non-conforming, unless such declaration is explicitly prohibited by federal or state law, and shall be removed by the owner within three (3) years. 
Sec. 14-167. - Illegal signs. 
(a)  Discontinuance of use. Whenever the use of a building or premises is discontinued by a business for reasons other than a normal seasonal shutdown for a period of thirty (30) days, any signs pertaining to that business shall be removed within thirty (30) days of the discontinuance of use. The zoning administrator shall notify the owner at the last known address that said signs are in violation of this chapter and must be removed within thirty (30) days; any signs not removed within that period shall be removed by the city at the owner's expense. 
(b)  Signs located within a public right-of-way. Any sign, consistent with section 14-162(5), except as permitted by sections 14-161(9), 14-163(2)b., and (2)e., which is found to be located within a public right-of-way shall be removed by its owner within thirty (30) days of written notice thereof. If ownership of a sign cannot be reasonably established, a notice shall be attached to the sign by the zoning administrator stating the need to remove it within thirty (30) days; otherwise, the town shall remove the sign. Temporary signs shall be removed by the city upon discovery. 
(c)  Encroachments over public right-of-way. 
(1)  The owner of the sign shall execute a restrictive covenant prepared by the city attorney, which shall run with the title of the land, agreeing to provide public liability insurance, coverage for the encroachment in the minimum limits required by the city, and naming the city as additional insured under the policy. 
(2)  An executed copy of the restrictive covenant, together with certificate of required insurance, shall be presented to the building official, prior to the issuance of any permits for such work. 
(3)  Signs must be in accordance with the provisions of this section and the South Florida Building Code, and maintained in good condition at all times at the property owner's expense. 
(4)  The city reserves the right to remove, add, maintain or have the owner remove any sign within the right-of-way at the owner's expense. 
(d)  Signs erected without a permit. The owner of any sign, as defined by this article, that has been erected without a permit in accordance with section 14-164(a) and 14-164(b) of this article shall obtain a permit for the sign and otherwise ensure that it complies with these regulations within twenty-four (24) hours of notification by the city manager that the sign has been illegally erected, or shall cause such sign to be removed. If the sign has to been removed with twenty-four (24) hours of notification, it may be removed and confiscated by the code enforcement officer at the owner's expense. 
Secs. 14-168-14-179. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES 

Sec. 14-180. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this division to regulate the installation, configuration, and use of accessory structures, and the conduct of accessory uses, in order to ensure that they are not harmful either aesthetically or physically to residents and surrounding areas. 
Sec. 14-181. - Accessory structures. 
(a)  General standards and requirements. Any number of different accessory structures may be located on a parcel, provided that the following requirements are met: 
(1)  There shall be a permitted principal development on the parcel, located in full compliance with all standards and requirements of this code. 
(2)  All accessory structures shall comply with standards pertaining to the principal use, unless exempted or superseded elsewhere in this code. 
(3)  Accessory structures shall not be located in a required buffer, landscape area, or minimum building setback area. 
(4)  Accessory structures shall be included in all calculations of impervious surface and stormwater runoff. 
(5)  Accessory structures shall be shown on any concept development plan with full supporting documentation as required in article II and article V of this code. 
(b)  Satellite dish antenna. 
(1)  Standards. 
a.  All satellite dish antenna installations beginning with the enactment of this code shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  The satellite dish antenna shall be considered a structure requiring a building permit to be issued prior to installation. Subsequent to installation, the antenna shall be maintained in compliance with all applicable building and electrical codes. 
2.  The satellite dish antenna installation and any part thereof shall maintain vertical and horizontal clearances from any electric lines and shall conform to the National Electric Safety Code. 
3.  The satellite dish antenna installation shall meet all FCC and manufacturer specifications, rules, and requirements. 
4.  The satellite dish antenna shall be of a nonreflective surface material and shall be made, to the maximum extent possible, to conform and blend, taking into consideration color and location, with the surrounding area and structures. 
5.  The satellite dish antenna shall contain no advertising or signage of any type. 
6.  The installer of any satellite dish antenna, prior to installation, shall submit detailed blueprints/drawings of the proposed satellite dish antenna installation and foundation which shall be certified by the manufacturer or a professional engineer. 
7.  The satellite dish antenna installation shall be permitted to be placed in side and rear areas of the main dwelling or commercial structure only. 

Figure 7.01.02-A Placement Area For Satellite Dishes
SEE FIGURE 11.01.02-A. 
8.  The satellite dish antenna shall, to the maximum extent possible, be screened from view from a public right-of-way. 
b.  The following standards are for installations in developments: 
1.  A satellite dish antenna shall be considered an accessory structure to the main dwelling structure and shall not constitute the principal use of the property. 
2.  The satellite dish antenna installed pursuant to this subsection shall not be used for any commercial purposes. It shall only provide service to the main dwelling structure. 
3.  Satellite dish antenna installations shall be limited to one (1) installation per residential lot. 
4.  The maximum size of the satellite dish antenna, whether ground or pole-mounted, shall be limited to twelve (12) feet in diameter. 
5.  The maximum height of a ground-mounted satellite dish antenna installation shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
6.  The maximum height of a pole-mounted satellite dish antenna installation shall be thirteen and one-half (13 1/2) feet above the eaves of the roof. 
7.  A satellite dish antenna shall not be permitted to be installed on the roof of any main dwelling structure. 
8.  The satellite dish antenna installation, whether ground or pole, shall be mounted at a fixed point and shall not be portable. 
(2)  Nonconforming antenna. Any satellite dish antenna lawfully installed prior to the enactment of this code shall be allowed to remain, until such time as it is replaced or moved. At the time of replacement or relocation, the provisions of this code shall be met. 
(c)  Storage buildings, utility buildings, greenhouses. 
(1)  No accessory buildings used for industrial storage of hazardous, incendiary, noxious, or pernicious materials shall be located nearer- than one hundred (100) feet from any property line. 
(2)  Storage buildings, greenhouses, and the like shall be permitted only in compliance with standards for distance between buildings, and setbacks, if any, from property lines. 
(3)  Storage and other buildings regulated by this section shall be permitted only in side and rear yards, and shall not encroach into any required building setback from an abutting right-of-way. 
(4)  Storage and other buildings regulated by this section shall be included in calculations for impervious surface, floor area ratio, or any other site design requirements applying to the principal use of the lot. 
(5)  Vehicles, including manufactured housing and mobile homes, shall not be used as storage buildings, utility buildings, or other such uses. 
(d)  Swimming pools, hot tubs, and similar structures. 
(1)  Swimming pools shall be permitted only in side and rear yards, and shall not encroach into any required building setback. 
(2)  Enclosures for pools shall be considered a part of the principal structure and shall comply with standards for minimum distance between buildings, yard requirements, and other building location requirements of this code. 
(3)  All pools shall be completely enclosed with an approved wall, fence or other substantial structure not less than five (5) feet in height. The enclosure shall completely surround the pool and shall be of sufficient density to prohibit unrestrained admittance to the enclosed area through the use of self-closing and self-latching doors. 
(4)  No overhead electric power lines shall pass over any pool unless enclosed in conduit and rigidly supported, nor shall any power line be nearer than ten (10) feet horizontally or vertically from the pool's water edge. 
(5)  Excavations for pools to be installed for existing dwellings shall not exceed a two-to-one (2:1) slope from the foundation of the house, unless a trench wall is provided. 
(e)  Fences. 
(1)  All fences to be built shall comply with the Standard Building Code and with a approved building permit. The posts of each fence must be resistant to decay, corrosion, and termite infestation. The posts must also be pressure-treated for strength and endurance. 
(2)  Fences or hedges may be located in all front, side and rear yard setback areas. No fences or hedges shall exceed six (6) feet in height when placed in the front yard (the yard abutting a road or public right-of-way). Each fence located in the side and rear yard setbacks shall not exceed the height of eight (8) feet. 
(3)  In areas where the property faces two (2) roadways or is located in any other area construed to be a corner lot, no fence shall be located in the vision triangle. 
(4)  Any fence located adjacent to a public right-of-way or private road shall be placed with the finished side facing that right-of-way. 
(5)  A fence required for safety and protection of hazard by another public agency may not be subject to height limitations above. Approval to exceed minimum height standards may be given by the conditional use review article II based upon satisfactory evidence of the need to exceed height standards. 
(6)  No fence or hedge shall be constructed or installed in such a manner as to interfere with drainage on the site. 
(7)  There shall not be permitted any electrical fences or electrical shock security devices any public, quasi-public or private property. 
(8)  Barbed wire. Barbed wire may be used in conjunction with a minimum six (6) foot high fence with an overall height maximum of eight (8) feet under the following conditions and restrictions. 
a.  Conditions. 
1.  Barbed wire shall not exceed three (3) stands. 
2.  Barbed wire shall angle towards the interior of property. 
3.  Barbed wire is specifically prohibited in conjunction with all residential zoning districts and uses. 
4.  Barbed wire on a site of mixed use or adjacent to residential use or zone shall be by use permit. (article II). 
5.  Agriculture zone area may utilize barbed wire as outlined in (8) by building permit. 
6.  All commercial and industrial sites may utilized barbed wire when approved by the site plan review process or by use permit (article II) when recommended by the director of community development once the following conditions are met: 
(i)  Fence must be at least six (6) feet in height. 
(ii)  Permitted by right in agricultural and industrial zones by right. 
(iii)  Permitted in neighborhood and general commercial by administration review and/or site plan approval. 
(iv)  Any residential zone shall require a use permit with justification's for request. 
(e)  Accessory uses. (Reserved) 
(Ord. No. 99-1 , § 1, 1-12-99) 
Secs. 14-182-14-199. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OPERATIONAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 

Sec. 14-200. - Generally. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of this section to provide appropriate standards relating to the operation of certain activities throughout the city. Such operations may create or maintain such excessive noise, vibration, air pollution, odor, or electromagnetic interference as to be a detriment to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, and welfare. These standards are therefore provided to protect the public interest, and promote the public health and welfare. 
(b)  Applicability. These standards shall apply to all lands within the city/county jurisdiction. 
(c)  Standard manuals and measuring devices. (Reserved) 
(1)  Devices and instruments. (Reserved) 
[Specify the agency or association responsible for standardizing the instruments.] 
(2)  References. The following references are cited in this article: 
40CFR Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40, "Protection of Environment" FAC17-2 Chapter 17-2, Florida Administrative Code, "Air Pollution" APAM "Air Pollution Abatement Manual" of the Manufacturing Chemist Association PHR47 U.S. Public Health Report 47, No. 12, "Measurement of Density Mineral Dust" ICR12 Industrial Cost Rule No. 12 adopted by the Board of Standards and Appeals of the New York State Department of Labor CFR10 Title 10, Chapter 1, Part 20, Code of Federal Regulations, "Standards for Protection Against Radiation" ANSI American National Standards Institute - Applicable Standards  
Sec. 14-201. - Noise. 
    Unless otherwise defined herein, all terminology shall be in conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute, Incorporated (ANSI) or its successor body. 
(1)  Instrumentation. (Reserved) 
[Standardizing the instruments. For example, noise may be measured with a sound level meter meeting the standards of the American National Standards Institute, with measurements conducted in accordance with the American Standard Method for the Physical Measurement of Sound. Any appropriate instrumentation and methodology may be cited in this section.] 
(2)  Maximum permissible sound levels by receiving land use. 
a.  Maximum sustained sound. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any source of sound in such a manner as to create a sound level which exceeds the limits set forth for the receiving land use category in the table below. 
SOUND LEVELS BY RECEIVING LAND USE 
Receiving Land Use Category Time Sound Level Limit dBA Residential 7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m. 60 10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m. 55 Commercial 7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m. 65 10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m. 60 Manufacturing, Industrial or Agricultural At All Times 75  
(3)  Exemptions. The following activities or sources are exempt from these noise standards: 
a.  Activities covered by the following: stationary, non-emergency signaling devices, emergency signaling devices, domestic power tools, air-conditioning and air-handling equipment for residential purposes, operating motor vehicles, refuse collection vehicles. 
b.  The unamplified human voice. 
c.  Railway locomotives and cars. 
d.  The lowing of cattle, the clucking of fowl, the neighing of horses, the baying of hounds, or other normal sounds of reasonably cared for agricultural or domestic animals, as well as the sounds of necessary farming equipment for a bona fide agricultural operation. 
e.  Aircraft operations. 
f.  Construction or routine maintenance of public service utilities. 
g.  Houses of worship bells or chimes. 
h.  The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency, or the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work. 
(4)  Notice of violation. Except where a person is acting in good faith to comply with an abatement order, violation of any provision of this code shall be cause for a notice of violation to be issued by the director of development review. 
(5)  Pre-existing uses not in conformance. Where an industry or commercial business has established its use away from other incompatible uses and subsequently, through the encroachment of development, now finds itself adjoining a receiving land category which would require a reduction in noise generation, said industry or commercial business shall not emit a noise which exceeds the maximum noise limitation for the receiving land use category by more than ten (10) decibels. 
Sec. 14-202. - Vibration. 
(a)  Method of measurement. (Reserved) 
(b)  Standards. (Reserved) 
(1)  Industrial. In industrial districts, impact vibrations from any use, at any point beyond district boundaries, shall not exceed the levels set forth in paragraph (3) below. 
(2)  All other districts. In all other districts, impact vibrations from any use shall not exceed, at any point beyond the property lines of the use, the levels set forth in paragraph (3) below. 
(3)  Maximum permissible vibration. 
Sec. 14-203. - Air pollution. 
(a)  Standard. To protect and enhance the air quality of the city, all sources of air pollution shall comply with rules set forth by the Environmental Protection Agency (Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40) and the Florida Department of Environmental Regulations (Florida Administrative Code, Chapter 17-2). No person shall operate a regulated source of air pollution without a valid operation permit issued by the Department of Environmental Regulation. 
(b)  Testing. Air pollution emissions shall be tested and results reported in accordance with techniques and methods adopted by the Florida Department of Environmental Regulation and submitted to the state. These tests shall be carried out under the supervision of the state and at the expense of the person responsible for the source of pollution. 
Sec. 14-204. - Odor. (Reserved) 
Sec. 14-205. - Fire and explosive hazards. 
(a)  Standards (as determined and approved by fire chief). In all districts in which the storage, use, or manufacture of flammable or explosive materials is permitted, the following standards shall apply: 
(1)  Storage and utilization of solid materials or products which are incombustible, or which in themselves support combustion and are consumed slowly as they burn, is permitted. 
(2)  Storage, utilization, or manufacture of solid materials or products including free burning and intense burning is permitted provided that said materials or products shall be stored, utilized, or manufactured within completely enclosed buildings having noncombustible and protected throughout by an automatic fire extinguishing system. The requirements for an automatic fire extinguishing system may be waived by the director of development review in those cases where the introduction of water to a burning substance would cause additional hazard. 
(3)  Outdoor storage of coal and other solid fuels is permitted provided storage is in conformance with the "Fire Protection Handbook" 1986 Edition, printed by the National Fire Protection Association. 
(4)  Storage, utilization or manufacture of flammable and combustible liquids, or materials which produce flammable or explosive vapors or gases shall be permitted in accordance with National Fire Code #30, exclusive of storage of finished products in original sealed containers which shall be unrestricted. 
(5)  The following classifications of liquids are unrestricted, provided that storage, handling, and use shall be in accordance with National Fire Protection Association, "Flammable and Combustible Liquids" Code #30. 
CLASSIFICATION OF LIQUIDS 
Class I  Shall include those having flash points below one hundred (100) degrees Fahrenheit (37.8 degrees Celsius) and may be subdivided as follows: 
Class I-A  Shall include those having flash points below seventy-three (73) degrees Fahrenheit (22.8 degrees Celsius) and having a boiling point below one hundred (100) degrees Fahrenheit (37.8 degrees Celsius). 
Class I-B  Shall include those having flash points below seventy-three (73) degrees Fahrenheit (22.8 degrees Celsius) and having a boiling point at or above one hundred (100) degrees Fahrenheit (37.8 degrees Celsius). 
Class I-C  Shall include those having flash points at or above seventy-three (73) degrees Fahrenheit (22.8 degrees Celsius) and below one hundred (100) degrees Fahrenheit (37.8 degrees Celsius). 
Class II  Shall include those having flash points at or above one hundred (100) degrees Fahrenheit (37.8 degrees Celsius) and below one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty (60) degrees Celsius). 
Class III  Shall include those having flash points at or above one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty (60) degrees Celsius) and may be subdivided as follows: 
Class III-A  Shall include those having flash points at or above one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty (60) degrees Celsius) and below two hundred (200) degrees Fahrenheit (93.4 degrees Celsius). 
Class III-B  Shall include those having flash points at or above two hundred (200) degrees Fahrenheit (93.4 degrees Celsius). 
Sec. 14-206. - Electromagnetic interference. 
    In all districts, no use, activity, or process shall be conducted which produces electric and/or magnetic fields which adversely affect public health, safety, and welfare including but not limited to interference with normal radio, telephone, or television reception from off the premises where the activity is conducted. 
Secs. 14-207-14-217. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - STROMWATER DRAINAGE (MANAGEMENT) 
DIVISION 1. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 14-218. - Definitions. 
    Alter or alteration means work done on a stormwater management system other than that necessary to maintain the system's original design and function. 
    Detention means the collection and storage of surface water for subsequent gradual discharge. 
    Existing means for purposes of the stormwater management provisions of this code, the average condition immediately before development or redevelopment commences. 
    Impervious surface means a surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. It includes, but is not limited to, semi-impervious surfaces such as compacted clay, as well as most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, parking lots and other similar structures. 
    Maintenance means that action taken to restore or preserve the original design and function of any stormwater management system. 
    Natural systems means systems which predominantly consist of or are used by those communities of plants, animals, bacteria and other flora and fauna which occur indigenously on the land, in the soil or in the water. 
    Rate means volume per unit of time. 
    Retention means the collection and storage of runoff without subsequent discharge to surface waters. 
    Runoff coefficient means the ratio of the amount of rain which runs off a surface to that which falls on it; a factor from which run-off can be calculated. 
    Sediment means the mineral or organic particulate material that is in suspension or has settled in surface or ground waters. 
    Site generally, any tract, lot or parcel of land or combination of tracts, lots, or parcels of land that are in one (1) ownership, or in diverse ownership but contiguous, and which are to be developed as a single unit, subdivision, or project. 
    Stormwater means the flow of water which results from, and that occurs immediately following, a rainfall. 
    Stormwater runoff means that portion of the stormwater that flows from the land surface of a site either naturally, in manmade ditches, or in a closed conduit system. 
    Stormwater management system means the system, or combination of systems, designed to treat stormwater, or collect, convey, channel, hold, inhibit, or divert the movement of stormwater on, through and from a site. 
    Surface water means water above the surface of the ground whether or not flowing through definite channels, including the following: 
(1)  Any natural or artificial pond, lake, reservoir, or other area which ordinarily or intermittently contains water and which has a discernible shoreline; or 
(2)  Any natural or artificial stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, street, roadway, swale or wash in which water flows in a definite direction, either continuously or intermittently, and which has a definite channel, bed or banks; or 
(3)  Any wetland. 
    Wetland means land that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do or would support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. The term includes, but is not limited to, swamp hammocks, hardwood swamps, riverine cypress, cypress ponds, bayheads and bogs, wet prairies, freshwater marshes, tidal flats, saltmarshes, mangrove swamps, and marine meadows. 
Sec. 14-219. - Relationship to other stormwater management requirements. 
    In addition to meeting the requirements of this code, the design and performance of all stormwater management systems shall comply with applicable state regulations (Chapter 17-25, Florida Administrative Code) or rules of the South Florida Water Management District and the city's subdivision standards article XIV. In all cases the strictest of the applicable standards shall apply. (See City of Pahokee subdivision standards chapter 14, article XIV.) 
Editor's note- The Florida Department of Environmental Regulation regulates stormwater management systems in Chapter 17-25, Florida Administrative code. These rules provide for the delegation of authority to permit stormwater management to water management districts or local governments. Except for the Northwest Florida Water Management District, each of the water management districts has accepted this delegation, see § 17-25.090 F.A.C., and adopted stormwater management rules, see South Florida: Chapter 40E-4; Southwest Florida: Chapter 17-25 F.A.C., adopted by reference; St. Johns: Chapter 40C-42; and Suwannee: Chapter 40B-4. 
 The Growth Management Act of 1985 requires local governments to adopt stormwater management regulations. Rule 9J-24 F.A.C., which establish the procedures and criteria for review of local government land development regulations, requires the inclusion of "specific programs, activities, standards, actions or prohibitions which regulate or govern the ... provision of adequate drainage facilities to control the individual and cumulative impacts of flooding and non-point source pollution in drainage basins existing wholly or in part within the jurisdiction." 
 Thus, the land development regulations adopted pursuant to F.S. § 163.3202 and Rule 9J-24.033 F.A.C. must address both the water quantity and quality aspects of stormwater management. If the stormwater management LOS standards adopted by a local government in its comprehensive plan are met by the permitting requirements already established by the DER and the water management district, that locality may comply with 9J-24 by simply adopting language in the land development code requiring all nonexempt development receive appropriate permits from the DER and water management district before a development order is issued by the local government. 
 If, however, the city sets stormwater management LOS standards in the comprehensive plan that will not be met through implementation of the DER and water management district permitting requirements, it is necessary to adopt additional standards and permitting provisions in the land development code. 
 The following provisions are provided as suggested language for those localities that must adopt additional permitting requirements. 
Sec. 14-220. - Exemptions. 
    The following development activities are exempt from these stormwater management requirements, except that steps to control erosion and sedimentation must be taken for all development. 
(1)  The construction of a single family or duplex residential dwelling unit and accessory structures on a single parcel of land. 
(2)  Any development within a subdivision if each of the following conditions have been met: 
a.  Stormwater management provisions for the subdivision were previously approved and remain valid as part of a final plat or development plan; and 
b.  The development is conducted in accordance with the stormwater management provisions submitted with the final plat or development plan. 
(3)  Bona fide agricultural activity, including forestry, provided farming activities are conducted in accordance with the requirements set forth in an approved soil conservation service conservation plan and forestry activities are conducted in accordance with the Silviculture Best Management Practices (BMP) Manual (1979) published by the Florida Division of Forestry. If the conservation plan and forestry BMP's are not implemented accordingly, this exemption shall become void and a stormwater permit shall be required. 
(4)  Maintenance activity that does not change or affect the quality, rate, volume or location of stormwater flows on the site or of stormwater runoff. 
(5)  Action taken under emergency conditions to prevent imminent harm or danger to persons, or to protect property from imminent fire, violent storms, hurricanes or other hazards. A report of the emergency action shall be made to the department as soon as practicable. 
Sec. 14-221. - Stormwater management requirements. 
(a)  Performance standards. All development must be designed, constructed and maintained to meet the following performance standards: 
(1)  While development activity is underway and after it is completed, the characteristics of stormwater runoff shall approximate the rate, volume, quality, and timing of stormwater runoff that occurred under the site's natural unimproved or existing state, except that the first one (1) inch of stormwater runoff shall be treated in an off line retention system or according to other best management practices as described in the stormwater management manual adopted pursuant to this code. (Refer to City of Pahokee's subdivision standards, article XIV.) 
(2)  The proposed development and development activity shall not violate the water quality standards as set forth in Chapter 17-3, Florida Administrative Code. 
(b)  Design standards. To comply with the foregoing performance standards the proposed stormwater management system shall conform to the following design standards: 
(1)  Detention and retention systems shall be designed to comply with the stormwater management manual adopted by the city pursuant to this code. 
(2)  To the maximum extent practicable, natural systems shall be used to accommodate stormwater. 
(3)  The proposed stormwater management system shall be designed to accommodate the stormwater that originates within the development and stormwater that flows onto or across the development from adjacent lands. 
Editor's note- [The total watershed area affecting the site may be obtained from the city engineer or United States Geological Survey maps.] 
(4)  The proposed stormwater management system shall be designed to function properly for a minimum twenty (20) year life. 
(5)  The design and construction of the proposed stormwater management system shall be certified as meeting the requirements of this code by a professional engineer registered in the state of Florida. 
(6)  No surface water may be channelled or directed into a sanitary sewer. 
(7)  The proposed stormwater management system shall be compatible with the stormwater management facilities on surrounding properties or streets, taking into account the possibility that substandard systems may be improved in the future. 
(8)  The banks of detention and retention areas should be sloped to accommodate, and should be planted with, appropriate vegetation. 
Editor's note- A generally accepted slope for this purpose does not exceed a four-to-one (4:1) ratio. Final slope design should consider soil types, maintenance access, side slope stabilization, basin depth, and design high water. Department of Environmental Regulation Stormwater Rules, Rule 17-25 F.A.C., require that, for safety reasons, a wet detention facility with a slope of four-to-one (4:1) ratio or greater must be fenced. In order t avoid the unsightly fencing of wet detention facilities, slopes of less than four-to-one (4:1) ratio should be encouraged. 
(9)  Dredging, clearing of vegetation, deepening, widening, straightening, stabilizing or otherwise altering natural surface waters shall be minimized. 
(10)  Natural surface waters shall not be used as sediment traps during or after development. 
(11)  For aesthetic reasons and to increase shoreline habitat, the shorelines of detention and retention areas shall be sinuous rather than straight. 
(12)  Water reuse and conservation shall, to the maximum extent practicable, be achieved by incorporating the stormwater management system into irrigation systems serving the development. 
(13)  Vegetated buffers of sufficient width to prevent erosion shall be retained or created along the shores, banks or edges of all natural or man-made surface waters. 
(14)  In phased developments the stormwater management system for each integrated stage of completion shall be capable of functioning independently as required by this code. 
(15)  All detention and retention basins, except natural water bodies used for this purpose, shall be accessible for maintenance from streets or public rights-of-way. 
Sec. 14-222. - Stormwater management manual. 
(a)  Responsibility for completing and updating. The department shall compile a stormwater management manual for the guidance of persons seeking approval of a stormwater management system under this code. The manual shall be updated periodically to reflect the most current and effective practices and shall be readily available to the public. See city subdivision design and standards article XIV, section 2.5 
(b)  Contents. The manual shall include: 
(1)  Guidance and specifications for the design of stormwater management systems consistent with article XIV city subdivision standards and design. Acceptable techniques for obtaining, calculating and presenting the information required by this code shall be described. 
(2)  Guidance in the selection of environmentally sound practices for the management of stormwater and the control of erosion and sediment. Specific techniques and practices shall be described in detail with particular attention given to the development and use of techniques that emphasize the use of natural systems. 
(3)  Minimum construction specifications for stormwater management facilities in accordance with good engineering practices. (Refer to City of Pahokee subdivision standards, article XIV.) 
(c)  Approval by city commission. The department shall submit the manual and subsequent revisions of it to the city commission for review and approval. 
Editor's note- Numerous effective techniques have been developed for managing stormwater runoff in an environmentally acceptable manner. Local developers may be unfamiliar with some of them. The city, therefore, will compile a manual to guide the selection of appropriate techniques. The use of innovative and effective techniques should be encouraged. 
 A list of helpful reference materials including existing manuals of stormwater management practices are compiled and included in the technical assistance manual that accompanies this code. An excellent source is The Florida Development Manual: A Guide To Sound Land And Water Management published by the Florida Department of Environmental Regulation. 
Sec. 14-223. - Cash in lieu of on-site treatment of stormwater. 
(a)  Generally. Payment of cash in lieu of providing on-site treatment of stormwater may be accepted by the city pursuant if the two (2) conditions below are met. 
(b)  Conditions. 
(1)  The development site is within the area covered by a functioning regional stormwater management facility permitted by the Department of Environment Regulation or South Florida East Beach Water Management District. 
(2)  The director, with the written concurrence of the city engineer, determines that the regional stormwater management facility is if sufficient size and capacity to accept the projected additional stormwater runoff without impairing its capacity to perform its current and projected functions for other areas. 
(c)  Determination and payment of cash in lieu. The amount of the cash in lieu payment shall be set, and the payment shall be made, according to the following provisions. 
(1)  The developer shall supply calculations, certified by a registered professional engineer, of anticipated additional post-development stormwater runoff. 
(2)  A drainage payment of $1.00* per cubic foot/second (c.F.S.) of said additional stormwater runoff shall be paid by the developer to the city upon final approval of the development plan. 
(3)  The amount of the payment shall be held in trust by the city and shall be used only for land acquisition and/or improvements for stormwater management purposes, and shall be applied only within the same drainage basin as the site for which it was collected. 
Editor's note- [The use of a cash in lieu system requires the approval by the Florida Department of Environmental Regulation of a regional permit for an established stormwater system to accommodate the stormwater runoff that would otherwise be required to be retained on-site.] 
* The dollar amount to be recommended by city engineer and approved by city commission. 
Sec. 14-224. - Dedication or maintenance of stormwater management systems. 
(a)  Dedication. If a stormwater management system approved under this code will function as an integral part of the city-maintained regional system, as determined by the city engineer, the facilities should be dedicated to the city. 
(b)  Maintenance by an acceptable entity. 
(1)  All stormwater management systems that are not dedicated to the city shall be operated and maintained by one (1) of the following entities: 
a.  A local governmental unit including a county, municipality, or municipal service taxing unit, special district or other governmental unit. 
b.  An active water control district created pursuant to F.S. ch. 298 or drainage district created by special act, or community development district created pursuant to F.S. ch. 190, or special assessment district created pursuant to F.S. ch. 170. 
c.  A state or federal agency. 
d.  An officially franchised, licensed or approved communication, water, sewer, electrical or other public utility. 
e.  The property owner or developer if: 
1.  Written proof is submitted in the appropriate form by either letter or resolution, that a governmental entity or such other acceptable entity as set forth in paragraphs a-d. above, will accept the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management and discharge facility at a time certain in the future. 
2.  A bond or other assurance of continued financial capacity to operate and maintain the system is submitted. 
f.  For-profit or non-profit corporations including homeowners associations, property owners associations, condominium owners associations or master associations if: 
1.  The owner or developer submits documents constituting legal capacity and a binding legal obligation between the entity and the city affirmatively taking responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility. 
2.  The association has sufficient powers reflected in its organizational or operational documents to: 
(i)  Operate and maintain the stormwater management system as permitted by the city. 
(ii)  Establish rules and regulations. 
(iii)  Assess members. 
(iv)  Contract for services. 
(v)  Exist perpetually, with the articles of incorporation providing that if the association is dissolved, the stormwater management system will be maintained by an acceptable entity as described above. 
(2)  If a project is to be constructed in phases, and subsequent phases will use the same stormwater management facilities as the initial phase or phases, the operation/maintenance entity shall have the ability to accept responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management systems of future phases of the project. 
(3)  In phased developments that have an integrated stormwater management system, but employ independent operation/maintenance entities for different phases, the operation/maintenance entities, either separately or collectively, shall have the responsibility and authority to operate and maintain the stormwater management system for the entire project. That authority shall include cross easements for stormwater management and the authority and ability of each entity to enter and maintain all facilities, should any entity fail to maintain a portion of the stormwater management system within the project. 
(4)  The applicant shall be an acceptable entity and shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management system from the time construction begins until the stormwater management system is dedicated to and accepted by another acceptable entity. 
Editor's note- A dedication to the city may or may not be desirable depending upon the particular circumstances. The foregoing provisions permit the decision to go either way while ensuring that the stormwater management system will be operated and maintained by a responsible entity. Much of the foregoing language is based on § 17-25.027 of DER's stormwater rule. 
Secs. 14-225-14-239. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - RESOURCE PROTECTION STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-240. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish those resources or areas of a development site that must be protected from harmful affects of development. A developer should apply the provisions of this article to a proposed development site before any other development design work is done. Application of the provisions of this article will divide a proposed development site into areas that may be developed and areas that must generally be left free of development activity. The proposed development should then be designed to fit within the areas that may be developed. 
Secs. 14-241-14-245. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TREES 

Sec. 14-246. - Definitions. 
    Crown means the main mass of branching of a plant above the ground. 
    DBH means diameter at breast height. "Breast height" is defined to be fifty-four (54) inches above the surface of the ground at the base of the plant or tree. In the case of a tree with multiple main stems, the diameter shall be the sum of the diameters of the stems. 
    Drip line means the outermost perimeter of the crown of a plant as projected vertically to the ground. See Figure 13.01.01-A. 

Figure 5.01.01-A Dripline
    Mangrove means rooted trees and seedlings of the following species, but only when having a coastal or estuarine association: 
Red Mangrove (Rhizophora mangle L.) 
White Mangrove (Laguncularia racemosa Gaertn.) 
Black Mangrove (Avicennia germinans (L) L.) 
Buttonwood Mangrove (Conocarpus erecta L.). 
    Protected tree means any tree that as a DBH of more than eight (8) inches, and which is not otherwise exempted from this code. For the purpose of this code, all mangroves are hereby declared to be protected trees. In addition, all palms with at least four and one-half (4 1/2) feet of clear trunk between the ground level and the lowest branch are declared to be protected trees. 
Editor's note- The portion of this definition referring to mangrove trees should, of course, be deleted in jurisdictions where such species do not grow. The threshold DBH for protected trees will vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction depending on local botanical conditions. The eight (8) inch DBH used here is approximately in the middle of the range of minimum diameters commonly prescribed as the standard. 
    Remove means to relocate, cut down, damage, poison, or in any other manner destroy or cause to be destroyed, a tree. 
    City staff means the staff person assigned to administer this code under the director of community development. The city staff (reviewer) shall possess a college degree in forestry or the equivalent in a related field or in experience. 
Editor's note- It is not essential to the working of this code that the community have a staff forester, but it would be beneficial in establishing the best possible tree protection and landscaping program. The duties assigned to the staff forester by this code could also be performed by other competent naturalists such as a staff biologist, environmental planner or engineer, ecologist, etc. The Florida Division of Forestry has an urban forester program in many communities and may be helpful in this regard. 
    Tree protection zone means a circular zone around each protected tree defined as follows: 
(1)  If the drip line is less than six (6) feet from the trunk of the tree, the zone shall be that area within a radius of six (6) feet around the tree. 
(2)  If the drip line is more than six (6) feet from the trunk of the tree, but less than twenty (20) feet, the zone shall be that area within a radius of the full drip line around the tree. 
(3)  If the drip line is twenty (20) feet or more from the trunk of the tree, the zone shall be that area within a radius of twenty (20) feet around the tree. 
Editor's note- Maximum protection is afforded a tree if the protection zone is at the full drip line even if the drip line is more than twenty (20) feet from the tree. This must be weighed against the amount of land that must be set aside if large spreading trees are common in the jurisdiction. The local office of the division of forestry should be consulted for advice tailored to local conditions. 
Sec. 14-247. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Single-family homes. Lots or parcels of land on which a single family home is used as a residence shall be exempt from all provisions of these tree protection regulations, except that historic or specimen trees on such parcels shall be protected according to these regulations. This shall not be construed to exempt any residential developments that require the approval of a development plan by the development review board. 
Editor's note- [Some jurisdictions do not exempt single family lots from tree protection requirements, e.g. Gainesville and Sarasota. Sarasota County's tree protection requirements apply to single family dwellings during construction, but once a certificate of occupancy is issued, the requirements no longer apply. Gainesville's regulations apply at all times. The need for tree protection within the jurisdiction must be weighed against the added administrative and enforcement difficulties created by not exempting single family lots. Landscaping requirements are rarely imposed on single family lots, although the energy savings that may be derived from residential landscaping would justify such imposition.] 
(b)  Nuisance trees. The following types of trees shall be exempt from the tree protection requirements of this code: 
Brazilian Pepper 
Malaleuca 
Australian Pine 
Other nuisance-trees and invasive exotics that grow in the locality should be listed. 
(c)  Utility operations. Tree removals by duly constituted communication, water, sewer, electrical or other utility companies or federal, state, or county agencies, or engineers or surveyors working under a contract with such utility companies or agencies shall be exempt, provided the removal is limited to those areas necessary for maintenance of existing lines or facilities or for construction of new lines or facilities in furtherance of providing utility service to its customers, and provided further that the activity is conducted so as to avoid any unnecessary removal and, in the case of aerial electrical utility lines, is not greater than that specified by the National Electrical Safety codes as necessary to achieve safe electrical clearances. Written notice of the removal shall be provided to the Department five (5) days prior to the removal, except that when the removal is needed to restore interrupted service under emergency conditions, no prior notice is required. 
(d)  Surveyors. A Florida licensed land surveyor in the performance of his duties provided such alteration is limited to a swath three feet or less in width. 
(e)  Commercial growers. All commercial nurseries, botanical gardens, tree farms and grove operations shall be exempt from the provisions of this part, but only as to those trees which were planted for silvicultural or agricultural purposes or for the sale or intended sale in the ordinary course of business. 
(f)  Emergencies. During emergencies caused by a hurricane or other disaster, the city manager may suspend these tree protection regulations. 
Sec. 14-248. - Removal of trees. 
(a)  Conditions for authorization to remove protected trees. 
(1)  It is the intent of this section to minimize the removal of protected trees and that no authorization shall be granted to remove a tree if the developer has failed to take reasonable measures to design and locate the proposed improvements so that the number of protected trees to be removed is minimized. In particular, the design must attempt to preserve specimen and historic trees. 
(2)  No authorization for the removal of a protected tree shall be granted unless the developer demonstrates one (1) or more of the following conditions: 
a.  A permissible use of the site cannot reasonably be undertaken unless specific trees are removed or relocated. 
b.  The tree is located in such proximity to an existing or proposed structure that the safety, utility or structural integrity of the structure is materially impaired. 
c.  The tree materially interferes with the location, servicing or functioning of existing utility lines or services. 
d.  The tree creates a substantial hazard to motor, bicycle or pedestrian traffic by virtue of physical proximity to traffic or impairment of vision. 
e.  The tree is diseased or weakened by age, abuse, storm or fire and is likely to cause injury or damage to people, buildings or other improvements. 
f.  Any law or regulation requires the removal. 
(b)  Replacement of removed trees. 
(1)  Trees removed pursuant to paragraph (a) above shall be replaced at the expense of the developer. 
(2)  For each inch of diameter at breast height removed, an inch of diameter at breast height shall be replaced. 
(3)  A replacement tree may be a tree moved from one (1) location to another on the site, or moved off the site pursuant to paragraph (4) below. The city staff shall prescribe measures to ensure the survival of the tree. 
(4)  Replacement trees shall, if practicable, be planted on the development site. If not practicable, replacement trees may be donated, or a fee in lieu may be paid, to the city for purposes of planting trees on public property. The fee in lieu shall be based on the cost of purchasing the requisite size and number of replacement trees. 
(c)  Historic and specimen trees. 
(1)  A historic tree is one (1) that has been designated by the city commission as one (1) of notable historical interest and value to the city because of its location or historical association with the community. A public hearing shall be held by the city commission on the designation with due notice to the owner of the tree. 
(2)  A specimen tree is one (1) that has been officially designated by the city commission, upon the advice of the city staff, to be of high value because of its type, size, age, or other relevant criteria. A public hearing on the designation shall be held by the city commission with due notice to the owner of the tree. 
(3)  No historic or specimen tree shall be removed without a finding by the development review board that the tree is a hazard or that it is not economically or practically feasible to develop the parcel without removing the tree. The developer shall explain in detail why the tree is a hazard or why it is not economically or practically feasible to develop the parcel without removing the historic or specimen tree. The director of community development shall make a presentation to the board on the application and make a recommendation as to whether it should be approved or denied. The decision by the board on the application shall be made within sixty (60) days of the date the application was filed. 
Sec. 14-249. - Protection of trees during development activities. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  To assure the health and survival of protected trees that are not to be removed, the developer shall avoid the following kinds of tree injuries during all development activities: 
a.  Mechanical injuries to roots, trunk, and branches; 
b.  Injuries by chemical poisoning; 
c.  Injuries by grade changes; 
d.  Injuries by excavations; and 
e.  Injuries by paving. 
(2)  At a minimum, the protective measures described below shall be taken where appropriate to the development activity. The measures shall be planned and undertaken in consultation with the city staff and shall not be construed as limiting the authority of the development review board, upon the advice of the city staff, to impose additional reasonable requirements as may be necessary to preserve the health of protected trees in particular circumstances. 
(b)  Avoiding mechanical injuries. 
(1)  Prior to any land preparation or other development activities a protective barrier easily visible to equipment operators shall be placed around all protected trees so as to encompass the entire tree protection zone. See Figure 5.01.04-A. 
(2)  No attachment, wires (other than supportive wires), signs or permits may be fastened to any protected tree. 
(3)  No equipment, construction materials or debris of any kind shall be placed within the protective barrier. 
(4)  Landscaping activities within the bounds of the protective barrier (before and after it is removed) shall be accomplished with light machinery or manual labor. Grubbing and similar activities are prohibited. 
(5)  In lieu of constructing the barriers required above, the developer may physically designate large areas containing protected trees where no land preparation or other development activities of any kind will occur. The area shall be designated by placing stakes a maximum of twenty-five (25) feet apart and tying ribbon, plastic tape, rope, etc., from stake to stake along the outside perimeter of the area. This perimeter line shall be beyond the tree protection zone of any protected trees growing within the area. 
(6)  Required protective barriers and perimeter lines shall remain in place until all construction activity, except landscaping within the protected area, is terminated. 

(c)  Avoiding injuries due to chemical poisoning. 
(1)  No fuel, paint, solvent, oil, thinner, asphalt, cement, grout or any other construction chemical or other material or tools of any kind shall be stored, or allowed in any manner to enter, within a required protective barrier or perimeter line. 
(2)  No equipment shall be cleaned within a required protective barrier or perimeter line. 
(d)  Avoiding injuries due to grade changes. Grade changes shall not be made within the tree protection zone unless the following protective measures are taken: 
(1)  When raising the grade, the following measures shall be taken: 
a.  Within the tree protection zone, existing sod, vegetation and leaf litter shall be removed and the soil loosened without injuring the roots. 
b.  The area within the tree protection zone shall be properly fertilized to improve the vigor and growth of the roots. 
c.  Porous, four-inch agriculture drain tiles shall be laid over the soil to drain liquids away from the trunk. A drop of at least one eighth (?) inch per foot shall be provided. The drain field shall be designed to provide adequate drainage of the existing configuration of the trees. 
d.  The number of drains shall depend upon soil material; lighter sandy soils and porous gravelly material require fewer drains than heavy non-porous soils. 
e.  Aeration shall be provided by installing vertical tiles along the system. The vertical tiles shall be filled with gravel and capped with a heavy-duty mesh to keep out trash and debris. 
f.  Dry wells shall be large enough to allow for maximum growth of the tree trunk. Most large shade trees require at least a sixty (60) inch diameter well. For slow-growing mature trees, a space of twelve (12) to eighteen (18) inches shall be provided between the trunk and the side of the well at every point. 
g.  To prevent washing of material into the well, the dry well casing walls shall be high enough to bring the coping just above the level of the proposed fill. 
h.  Dry well walls shall be constructed of materials that permit passage of air and water. Concrete blocks backed with galvanized screening may be used for the sides of the well. 
i.  Gratings or barriers shall be used around openings that are large enough to present a hazard to pedestrians. 
j.  Open wells shall be cleaned regularly to remove sediment, leaves, and debris that might interfere with the free passage of air. 
k.  Large stones shall be placed over the drainage tiles and a layer of smaller stones shall be placed over the remainder of the ground within the drip line. 
l.  A layer of gravel shall be placed over the stones. 
m.  The fill shall be completed with a layer of porous soil. 
See Figures 5.01.04-B, -C, AND -D. 



(2)  When lowering the grade, the following measures shall be taken: 
a.  Roots shall be cut cleanly and re-trimmed after excavation. 
b.  The canopy shall be pruned to aid in maintaining tree vigor. 
c.  When lowering the grade of the soil surrounding a protected tree, the maximum number of tree roots within the tree protection zone shall be preserved by using any of the following methods: 
1.  Terracing. The area within the tree protection zone is left at the original grade by terracing. 
2.  Retaining wall. The area within the tree protection zone is left at the original grade constructing a dry retaining wall. The retaining wall shall be porous to allow for aeration. 
3.  Terracing and retaining wall. The area within the tree protection zone is left at the original grade by the combined use of terracing and dry retaining wall. See Figure 5.01.04 E. 

(3)  Minor changes in grade. When the change in grade is minor, as determined by the city staff, lesser protective measures than those described above may be taken. The city staff shall approve the use of these methods where their use will not endanger the health of the protected tree. 
(e)  Avoiding injuries due to excavations. 
(1)  Water, sewer, and other utility lines should be routed around the tree protection zones of protected trees. 
(2)  If a line cannot reasonably be routed around the tree protection zone, the line shall be tunnelled beneath the area within the zone. The tunnel shall be offset to one (1) side of the trunk to prevent damage to the main tap roots. 
(f)  Avoiding injury by paving within the drip line. Porous paving may be placed within the tree protection zone of a protected tree, so long as no damage is inflicted to the tree by grade change, compaction of the soil, or any other cause. 
Editor's note- The foregoing protective measures and figures are adapted from "Tree Protection Manual for Builders and Developers," Florida Division of Forestry, Forest Education Bureau, Collins Building, Tallahassee, Florida 32201. Because the appropriate protective measures may change as knowledge in the area of urban forestry increases, you should contact your local forester for the latest tree protection measures. 
Sec. 14-250. - Special provisions for the protection of mangroves. 
(a)  Generally. In addition to the foregoing tree protection requirements, the following special provisions shall apply to the removal or alteration of mangroves (black mangrove, Avicennia germinans; white mangrove, Laguncularia racemosa; red mangrove, Rhizophora mangle). 
(b)  Replacement. Mangroves may not be removed unless the developer replaces or relocates on the same development site at least an equal number of mangroves, necessary to re-vegetate a land area equal to or greater than the land area from which mangroves were removed. The developer shall provide a plan to be approved by the city staff or other appropriate professional, to assure the survival of the replaced or relocated mangroves and to stabilize the shoreline from which mangroves were removed. The approved plan is an express condition of any permit. Failure to carry out any provision of the plan shall be a violation of this code. 
(c)  Other protective measures. The following protective measures apply to all mangroves. 
(1)  A permit shall be obtained from DER for any alteration of mangroves in jurisdictional waters. 
(2)  A permit shall be obtained from the city for any alteration of mangroves which are exempt from DER permit requirements. 
(3)  Standards for alteration of mangroves shall be those contained in rule 17.27, Mangrove Protection, of the Florida Administrative Code. 
Editor's note- The requirement that a DER permit be obtained should, of course, be deleted if permitting authority has been delegated to the local government pursuant to Rule 17.27.0800, F.A.C. 
Sec. 14-251. - Special provisions for protection of canopy roads. 
(a)  Generally. The city commission has determined that certain roadways within the city merit special protection of the trees which line and/or provide canopies over the roadway. It is the purpose of this section to describe those roadway sections and require additional protection, through control of activities that abut these roadways. 
(b)  Designation of roadways. The following roads are designated as tree-lined and canopy road protection areas: 
Local canopy roads should be listed. 
(c)  Restrictions. All protected species within an area extending fifty (50) feet on either side of the designated roadways are protected from removal or destruction by the requirements of this section. No protected species within the area of protection shall be removed Without permit. Protected trees which are approved for removal shall be replaced with one and one-half (1/2) times the number [of the] trunk circumference inches as the removed tree(s). 
Sec. 14-252. - Preservation of protected trees as grounds for variance from other requirements of this code. 
    The preservation of any protected tree may be considered as a factor in rendering a decision upon an application for a variance from the literal application of other requirements of this code. See Part 10.02.00 of this code for variance provisions. 
Secs. 14-253-14-264. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE LANDS 

Sec. 14-265. - General provisions. 
(a)  Relationship to other requirements relating to the protection of environmentally sensitive lands. In addition to meeting the following protection of environmentally sensitive lands requirements, development plans shall comply with applicable federal, state and water management district regulations relating to environmentally sensitive lands. In all cases the strictest of the applicable standards shall apply. 
(b)  Conservation element incorporated by reference. The conservation element of the city comprehensive plan as from time to time amended is hereby incorporated by reference into this code. 
Editor's note- This provision is necessary only if the conservation element will be used to determine the location and/or boundaries of environmentally sensitive lands. 
(c)  Compliance when subdividing land. Each lot of a proposed subdivision must include a site suitable for constructing a structure in conformity with the standards of these protection of environmentally sensitive lands regulations. 
Sec. 14-266. - Definitions. 
    Accessory use means a use of land or structure or portion thereof customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or structure and located on the same parcel with the principal use. 
    Adjacent to a protected environmentally sensitive area means any location within five hundred (500) feet of the boundary of any protected environmentally sensitive area, whether the location is on or off the development site. 
    Adverse effects means any modifications, alterations, or effects on waters, associated wetlands, or shorelands, including their quality, quantity, hydrology, surface area, species composition, or usefulness for human or natural uses which are or may potentially be harmful or injurious to human health, welfare, safety or property, to biological productivity, diversity, or stability or which unreasonably interfere with the reasonable use of property, including outdoor recreation. The term includes secondary and cumulative as well as direct impacts. 
    Associated wetland means any wetland that is adjacent or contiguous to waters, or which has a direct hydrologic connection to waters. 
    Beneficial functions of a protected environmentally sensitive area means those functions, described in the conservation element of the comprehensive plan, that justify designating an area as environmentally sensitive. 
    Clearing means the removal of trees and brush from the land, not including the ordinary mowing of grass. 
    Direct hydrologic connection means a surface water connection which, under normal hydrological conditions, occurs on an average of thirty (30) or more consecutive days per year. In the absence of reliable hydrologic records, a continuum of wetlands may be used to establish a direct hydrologic connection. 
    Pollutant means any substance, contaminant, noise, or manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, or radiological integrity of air or water in quantities or at levels which are or may be potentially harmful or injurious to human health or welfare, animal or plant life, or property, or which unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property, including outdoor recreation. 
    Protected environmentally sensitive area means an environmentally sensitive area designated for protection in the conservation element of the city comprehensive plan. 
    Significant adverse effect means any modification, alteration, or effect upon a protected environmentally sensitive area which measurably reduces the area's beneficial functions as delineated in the conservation element of the city comprehensive plan. 
    Water or waters includes, but is not limited to, water on or beneath the surface of the ground or in the atmosphere, including natural or artificial watercourses, streams, rivers, lakes, ponds, or diffused surface water and water percolating, standing, or flowing beneath the surface of the ground. 
    Water body means any natural or artificial pond, lake, reservoir, or other area with a discernible shoreline which ordinarily or intermittently contains water. 
    Watercourse means any natural or artificial channel, ditch, canal, stream, river, creek, waterway or wetland through which water flows in a definite direction, either continuously or intermittently, and which has a definite channel, bed, banks, or other discernible boundary. Water's edge and wetland's edge means the water's or wetland's edge shall be determined by whichever of the following indices yields the most landward extent of waters or wetlands: 
(1)  The boundary established by the average annual high water mark, 
(2)  The landward boundary of hydric soils, or 
(3)  The landward boundary of wetland vegetation, based on the wetland vegetation index. 
Sec. 14-267. - Creation of protected environmentally sensitive zones. 
(a)  Wetlands protection zone. 
(1)  There is hereby created a "wetlands protection zone" in which special restrictions on development apply. 
(2)  The boundaries of this zone shall be the most landward extent of the following: 
a.  Areas within the dredge and fill jurisdiction of the department of environmental regulation as authorized by F.S. § 403. 
b.  Areas within the jurisdiction of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers as authorized by section 404, Clean Water Act or Section 10, River and Harbor Act. 
c.  Areas within the jurisdiction of the South Florida Water Management District pursuant to the Florida Administrative Code. 
Editor's note- The intent of this definition is to use wetlands boundaries that will have already been determined, rather than having the local government create yet another jurisdictional line. The conservation element of the local comprehensive plan may, however, call for the delineation of boundaries that differ from those used by state and federal agencies. 
(b)  Shoreline protection zone. 
(1)  There is hereby created the "shoreline protection zone" in which special restrictions on development apply. 
(2)  The shoreline protection zone extends from the point in waters where no emergent aquatic vegetation can grow landward to a point fifty (50) feet landward of the water's edge. 
(c)  Others. Other zones should be created based on environmentally sensitive land designated in the conservation element as warranting protection. 
(d)  Request for determination of boundaries. A developer may obtain a determination of the boundaries of a protected environmentally sensitive zone by submitting to the department by certified mail or hand delivery a request for determination of boundaries. The request must, as a minimum, set forth an adequate description of the land the developer wishes to develop, the nature of the developer's right to ownership or control of the land, and other information needed to make the determination. The department shall make the determination within ten (10) working days of receiving the needed information from the developer. 
Sec. 14-268. - Development activities within protected environmentally sensitive zones. 
(a)  Generally. Except as expressly provided herein, no development activity shall be undertaken in a protected environmentally sensitive zone. 
(b)  Activities presumed to have an insignificant adverse affect on protected environmentally sensitive zones. 
(1)  Certain activities are presumed to have an insignificant adverse affect on the beneficial functions of protected environmentally sensitive zones. Notwithstanding the prohibition in section 14-268(a) of this section, these activities may be undertaken unless it is shown by competent and substantial evidence that the specific activity would have a significant adverse effect on the protected environmentally sensitive area. 
(2)  The following uses and activities are presumed to have an insignificant adverse effect on wetlands protection zones: 
a.  Scenic, historic, wildlife, or scientific preserves. 
b.  Minor maintenance or emergency repair to existing structures or improved areas. 
c.  Cleared walking trails having no structural components. 
d.  Timber catwalks and docks four (4) feet or less in width. 
e.  Commercial or recreational fishing or hunting, and creation and maintenance of temporary blinds. 
f.  Cultivating agricultural or horticultural products that occur naturally on the site. 
g.  Constructing fences where no fill activity is required and where navigational access will not be impaired by construction of the fence. 
h.  Developing an area that no longer functions as a wetland, except a former wetland that has been filled, or altered in violation of any rule, regulation, statute, or this code. The developer must demonstrate that the water regime has been permanently altered, either artificially or naturally, in a manner to preclude the area from maintaining surface water or hydroperiodicity necessary to sustain wetland structure and function. If the water regime of a wetland has been artificially altered, but wetland species remain the dominant vegetation of the area, the department shall determine the feasibility of restoring the altered hydrology. If the wetland may be restored at a cost that is reasonable in relation to benefits to be derived from the restored wetland, the developer shall, as a condition of development, restore the wetland and comply with the requirements of this code. 
i.  Developing a "wetlands storm water discharge facility" or "treatment wetland" in accordance with state permits received under Chapters 17-25 and 17-6, Florida Administrative Code. 
(3)  The following uses and activities are presumed to have an insignificant adverse effect on shoreline protection zones: 
a.  Scenic, historic, wildlife, or scientific preserves. 
b.  Minor maintenance or emergency repair to existing structures or improved areas. 
c.  Clearing of shoreline vegetation waterward of the water's edge, so as to provide a corridor not to exceed fifteen (15) feet in width, of sufficient length from the shore to allow access for a boat or swimmer to reach open water, and landward of the water's edge so as to provide an open area not to exceed twenty-five (25) feet in width. One (1)additional such corridor may be cleared for every full one hundred (100) feet of frontage along the water's edge above and beyond the first one hundred (100) feet. 
d.  Clearing of shoreline vegetation to create walking trails having no structural components, not to exceed four (4) feet in width. 
e.  Timber catwalks, docks, and trail bridges that are less than or equal to four (4) feet wide, provided that no filling, flooding, dredging, draining, ditching, tiling or excavating is done, except limited filling and excavating necessary for the installation of pilings. 
f.  Commercial or recreational fishing, hunting or trapping, and creation and maintenance of temporary blinds. 
g.  Constructing fences where no fill activity is required and where navigational access will not be impaired by construction of the fence. 
h.  Developing a "wetlands storm water discharge facility" or "treatment wetland" in accordance with state permits received under Chapters 17-25 and 17-6, Florida Administrative code. 
(4)  Other protected environmentally sensitive zones. 
(c)  Special uses. Certain uses that provide substantial public benefits may not be viable unless placed within a protected environmentally sensitive zone, e.g., a marina that may require the use of wetland areas for lack of suitable non-sensitive sites adjacent to a water body. A local government may decide to allow these uses in sensitive areas despite significant damage to the area. The following example creates an exception for water dependent uses, accompanied by mitigation requirements. A local government may employ other exceptions relating to local conditions. 
(1)  Water dependent activities. 
a.  Generally. Designated water dependent activities that are otherwise prohibited may be allowed if the developer shows: 
1.  The public benefits of the activity substantially outweigh the adverse environmental effects on a wetland area; and 
2.  No practicable alternative to placement in the protected environmentally sensitive zone exists. 
b.  Permittable water dependent activities. The following are permittable water dependent activities: 
1.  Projects not exceeding ten thousand (10,000) cubic yards of material placed in or removed from watercourses, water bodies or wetlands. 
2.  Dockage or marinas where dock length does not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the width of the water body and containing less than one (1) slip per one hundred (100) feet of shoreline. All docks and slips shall be at least one hundred (100) feet from any federal navigation project. 
3.  New riprap or similar structures (not including seawalls, bulkheads or the like) not exceeding fifty (50) feet of shoreline. 
4.  Installation of buoys, aids to navigation, signs, and fences. 
5.  Performance of maintenance dredging for ten (10) years from the date of the original permit. Thereafter, performance of maintenance dredging so long as less than ten thousand (10,000) cubic yards of material is removed. 
6.  Installation of subaqueous transmission and distribution lines for water, wastewater, electricity, communication cables, oil or gas. Lines may be entrenched in (not exceeding ten thousand (10,000) cubic yards of dredging), laid on, or embedded in bottom waters. 
7.  Construction of foot bridges and vehicular bridges. 
8.  Replacement or widening of bridges on pilings or trestles where the effects of pollutants discharged into open waters are minimized. 
9.  Construction of artificial reefs. 
Editor's note- These allowable water dependent activities are similar to those included in the rules of the Florida Department of Environmental Regulation. Fla. Admin. Code Rule 17-12.090. 
c.  Minimization of impacts. The water dependent activity shall be designed, constructed, maintained and undertaken in a way that minimizes the adverse impacts on the beneficial functions of the affected environmentally sensitive zone. 
(2)  Other special uses based on local conditions. 
(d)  Design standards for special uses. 
(1)  Generally. In addition to the standards listed in section 14-269(b) of this section, the following standards apply to special uses allowed in the protected environmentally sensitive zones. 
(2)  Special uses allowed in a shoreline protection zone. 
a.  The development shall be designed to: 
1.  Allow the movement of aquatic life requiring shallow water; 
2.  Maintain existing flood channel capacity; 
3.  Assure stable shoreline embankments. 
b.  Development that encroaches on the shoreline protection zone shall not be located: 
1.  On unstable shorelines where water depths are inadequate to eliminate or minimize the need for offshore or foreshore channel construction dredging, maintenance dredging, spoil disposal, filling, beach feeding, and other river, lake, and channel maintenance activities; 
2.  In areas where there is inadequate water mixing and flushing; 
3.  In areas which have been identified as hazardous due to high winds or flooding. 
c.  Access roads, parking lots, and similar structures shall be located on upland sites. 
d.  Non-developed portions of the shoreline protection zone that are damaged during construction shall be restored or replaced through replanting of vegetation, restocking of fish, shellfish, and wildlife, re-establishment of drainage patterns, and the like. To the maximum extent possible, the restored areas shall match their prior ecological functioning. 
e.  Accessory uses shall be limited to those which are water-dependent or necessary for operation of the development. Accessory uses will be consistent in scale and intensity with the surrounding uses. Fill shall not be placed in waters or associated wetlands to create usable land space for accessory uses. 
Editor's note- The City of Pahokee should designate allowable accessory uses for different types of development. 
(3)  Other design standards for other protected environmentally sensitive zones. 
(e)  Mitigation. 
(1)  Generally. 
a.  Compensatory mitigation, by which environmentally sensitive lands are purchased, created, enhanced and/or restored to compensate for the loss of such lands, is required whenever a special use is allowed under section 14-268(c) of this section. 
b.  The purchased, created, enhanced, or restored environmentally sensitive land must be of the same type as that destroyed or degraded. 
c.  Compensatory mitigation shall not be the basis for approving a project that could not otherwise be approved. 
d.  A development of a compensatory mitigation plan shall grant conservation easement under F.S. § 704.06, on the newly purchased, created, enhanced or restored environmentally sensitive lands to protect them from future development. 
(2)  Wetlands. Compensatory wetland mitigation shall require that the amount of wetlands purchased, created, enhanced, or restored be large enough to assure that the amount of wetlands destroyed or degraded will be completely and successfully replaced. The following ratios of replacement to destroyed wetlands shall be presumed to provide reasonable assurances for type-for-type mitigation: 
a. Swamp Hammock 2.5:1 b. Hardwood Swamp 2.5:1 c. Bayheads and Bogs 2.5:1 d. Mangroves 2.5:1 e. Riverine Cypress 2.0:1 f. Cypress Pond 2.0:1 g. Wet Prairie 1.5:1* h. Freshwater Marsh 1.5:1* i. Salt Marsh 1.5:1*  
*If the wetland creation proposed depends extensively on natural recolonization the ratio may be 3.0:1-4.0:1. 
(3)  Other special provisions relating to particular types of environmentally sensitive lands. 
Sec. 14-269. - Restricted development zone. 
(a)  Generally. There is hereby created a restricted development zone adjacent to each protected environmentally sensitive area. This zone shall encompass all land within five hundred (500) feet of the boundary of the protected environmentally sensitive zone. 
(b)  Development activities within restricted development zone. 
(1)  All development in a restricted development zone shall be designed, constructed and maintained to avoid significant adverse effects on the adjacent environmentally sensitive zone. 
(2)  The acreage within a protected environmentally sensitive zone may be used to determine the total allowable units or square footage of development that will be allowed on a site containing all or part of such a zone. This development potential may be transferred from the protected environmentally sensitive zone to the restricted development zone or beyond as provided for in the clustering and transferable development rights provisions in article X. Allowable development potential may not, however, be transferred from without the area encompassed by the restricted development zone and protected environmentally sensitive zone to within such area. 
(3)  The following special design standards applying within restricted development zones adjacent to wetlands protection zones: 
a.  Wherever possible, natural buffers shall be retained between all development and all protected environmentally sensitive zones. If a natural buffer does not exist, an equivalent buffer shall be created. The size of the buffer shall be the minimum necessary to prevent significant adverse effects on the protected environmentally sensitive area. The factual basis of the decision as to the size of the buffer shall be stated as a finding in the written record. 
b.  The developer shall completely restore any portion of a protected environmentally sensitive zone damaged during construction. Complete restoration means that the damaged area shall, within five (5) years, be operating as effectively as the natural system did prior to being destroyed. 
c.  Other reasonable protective measures necessary to prevent significant adverse effects on a protected environmentally sensitive zone may be required. The factual basis of the decision to require the measure shall be stated as a finding in the written record. Protective measures may include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Maintaining natural drainage patterns. 
2.  Limiting the removal of vegetation to the minimum necessary to carry out the development activity. 
3.  Expeditiously replanting denuded areas. 
4.  Stabilizing banks and other unvegetated areas by siltation- and erosion-control measures. 
5.  Minimizing the amount of fill used in the development activity. 
6.  Disposing of dredged spoil at specified locations in a manner causing minimal environmental damage. 
7.  Constructing channels at the minimum depth and width necessary to achieve their intended purposes, and designing them to prevent slumping and erosion and allow revegetation of banks. 
8.  Dredging wetlands at times of minimum biological activity to avoid periods of fish migration and spawning, and other cycles and activities of wildlife. 
9.  Designing, locating, constructing and maintaining all development in a manner that minimizes environmental damage. 
10.  Prohibiting septic tanks or locating them away [from] high groundwater areas and peaty soils. 
11.  Using deed restrictions and other legal mechanisms to require the developer and successors to protect the environmentally sensitive areas and maintain the development in compliance with the protective measures. 
(4)  The following special design standards applying within restricted development zones adjacent to shoreline protection zones: 
a.  All development shall be setback greater than or equal to fifty (50) feet from the landward boundary of the shoreline protection zone. 
b.  Total impervious surface, including but not limited to buildings, houses, parking lots, garages, accessory buildings, driveways, pools, and walkways is limited to twenty-five (25) percent of the land area of the entire site. 
c.  The development shall leave a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the site as trees, shrubs, or other natural vegetation, or replace existing trees at a (minimum) two-to-one (2:1) ratio. 
d.  Point source and nonpoint source discharges are prohibited, except for stormwater, which may be discharged only if it meets the following minimum standard. Stormwater discharges shall include an additional level of treatment equal to fifty (50) percent of the treatment criteria specified in [the rules of the appropriate water management district], and shall provide off-line retention or off-line detention with filtration of the first one-half (1/2) inch of run-off of the total amount required to be treated. If the city or any state agency has a stormwater rule which is stricter than this standard, then the stricter rule or combination of rules shall apply. 
Editor's note- The state imposes an additional fifty (50) percent treatment to Protect Outstanding Florida Waters, and that standard has been followed here to ensure protection of water bodies adjacent to development. 
e.  Siltation and erosion control measures shall be applied to stabilize banks and other un-vegetated areas during and after construction. Sediment settling ponds shall be installed for stormwater runoff prior to the creation of any impervious surfaces. For lots or parcels that are cleared, silt screens shall be placed between the construction site and the water body to prevent erosion and siltation. 
Editor's note- The city should develop erosion control guidelines and include them in this code. Erosion control measures such as the planting of natural vegetation or the use of riprap are preferred over solid structures, such as cement walls, which disrupt natural flows and processes. 
f.  Any channels constructed shall be of a minimum depth and width capable of achieving the intended purposes. Sides of channels shall reflect an equilibrium shape to prevent slumping and erosion and to allow re-vegetation. 
g.  Any dredging shall be conducted at times of minimum biological activity to avoid fish migration and spawning, and other cycles and activities of wildlife. 
h.  Any spoil that results from dredging shall be disposed of at upland sites and stabilized within thirty (30) days, unless the spoil is causing turbidity or other problems, in which case the developer must stabilize the spoil immediately. 
i.  If dredging changes the littoral drift processes and causes adjacent shores to erode, the developer shall periodically replenish these shores with the appropriate quantity and quality of aggregate. 
j.  Septic tanks shall not be located closer than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the boundary of the shoreline protection zone. If septic tanks are allowed, there may be no more than two (2) septic tanks per acre of land. 
k.  Where wet moorage is offered for boats which have holding facilities for sewage, or where other recreational vehicles are allowed to stay overnight, then pump-out, holding, or treatment facilities shall be provided by the developer for sewage and other wastes, including bilge, contained on vessels and vehicles. The facilities shall be conveniently available to all vessels and vehicles. 
l.  If no natural vegetation exists, strips of buffer vegetation shall be planted between development activities and the shoreline protection zone. Buffers shall be a minimum of ** feet wide and shall be composed of native plant species or **. 
** As per permit requirements from Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Editor's note- The city should develop criteria for the width and vegetative composition and density of buffers. The buffer standards provided in article VIII may be used here. 
m.  Marinas and other appropriate developments shall post the following signs where they are readily visible to all users of the development: 
1.  Regulations pertaining to handling and disposal of waste, sewage, or toxic materials. 
2.  Regulations prohibiting the use of vessel toilets while moored unless these toilets are self-contained or have an approved treatment device. 
3.  Regulations prohibiting the disposal of fish or shellfish cleaning wastes, scrap-fish, viscera, or unused bait in or near the development. 
4.  Appropriate messages relating to local ecological concerns, e.g., manatee protection. 
n.  A marina shall include boat launch facilities unless the applicant can demonstrate that providing such facilities is not feasible or it is determined that the ramp would be excessively damaging to the aquatic environment. 
Editor's note- The idea behind this requirement is to combine destructive activities to a minimal number of sites along the shoreline. Providing a boat ramp at the already-disturbed marina site may be preferable to disturbing another site along the shoreline to provide the ramp. 
o.  Marinas shall have adequate rest-room facilities in compliance with local health board regulations. 
p.  Garbage receptacles shall be provided and maintained by the marina operator at several locations convenient to users. 
Sec. 14-270. - Prohibited on-going activities. 
    The following standards apply to post-development activities taking place within any restricted development zone or protected environmentally sensitive zone. 
(1)  Point source and nonpoint source discharges. Absent an amendment to the development order, point source and nonpoint source discharges shall continue to meet the standards applicable to the original development. 
(2)  Clearing. Absent an amendment to the development order, no person shall clear more vegetation than was permitted for the original development. 
(3)  Handling and storage of fuel, hazardous and toxic substances, and wastes. 
a.  Developments where fuel or toxic substances will be stored, transferred, or sold shall employ the best available facilities and procedures for the prevention, containment, recovery, and mitigation of spillage of fuel and toxic substances. Facilities and procedures shall be designed to prevent substances from entering the water or soil, and employ adequate means for prompt and effective clean-up of spills that do occur. 
b.  No toxic or hazardous wastes or substances shall be stored in outdoor containers. 
c.  Storage or disposal of all types of wastes is prohibited on shorelines. 
(4)  Prohibited uses. The long-term storage of equipment or materials, and the disposal of wastes shall be prohibited. 
(5)  Fertilizers, herbicides, or pesticides. 
a.  Fertilizers, herbicides, or pesticides shall not be applied in a protected environmentally sensitive zone except for projects conducted under the authority of F.S. § 373.451-373.4595, the Surface Water Improvement and Management Act, and governmentally authorized mosquito control programs. 
b.  Fertilizers, pesticides, and herbicides used in restricted development zones shall be applied sparingly and at appropriate rates and time intervals. 
(6)  Spray vehicles. Vehicles used for mixing or spraying chemicals are prohibited from withdrawing water directly from waters. 
(7)  Pump-out, holding, and treatment facilities for wastes from mobile sources. Sewage, solid waste, and petroleum waste generated by vessels or vehicles on the site shall be properly collected and disposed of. 
Editor's note- Enforcement of standards for post-development activities is not addressed in this Ordinance. The city should either enforce the post-development standards through an existing enforcement process or create a process to enforce post-development standards. 
Secs. 14-271-14-279. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - GROUNDWATER AND WELLHEADS 

Sec. 14-280. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of groundwater protection standards is to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. This is accomplished through ensuring the protection of the principle source of water for domestic, agricultural, and industrial use. The availability of adequate and dependable supplies of good quality water is of primary importance to the future of the city. Therefore, standards are described in this section with the intent of protecting both the quantity and quality of the groundwater supply. It is further the intent of this section to control development in and adjacent to designated wellheads to protect water supplies from potential contamination. 
Sec. 14-281. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Protected wellhead means those wellheads with a permitted capacity of one hundred thousand (100,000) GPD or more. 
    Wellhead protection area. Each local government must determine, based on local geologic and hydrologic conditions, the size of the area around protected wellheads in which development activities allowed but carefully regulated. The size of the area may be based on the travel time of pollutants spilled on the surface, or some other determinant. 
    Zone of exclusion means all land within a two hundred (200) foot radius of an existing or designated protected wellhead. 
Sec. 14-282. - Restrictions on development. 
(a)  Within the zone of exclusion. No development activities shall take place in the zone of exclusion. 
(b)  Prohibited uses and development activities within the wellhead protection zone. The following land uses are prohibited within wellhead protection zone: 
(1)  Landfills. 
(2)  Facilities for the bulk storage, handling or processing of materials on the Florida Substance List (F.S. ch. 442). 
(3)  Activities that require the storage, use, handling, production or transportation of restricted substances: agricultural chemicals, petroleum products, hazardous/toxic wastes, industrial chemicals, medical wastes, etc. 
(4)  Feedlots or other concentrated animal facilities. 
(5)  Wastewater treatment plants, percolation ponds, and similar facilities. 
(6)  Mines. 
(7)  Excavation of waterways or drainage facilities which intersect the water table. 
(8)  Others based on local conditions. 
(c)  Special restrictions on development allowed within the wellhead protection zone. 
(1)  Stormwater management practices shall not include drainage wells and sinkholes for stormwater disposal where recharge is into potable water aquifers. 
(2)  Where development is proposed in areas with existing wells, these wells shall be abandoned, including adequate sealing and plugging according to Chapter Rule 17.28, Florida Administrative Code. 
(3)  Others based on local conditions. 
Secs. 14-283-14-289. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - HABITAT OF ENDANGERED OR THREATENED SPECIES 

Sec. 14-290. - Generally. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of this part to provide standards necessary to protect the habitats of species, both flora and fauna, of endangered, threatened, or special concern status in the city. It is the intent of this division to require that an appropriate amount of land shall be set aside to protect habitat of rare, endangered, or special concern plant and animal species. 
(b)  Applicability. Areas subject to the standards of this article shall be those identified in the conservation element of the city comprehensive plan as habitat for rare and endangered species, threatened species, or species of special concern. 
Sec. 14-291. - Habitat management plan. 
(a)  When required. A habitat management plan shall be prepared as a prerequisite to the approval of any development proposed on a site containing areas subject to this division. 
(b)  Contents. The habitat management plan shall be prepared by an ecologist, biologist or other related professional. The plan shall document the presence of affected species, the land needs of the species that may be met on the development site, and shall recommend appropriate habitat management plans and other measures to protect the subject wildlife. 
(c)  Conformity of final development plan. The final development plan approved for a development shall substantially conform to the recommendations in the habitat management plan. 
(d)  Preservation of land. Where land on a proposed development site is to be preserved as habitat of rare, endangered or special concern species, such land shall be adjacent to existing viable habitat, a significant wetland system, floodplain, or wildlife corridor. If such lands are not adjacent to the development site, land to be set aside shall be of such quantity and quality as to provide viable habitat, as documented in the study required in paragraph (b) above. 
(e)  Fee in lieu. As an alternative to preservation of land, the city may establish a fee-in-lieu-of-land program, whereby the city can purchase land which will provide a significant habitat. 
Editor's note- Requirements of this section should be based upon the data and analysis of the conservation element. As an alternative to a professionally-prepared study for all lands which may provide habitat for species which are rare, endangered, or of special concern, the city may establish a threshold for requiring such a study. It is important to note that the reservation of land area must recognize that the land requirements to provide habitat which satisfy the needs for food, water, and shelter for affected species may be so comprehensive or specialized that every development cannot provide a meaningful quantity or quality of land. Small, isolated areas may not function as viable habitat. 
Secs. 14-292-14-299. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - FLOODPLAINS 

Sec. 14-300. - General provisions. 
(a)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. These flood damage prevention regulations do not repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. 
(b)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. Although the degree of flood protection required by these flood damage prevention regulations is reasonable and appropriate for regulatory purposes, based on scientific and engineering considerations, more severe floods will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. Consequently, these flood damage prevention regulations do not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within those areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. These flood damage prevention regulations shall not create liability on the part of the city or any of its officers or employees for any flood damages that result from reliance on these flood damage prevention regulations or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(c)  Declaration of public nuisance. All development located or maintained within any area of special flood hazard after [the adoption of this chapter] in violation of these flood damage prevention regulations is hereby declared a public nuisance per se. 
Sec. 14-301. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrator means the federal insurance administrator. 
    Appurtenant structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured under the federal flood insurance program and where the use is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH or VO zone on the flood insurance rate map, or other area designated on a map by the director of community development with base flood depths from one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Editor's note- The FIRM maps for some communities may not contain any AO, AH or VO zones in which case this definition and the regulations related thereto may be deleted. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the area of special flood hazard shall include: 
(1)  All areas designated on a flood hazard boundary map as Zone A or a flood insurance rate map as Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, VO, or V1-30, VE, or V. The relevant flood hazard boundary map and flood insurance rate maps, and any revisions thereto, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this code. 
(2)  Other areas of the community designated on a map by the director of community development as having a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This may include isolated topographic depressions with a history of flooding or a high potential for flooding. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Basement means that portion of a building having its floor below ground level on all sides. 
    Breakaway wall means a wall that is designed and constructed to collapse under specified lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system. 
    Coastal high hazard area means all areas designated on a flood insurance rate map as V1-30, VE or V. 
    Flood or Flooding means a temporary partial or complete inundation of normally dry land from the overflow of inland or tidal waters, or from the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff or surface waters from any source. 
    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means the map issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency showing flood-prone areas. Drawn from United States Geological Survey Maps, it does not provide flood elevations and is intended to be used only until the flood insurance rate map is produced. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the official map issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency showing both the area of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones within the city. 
    Floodplain means land which will be inundated by floods known to have occurred or reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur from the overflow of inland or tidal waters and the accumulation of runoff of surface waters from rainfall. 
    Flood protection elevation means the elevation of the base flood plus one (1) foot. 
    Floodway means the channel of a natural stream or river and portions of the floodplain adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry and discharge the floodwater or flood flow of any natural stream or river. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking, loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, ship building and ship repair, or processing seafood. The term does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing uses. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest enclosed floor of a structure, including a basement, but not including the floor of an area enclosed only with insect screening or wood lattice as permitted by the flood damage prevention regulations in this code. 
    Mangrove stand means an assemblage of one (1) or more of the following species: black mangrove (Avicennia nitida); red mangrove (Rhizophora mangle); white mangrove (Languncularia racemosa); and buttonwood (Conocarpus erecta). 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation, and connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed in use (other than for sale) on a site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer. 
    Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. For purposes of this code the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
    New construction means structures or substantial improvements for which the "start of construction" occurred on or after the effective date of this code, and any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a structure which is in compliance with these flood damage prevention regulations. 
Editor's note- "New construction" and "start of construction" are used to designate which projects must comply with the flood damage prevention provisions of this code. 
    Person means any individual, group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity, including State and local governments and agencies. 
    Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be unobstructed in order to discharge the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation of that flood more than one (1) foot at any point. 
Editor's note- The "floodway" is the area that has the greatest impact on the velocity and height of flood flows. Further encroachment in the floodway zone is likely to increase the ability of the flood plain to convey water, and development in this area is susceptible to extreme flood damage. The one-foot standard is maximum allowed under federal flood insurance regulations; a larger floodway could be designated by decreasing this amount.] 
    Sand dunes means naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach. 
    Start of construction means the date the construction permit was issued, provided the "actual start of construction" was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The "actual start of construction" means the first placement of permanent elements of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or of the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; installation of streets and/or walkways; excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations; erection of temporary forms; or the installation of appurtenant structures. This definition does not apply to new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. 97-348). 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a manufactured home, and a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground. 
    Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure, taking place during [the life of a structure] [a ten (10) year period], in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure. The market value of the structure is the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or, in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the occurrence of the damage. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" occurs when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the structure commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include any improvement of a structure to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety codes, or any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places, the Local Register of Historic Places, or a State Inventory of Historic Places, unless that alteration will cause the structure to lose its historical designation. 
Editor's note- This definition is used to require that improvements that equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of a structure's market value must comply with the flood damage prevention requirements in this code. This attempts to strike a balance between the competing demands for sound flood management and the need for owners to conduct routine repairs and maintenance [of] existing structures without having to comply with the code. [Floodplain] regulations are silent on the issue a period of time resulting in expenditures of over fifty (50) percent of a structure's value. A community is free, therefore, to make the code more stringent by a cumulative expenditure provision such as appears in this definition. 
Sec. 14-302. - Standards for reducing flood hazards in the area of special flood hazard 
(a)  Generally. The standards in this part apply to all development within the area of special flood hazard as shown on a flood hazard boundary map or a flood insurance rate map. 
(b)  Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements of existing construction shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure during a base flood. Manufactured homes shall be anchored, tied down and blocked in accordance with the standards of Section 15C-1.10, Florida Administrative Code. 
(c)  Construction materials and methods. All new construction and substantial improvements of existing construction shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage, and using methods and practices that will minimize flood damage and prevent the pollution of surface waters during a base flood. 
(d)  Service facilities and utilities. 
(1)  Electrical heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning and other service facilities shall be designed or located to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during a base flood. 
(2)  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate both infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters. 
(3)  On-site sanitary sewage systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding, and shall not be installed wholly or partially in a regulatory floodway. 
(e)  Storage of materials and equipment. 
(1)  Storing or processing materials that would, in a flood, be buoyant, flammable, explosive, or potentially injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. 
(2)  Materials or equipment immune to substantial damage by flooding may be stored if firmly anchored to prevent flotation or if readily removable from the area upon receipt of a flood warning. 
Sec. 14-303. - Additional standards for reducing flood hazards in areas for which flood insurance rate maps have been prepared. 
(a)  Generally. The following standards must be complied with in all areas of special flood hazard for which a base flood elevation has been established by a flood insurance rate map or otherwise. 
(b)  Residential structures. 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of existing construction of residential structures shall be constructed with the lowest floor elevated to or above the flood protection elevation. 
(2)  For all new construction and substantial improvements of existing construction, enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for automatic entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified as meeting this requirement by a registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum standards: 
a.  Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. 
b.  Place the bottom of all openings no higher than one (1) foot above grade. 
c.  Equip openings with devices, such as screens, louvers, or valves that permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (i.e. a garage door) or storing equipment used to maintain the premises (i.e. a standard exterior door), or entering the living area (i.e. a stairway or elevator). The interior of the enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(3)  Electrical, plumbing, and other utility connections shall not be placed below the Flood Protection Elevation. 
(c)  Nonresidential structures. New construction and substantial improvements of existing construction of nonresidential structures shall either comply with section 14-302(b) of this article, or be constructed, including attendant utility and sanitary facilities, to meet the following standards: 
(1)  Walls below the flood protection elevation shall be substantially impermeable to the passage of water. 
(2)  Structural components shall resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  Be certified as meeting the standards of this section by a registered professional engineer or architect. 
(d)  Subdivisions. 
(1)  All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the area of special flood hazard and the elevation of the base flood. 
(2)  All final subdivision plans shall identify the elevation of proposed structures and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood, the final pad elevation shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. 
(3)  All public utilities and facilities in subdivisions shall be located and constructed to minimize flood damage, and shall be adequately drained to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(4)  Each lot must include a site suitable for constructing a structure in conformity with the standards of these flood damage prevention regulations. 
(5)  All agreements for deed, purchase agreements, leases, or other contracts for sale or exchange of lots within an area of special flood hazard and all instruments conveying title to lots within an area of special flood hazard must prominently publish the following flood hazard warning in the document: 
Flood Hazard Warning 
This property may be subject to flooding. You should contact local building and zoning officials and obtain the latest information about flood elevations and restrictions before making plans for the use of this property. 
Sec. 14-304. - Standards for reducing flood hazards in certain zones within the area of special flood hazard. 
(a)  Regulatory floodways. The following standards apply to regulatory floodways located within the area of special flood hazard: 
(1)  Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development, are prohibited unless a registered professional engineer certifies and demonstrates that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not result in any increase in flood levels during a base flood. 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of existing construction shall comply with all applicable flood damage prevention provisions of sections 14-302 and 14-303 of this article. 
Editor's note- A floodway must be designated by a community if FEMA has provided the necessary data. Regulation of the floodway is one (1) of the most important aspects of flood damage prevention regulations. It is assumed that additional development within the floodway would interfere with the normal movement of flood waters, and result in a significant increase in water surface elevations. By designating a floodway zone in which development is strictly limited, the community can be assured that a channel will be maintained that is capable of passing floodwater associated with a base flood. 
 Based on these assumptions, development in the floodway is treated differently from that in the remaining portion of the area of special flood hazard. Proposals for development in the area of special flood hazard that are not in the floodway are reviewed only to ensure that development is protected against the base flood and need not be reviewed to determine their impact on flood heights because a floodway has already been designated. 
 Proposals for development in the regulatory floodway are first reviewed for their cumulative impact on flood heights and are denied if flood levels would be raised. If a technical evaluation clearly demonstrates that the cumulative impact of the proposal will not cause an increase in flood heights, the proposal may be approved if the flood damage prevention standards of these regulations are otherwise met. 
(b)  Coastal high hazard areas. In all areas designated as coastal high hazard areas the following standards must be met: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of existing construction shall be located fifty (50) feet landward of the reach of the mean high tide. 
(2)  Elevation. 
a.  All new construction shall be elevated so that the bottom of the lowest supporting horizontal member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings or columns) is located no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, with all construction below the lowest supporting member open so as not to impede the flow of water. 
b.  No fill shall be used as structural support. Non-compacted fill may be used around the perimeter of a structure for landscaping or aesthetic purposes provided the fill will wash out from storm surge (thereby rendering the structure free of obstruction) prior to generating excessive loading forces, ramping effects, or wave deflection. The director of community development shall approve design plans for landscaping/aesthetic fill only after the applicant has provided an analysis by an engineer, architect, and/or soil scientist demonstrating that the foregoing criteria have been satisfied based upon the following considerations: 
1.  The particle composition of the fill material does not have a tendency for excessive natural compaction. 
2.  The volume and distribution of the fill will not cause wave deflection to adjacent properties. 
3.  The slope of the fill will not cause wave run-up or ramping. 
c.  The construction below the lowest floor shall be free of obstructions but may be enclosed with breakaway walls, open wood lattice or insect screening designed to collapse under wind and water loads without causing collapse, displacement, or other structural damage to the elevated portion of the structure or supporting foundation system. For the purposes of this section, a breakaway wall shall have a design safe loading resistance of not less than ten (10) and no more than twenty (20) pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls which exceed a design safe loading resistance of no less than ten (10) and no more than twenty (20) pounds per square foot (either by design or when so required by local or state codes) may be permitted only if a registered engineer or architect certifies that the proposed design meets the following criteria: 
1.  The breakaway wall will collapse under a water load less than the load imposed by the base flood; and 
2.  The elevated portion of the structure and supporting foundation system will not collapse, be displaced, or suffer structural damage from wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components (structural and non-structural.) Wind and water loading values to be used in this determination shall not be less than those that have a one (1) percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year (one hundred (100) year mean recurrence interval.) 
d.  The space below the lowest floor shall be used only for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage of equipment used to maintain the premises. 
(3)  Anchoring. 
a.  All structures shall be securely anchored on pilings or columns. 
b.  All pilings and columns and the attached structures shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement caused by wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all components of the structure. Wind and water loading values to be used in designing the anchor and support system shall not be less than those that have a one (1) percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year (one hundred (100) year mean recurrence interval.) 
(4)  Site alteration. Sand dunes and mangrove stands shall not be altered in a way that increases the potential for flood damage. 
(5)  Certification. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design, specifications and plans for construction comply with the requirements of this section. 
(c)  Standards for areas of shallow flooding. The following standards apply to areas of shallow flooding located within the area of special flood hazard. 
(1)  Residential structures. The lowest floor of all new construction of and substantial improvements to residential structures shall be elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified.) 
(2)  Nonresidential structures. The lowest floor of all new construction of and substantial improvements to non-residential structures shall: 
a.  Be elevated as prescribed in section 14-304(c)(1) above; or 
b.  Be constructed, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, so that any walls below the level prescribed in section 14-304(c)(1) above shall be substantially impermeable to the passage of water and any structural components below that level shall be capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
Editor's note- These requirements are designed to maintain the flood water storage capacity of ponding areas or to prevent damming of sheet flow flood waters. 
(d)  Standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or regulatory floodways. The following standards apply to small streams in the area of special flood hazard for which no base flood data or regulatory floodway have been provided. 
(1)  Encroachments. No encroachments, including fill material or structures shall be located within a distance of the stream bank equal to two (2) times the width of the stream at the top of the bank, or fifty (50) feet from the top of each bank, whichever is greater, unless a registered professional engineer demonstrates and certifies that the encroachments would not result in any increase in flood levels in a base flood. 
(2)  Elevation. New construction of or substantial improvements to structures shall be elevated or flood-proofed to minimize risks of flooding reasonably to be expected based on the best available data. 
Sec. 14-305. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  Generally. In addition to the administrative and enforcement provisions in Article XII of this code, the following provisions apply. 
(b)  Designation and duties of local administrator. The director of community development of the department of planning and development shall administer and implement the provisions of these flood damage prevention regulations. In addition to duties assigned elsewhere, the director of community development shall: 
(1)  Review all proposed developments to assure that the requirements of these regulations have been met. 
(2)  Review all certificates submitted to satisfy the requirements of these regulations. 
(3)  Notify adjacent communities, the water management district, and the state department of community affairs, prior to permitting or approving any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and provide evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(4)  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor, or of the flood-proofing, of all new or substantially improved structures regulated by these flood damage prevention regulations. 
(5)  Interpret the boundaries of the area of special flood hazard and the various zones, including the regulatory floodways and coastal high hazard areas. 
(6)  Maintain all records pertaining to the implementation of these flood damage prevention regulations. 
(c)  Certification of as-built elevations. 
(1)  For development activity which includes structures, and in areas where base flood elevations are available, the developer shall submit to the director of community development a certification prepared by a registered land surveyor or licensed professional engineer of the as-built elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor, flood-proofed elevation, or horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, as applicable. This certification shall be provided before additional construction may occur. 
(2)  The director of community development shall review submitted floor elevation survey data and inform the applicant of deficiencies within thirty (30) working days. No work shall be permitted to proceed until the deficiency is removed in the opinion of the director of community development. Failure to submit the certification or to make required corrections shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(3)  Upon submittal of certified elevations and/or a determination by the director of community development that the development meets all of the applicable requirements of these flood damage prevention regulations, the director of community development shall issue a certificate of compliance. All work performed before the issuance of this certificate shall be at the risk of the developer. 
(d)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Any violation of these flood damage prevention regulations is a public nuisance and may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
(2)  In addition to any remedy or penalty provided herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of these flood damage prevention regulations shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day during which the violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
(3)  Any violator may be required to restore land to its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the city may take necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the property until paid. 
Secs. 14-306-14-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - SUBDIVISIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS AND PROCEDURES 

Sec. 14-400. - Title, enabling and other general provisions. 
(a)  Title. An ordinance prescribing procedures and standards for the subdivision of real estate and for the; installation of required improvements; providing for title, enabling and other general provisions; providing for terminology; providing for general requirements; providing for application of ordinance; providing for previously platted subdivisions; providing for planned developments; providing for alternate designs for rural subdivisions; providing for phased developments; providing for exceptions to general requirements; providing for administration of ordinance; providing for preliminary subdivision plan procedure; providing for final subdivision plan procedures; providing for development procedure; providing for technical compliance and review; providing for land development permit application and review; providing for construction plans and supplemental engineering information; providing for construction of required improvements; providing for supplemental procedures; providing for requirements for the certified survey; providing for requirements for the preliminary and final plat; providing for required improvements; providing for access and circulation system; providing for clearing, earthwork, and grading; providing for stormwater management system; providing for parks and recreational areas; providing for wastewater system; providing for potable water systems; providing for utilities; providing for fire rescue services; providing for subdivision design and survey requirements; providing for variances and exceptions; providing for penalties and prohibitions; providing for legal status; providing for standard forms. 
(b)  Authority. 
(1)  Article VIII of the 1968 Constitution of the State of Florida vested city governments with powers of self-government as provided by general and special law. 
(2)  The Growth Management Act of 1985, as amended, requires local governments to adopt comprehensive plans and City of Pahokee has adopted the 1989 City of Pahokee Comprehensive Plan ("Comprehensive Plan") pursuant to this statutory provisions and other authority. 
(3)  The statutory provisions and the comprehensive plan require that land development regulations be adopted to implement the comprehensive plan and that no development of land shall take place which is inconsistent with the comprehensive plan. 
(4)  Section 125.01, Florida Statues, vested counties with the power to establish, coordinate and enforce business regulations, building, housing, and related technical codes and regulations as are necessary for the protection of the public and to perform other acts not inconsistent with laws which are in the common interest of the people of the city and to exercise all powers and privileges not specifically prohibited by law. 
(5)  Sections 125.01, 336.02 and 336.08, Florida Statutes, provide that counties have the power and authority to establish new roads and locate and change the same; and 
(6)  Chapter 163 and Special Acts, Chapter 69-1425, Laws of Florida, authorize the city commissioners to adopt, prescribe and promulgate rules and regulations governing the filing of plats and development of subdivisions, in order to aid in the coordination of land development. 
(7)  It is in the public interest to insure that adequate and necessary physical improvements are properly installed whenever land is developed. 
(8)  It is in the public interest to establish procedures and minimum standards for the subdivision, development and improvement of land within City of Pahokee. 
(c)  Short title. This ordinance shall be known as the "Subdivision and Required Improvement Regulations of City of Pahokee, Florida." 
(d)  Jurisdiction. The regulations set forth herein shall be applicable to subdivisions of land and to the installation of improvements in the unincorporated areas of City of Pahokee, Florida, as or hereafter established. 
(e)  Purpose and intent. This ordinance is adopted to: 
(1)  Establish procedures and standards for the subdivision of real estate within City of Pahokee, Florida;, 
(2)  Establish procedures and standards for the development of real estate within City of Pahokee, Florida; 
(3)  Ensure proper legal description, identification, documentation and recording of subdivisions; 
(4)  Aid in the coordination of land development in City of Pahokee, Florida, in accordance with orderly physical patterns; 
(5)  Implement the 1989 Comprehensive Plan ("Comprehensive Plan") with respect to installation of on-site improvements for the development, which improvements are necessary to the development to meet or support the level of services required under the concurrency management system of the comprehensive plan; 
(6)  Ensure safe and convenient access and traffic circulation; 
(7)  Ensure adequate utilities; 
(8)  Regulate development of areas subject to seasonal and periodic flooding and provide for adequate stormwater management to minimize adverse impacts of development on water resources while ensuring acceptable levels of protection from inundation for residents and improvements; 
(9)  Provide public and private parks and recreation areas in accordance with the objectives of the Recreation open space element of the comprehensive plan; 
(10)  Ensure land subdivision with installation of adequate and necessary physical improvements; 
(11)  Ensure that the citizens and taxpayers of the city will not have to bear the costs resulting from haphazard subdivision of land and the lack of authority to require installation by the developer of adequate and necessary physical improvements; 
(12)  Ensure to the purchaser of land in a subdivision that necessary improvements of lasting quality have been installed. 
(f)  Interpretation. 
(1)  Minimum requirements. In their interpretation and application, the requirements of this ordinance shall be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  Relationship to other agency requirements. The requirements of this ordinance are intended to complement and expand upon rules, regulations, and permit requirements of other state, regional, and local agencies applicable to the design, construction, and/or operation of facilities for access and circulation of vehicles and pedestrians, construction of streets and related facilities, power and communication services, wastewater and water services, and stormwater management and flood protection in City of Pahokee. Compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance shall not relieve the developer, his successors or assigns from the necessity to comply with all requirements and obtain all permits required by the regulations of such other agencies. These requirements shall include, but not be limited to, the following, as they may be amended from time to time: 
a.  Florida Department of Environmental Regulation (DER) requirements for dredge and fill up to the landward extent of waters of the State pursuant to Chapter 17-4, F.A.C.; 
b.  South Florida Water Management District Surface Water Management rules pursuant to Chapters 40E-4, 40E-40, and 40E-41, F.A.C.; 
c.  Palm Beach County Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, as amended by Ordinance 88-3; 
d.  Palm Beach County Mining Ordinance; 
e.  Requirements of the applicable Water Control District governing connection to and use of district facilities. 
f.  Palm Beach County Wetlands Protection Ordinance; 
g.  Palm Beach County Environmentally Sensitive Lands Ordinance, Ordinance No. 89-23; 
h.  Palm Beach County Endangered Species Ordinance; 
i.  Palm Beach County Wellfield Protection Ordinance, No. 88-7; and 
j.  The State Standards, as defined herein. 
(3)  Authority of the city engineer. In the event of conflict between a specific requirement of this ordinance and that of another agency's rule, compliance with this ordinance shall be interpreted by the City Engineer to avoid the conflict where such avoidance is not inconsistent with the general purposes and intent of this ordinance and is affirmatively demonstrated as necessary to meet the purposes and intent of the conflicting rule. However, if the difference between said requirements is solely a matter of degree, the more restrictive requirement shall prevail and no conflict will be considered to exist. 
Sec. 14-401. - Terminology. 
(a)  General application of terms. For the purposes of this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. All references to definitions in the development code are to Section 200.2 of the development code unless otherwise stated. When a definition in the comprehensive plan or development code is in conflict with or is dissimilar to a definition given below, the definition herein shall control when applying the provisions of this ordinance. Words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and the words "may" and "should" are permissive. 
(b)  Definitions. 
    Abutting property: See "contiguous" in development code. 
    Access: See "access" in development code. 
    ADT: See "average daily trips." 
    Alley: See "alley" in development code. 
    Antiquated subdivision: See "antiquated subdivision" in comprehensive plan. 
    Applicant: the developer or his duly authorized representative who submits to the city engineer's office a plat and related plans for the purpose of obtaining approval thereof. 
    Arterial street: A major street of higher classification than plan collector streets, used primarily for traffic traveling considerable distance within or through an area not served by an expressway, is of considerable continuity, and is used primarily as a main traffic artery. An arterial may also be a limited access street. 
    Average daily trips: See "average daily trips" in comprehensive plan. Also referred to as "ADT." 
    Block: See "block" in development code. 
    Board: The city commissioners of the City of Pahokee. The term shall include the term "city." 
    Building: See "building" in development code. 
    Catchment: A sub-area of a drainage basin which contributes stormwater runoff by overland flow to a common collection point. 
    Clustered lot: A special type of lot meeting special regulations in the development code and which is designated on the construction plans, as required by section 14-415 in this article. 
    Comprehensive plan: See "comprehensive land use plan" in the development code. 
    Control device: The element(s) of a discharge structure which allows release of water under controlled conditions. 
    Control elevation: The lowest elevation at which water can be released through a control device. 
    City: The "board," as defined in this article. 
    City commission: the "board" as defined in this article. 
    City engineer: the city engineer of city of Pahokee or his duly authorized representative. 
    City standards: See "city standards" in development code. 
    Cul-de-sac: a dead-end street terminated at the closed end by a circular vehicular turn-around. 
    Current: the specifications, design standards and construction details in effect or as may be changed from time to time or amended from time to time. The term "current" shall be applied at the time a plat or development plan is presented for acceptance or approval. 
    Days: Work days of city employees as established by the city commission. 
    Dead-end street: A street with only one (1) outlet. 
    Department of transportation: See "department of transportation" in the development code. 
    Detention: The collection and temporary storage of stormwater runoff for the purpose of treatment and/or discharge rate control with subsequent gradual release directly to surface waters. 
    Developer: A "developer" is any individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnerships, corporation, trust or any other legal entity who, as owner of the land, commences proceedings under this ordinance to effect the subdivision or development of land in the city. The term shall include the term "subdivider." 
    Developer's engineer: A single engineering firm or a professional engineer registered in Florida, and engaged by the developer to coordinate the design and monitor the construction of the work required under this ordinance. 
    Development of regional impact: A specific type of development as defined in F.S. § 380.06. 
    Discharge structure: A structural device, constructed or fabricated from durable material(s) such as concrete, metal, or decay-resistant timber, through which water is released to surface water from detention. 
    Drainage basin: A sub-area of a watershed which contributes stormwater runoff to a watercourse tributary to the main receiving water. 
    Dry detention/retention: Detention or retention in a storage facility which is designed, constructed, and operated to limit the duration of ponding within the facility so as to maintain a normally dry bottom between rainfall events. 
    Dwelling unit: See "dwelling unit" in comprehensive plan. 
    Easement or servitude: See "easement" in development code. 
    Expressway: See "expressway" in development code. 
    Final site development plan: See "final site development plan" in development code. 
    Flood or flooding: A general and temporary condition of inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from: (1) the overflow of tidal or non-tidal watercourses or water bodies; or (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation of surface waters from any source. 
    Floodplain: The land area adjacent to the normal limits of a watercourse or water body which is inundated during a flood event of specified magnitude or return period. 
    Floor: The bottom interior surface of an enclosed habitable space in a building, including a basement but not including a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
    Inundation: The presence of water, in motion or standing, of sufficient depth to damage property due to the mere presence of water or the deposition of silt or which may be a nuisance, hazard or health problem. 
    Lake maintenance easement: An expressed easement, created by plat dedication or other instrument of record, establishing access and use rights on the periphery of a water management tract for purposes of construction, maintenance, and repair of wet detention/retention facilities and appurtenant structures therein. 
    Land development permit: The development permit issued by the city commissioners authorizing construction of required improvements. 
    Legal access: The principal means of access from a lot to a public street or to a private street over which a perpetual ingress and egress easement or right of way has been granted to the owners of any lot serviced by such street. 
    Legal positive outfall: The permanently established connection of a stormwater discharge conveyance facility serving a development site to a watercourse or water body under the control and jurisdiction of one (1) or more public agencies, said connection being subject to all applicable agency permitting and approval requirements. 
    Limited access: See "limited access" in development code. 
    Limited access street: A street which does not permit access except at points authorized and controlled by the department of engineering and public works under a access control easement. 
    Local street: A minor street designed and maintained to provide access to abutting property. A local street is of limited continuity and not for through traffic and is the middle order street of minor streets, being of a higher classification than a residential access street. 
    Lot: A parcel of land identified as a single unit for development purposes and which is: 
(1)  Depicted on a plat duly recorded in the public records of the clerk of the circuit court of the county, whether such plat was recorded prior or subsequent to February 5, 1973; 
(2)  Under single ownership pursuant to a deed or agreement for deed duly recorded in the public records of the county prior to December 2, 1989, regardless of size; 
(3)  Depicted on a survey, map or drawing of land for which an affidavit of waiver has been granted and duly recorded in the public records of the county pursuant to the requirements of this Ordinance; 
(4)  A combination of lots, as defined in (1) through (3) above, which have been joined together under a unity of title recorded in the public records of the county so as to combine same as one (1) lot. 
As used herein, the term "lot" shall be synonymous with the terms "plot," "parcel," or "tract," however designated on any plat, map, survey, or drawing recorded in the public records of the county. 
Any lot to be subdivided or created on or after December 2, 1989, shall consist of at least sufficient size to meet the minimum requirements of the comprehensive plan and development code of the city as to use, coverage and area. 
When appropriate to the text, the term "lot" shall mean a proposed lot and refers to a parcel of land depicted on a site development plan, final site development plan, master land use plan, subdivision plan, preliminary plat, final plat or survey as a distinct parcel to be held as one (1) unit of ownership. 
    Major street: A street depicted on the adopted thoroughfare plan; a thoroughfare plan road. Major streets are further classified as collector street, arterial street, and expressway. 
    Marginal access street: A special purpose local street which is parallel and adjacent to an plan collector street, expressway, arterial street or other limited access street and which has its principal purpose of relieving such streets from local service of abutting property by providing access to abutting property and separation from through traffic . A marginal access street may also be called a "frontage street." 
    Master land use plan: See "master land use plan" in development code. 
    Minor street: Any street not classified as a major street, and includes streets providing traffic circulation within the development. 
    Mobile home subdivision: Subdivision of land for the sale of lots intended for the placement of mobile homes and which meets the requirements of this ordinance and the city development code. 
    Non-plan collector street: The highest classification of a minor street, designed to carry traffic from local streets and residential access streets to major streets. 
    Parking area: See "parking area" in development code. 
    Parking lot: See "parking lot" in development code. 
    Phase: A distinct portion of a development designed and permitted for construction and platting as a unit. 
    Plan collector street: A major street which carries traffic from minor streets to arterial streets and is the lowest order street in the hierarchy of major streets. 
    Plat: A map depicting the division or subdivision of land into lots, blocks, parcels, tracts, or other portions thereof, however the same may be designated, prepared in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and those of any applicable law and/or local ordinance, which may be designated to be placed of record in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of Palm Beach County. 
    Plat, final: A finished map of a subdivision accurately showing all legal requirements of the state plat law and the requirements of this ordinance. 
    Plat, preliminary: A copy of the plat in sufficient form to readily compare the plat with the subdivision plan and construction plans. 
    Plat of record: A plat which conforms to the requirements of the applicable laws of the state and ordinances of the city, which has been accepted by the board and placed in the official records of the county. 
    Positive drainage: The provision of a stormwater management system which conveys stormwater runoff to a point of legal positive outfall. 
    Primary stormwater system: Classified surface waters of the state which convey stormwater runoff toward the ocean or a major inland water body. 
    Property owners' association: An organization recognized under the Laws of the State of Florida, operated under recorded maintenance and ownership agreements through which each owner of a portion of a subdivision, be it a lot, home, property or any other interest, is automatically a voting member, and each such member is automatically subject to a charge for a prorated share of expenses, either direct or indirect, for maintaining common properties within the subdivision, such as roads, parks, recreational areas, common areas and other similar properties. Within the text of this ordinance, a property owners' association is considered to be a single entity for property ownership. As used in this ordinance, the term "property owners' association" shall also be deemed to include a homeowners' association, condominium association or cooperative (apartment) association, as defined in Chapter 711, Florida Statutes, 1971, as amended, having a life tenure of not less than twenty (20) years, as well as a third party having an agreement with a condominium or cooperative association as permitted by Chapter 711, Florida Statutes, as amended. 
    Private street: Any street which: 
(1)  Existed prior to or on February 5, 1973 and has not been dedicated for public use and not accepted for ownership or maintenance by the city commissioners; or 
(2)  Is dedicated to a property owners' association pursuant to recorded restrictions and covenants or a plat recorded in the public records pursuant to this ordinance; or 
(3)  Was dedicated for public use and existed prior to or on February 5, 1973 and has not been accepted for maintenance by the city. 
    Public street: A street dedicated to the public and accepted for ownership and maintenance by the board. 
    Public utility: Every person, corporation, partnership or association or other legal entity, their lessees, trustees or receivers now or hereafter, either owning, operating, managing or controlling a system or proposing construction of a system that is providing or proposes to provide water or sewer service, electricity, natural or manufactured gas, or any similar gaseous substance, telephone, telegraph or other communication service to the public for compensation. 
    Retention: The collection and storage of a specific portion of stormwater runoff without subsequent direct release to surface waters of said portion or any part thereof. 
    Right-of-way: See "right-of-way" in development code. 
    Rural subdivision: A division of land within an agriculture residential, country residential, or agricultural production zoning district. 
    Secondary stormwater system: That component of a stormwater management system which consists of facilities and features designed to provide for treatment and control of stormwater runoff generated by specifically delineated lands, in order to meet regulatory requirements governing the quality and quantity of stormwater discharged to the primary stormwater system. 
    Sewer system, central: A system for the collection and disposal of sewage, in accordance with the approval of requisite state and city agencies, from multiple family, commercial, industrial, institutional or other uses and shall include pipes, pumps, tanks, treatment plants and other appurtenances which comprise the system. 
    Sewer system, individual: A system designed to serve one (1) unit, comprised of pipes, tanks, and subsurface absorption field, or other approved treatment device, for handling and disposing of sewage wastes. 
    Sight distance: The extent of unobstructed vision in a horizontal and vertical plane. 
    Single-family detached cluster home: A "single-family detached cluster home" shall mean a single-family dwelling unit which is part of a cluster of similar dwelling units within a planned unit development but which is separated from other similar units by common areas dedicated to a property owners' association. 
    Site development plan: See "site development plan" in development code. 
    Site plan: See "site development plan." 
    State standards: The various design and construction guidelines, policies and standards promulgated, and amended from time to time, by the departments and agencies of the state of Florida, including but not limited to the policy and guidelines for vehicular connections to roads on the state highway systems, manual of uniform traffic control devices for streets and highways (as adopted by the department of transportation), manual of uniform minimum standards for design, construction and maintenance for streets and highways (a/k/a "the greenbook"), standard specifications for road and bridge construction, roadway and traffic design standards, and handbook for drainage connection permits. 
    Stormwater: The flow of water that results from and occurs immediately following a rainfall event. 
    Stormwater management plan: An engineering drawing and written report outlining the proposed secondary and tertiary stormwater management facilities needed for the proper development of a specific increment of the unincorporated area of the city, including details of drainage-related conditions and characteristics of the existing development site and surrounding lands. 
    Stormwater management system: A comprehensive system designed and constructed or implemented to collect, convey, store, absorb, inhibit, treat, use or reuse stormwater in order to prevent or reduce inundation, flooding, over-drainage, environmental degradation, and water pollution, or otherwise affect the quantity and quality of stormwater runoff. 
    Stormwater runoff: That portion of stormwater which occurs either as overland surface flow or subsurface lateral flow through normally unsaturated soils, and which is neither intercepted by vegetation, evaporated, nor recharged to groundwater. 
    Stormwater treatment: Removal of pollutants, debris, and other undesirable materials from stormwater runoff by means of natural chemical, biological or physical processes including, but not necessarily limited to, detention, retention, filtration, percolation, sedimentation, floatation, and skimming. This definition does not normally include active treatment processes, requiring the consumption of electrical or mechanical energy. 
    Stream: Any river, creek, slough, or other natural watercourse whether or not the bed shall have been dredged or otherwise improved in whole or in part. 
    Subdivider: A "developer," as defined in this article. 
    Surface waters: Water upon the surface of the earth whether contained in natural or artificial boundaries or diffused. 
    Surveyor: A land surveyor registered in Florida. 
    Tertiary stormwater system: That component of a stormwater management system which consists of facilities and features designed to provide for rapid removal of stormwater from structures, building sites, streets, and other areas of development or uses sensitive to damage or disruption by inundation. 
    Thoroughfare plan: The "thoroughfare right of way protection map" adopted as part of the comprehensive plan. 
    Townhouse: See "townhouse" in development code. 
    Townhouse cluster: See "townhouse cluster" in development code. 
    Traffic control devices: Any mechanism used to regulate traffic, such as pavement striping, signs, etc., excluding however, for the purpose of this ordinance, any mechanical or electrical device, such as traffic lights. 
    Water management tract: A parcel of land identified as a single unit, depicted on a plat or otherwise created by instrument of record, established for the purpose of delineating a complete facility or unified area to be utilized for detention, retention, or groundwater recharge of stormwater runoff prior to discharge from a development site. 
    Water system, central: The supply of water to serve more than one (1) dwelling, commercial, industrial, institutional or other units and shall include the water source, pipes, pumps, tanks, treatment plants and all other appurtenances to the system. 
    Water system, individual: a water source and other appurtenances supplying water to only one (1) dwelling, commercial, industrial, institutional or other units. 
    Waters of the state: Waters, as defined in F.S. § 403.031(12), subject to compliance with state water quality standards adopted pursuant to F.S. ch. 403, and set forth in Chapter 17-3, F.A.C. 
    Watercourse: Any stream, canal, ditch, or other natural or artificial channel in which water normally flows within a defined bed, banks, or other discernible boundaries, either continuously or seasonally, whether or not such flow is uniform or uninterrupted. 
    Watershed: The land area which contributed to the total flow of water entering a receiving stream or water body. 
    Wet detention/retention: Detention or retention in a storage facility not designed, constructed, and operated so as to provide dry detention/retention. 
    Work: All required construction as shown on approved construction plans and specifications for all facilities and features of any kind which are required, related to the process of subdivision of land under this ordinance. 
    Unified development code: The unified development code of the City of Pahokee, Florida, as adopted and amended from time to time by the city commissioners. 
Sec. 14-402. - General requirements. 
(a)  Platting requirement. Any developer planning to subdivide land shall record a final plat in accordance with the requirements of these regulations unless such requirement is specifically waived by the subdivision committee in accordance with the provisions of section 14-408(b). 
(b)  Required improvements installation requirement. The adequacy of necessary public or private facilities and services for traffic and pedestrian access and circulation, solid waste, wastewater disposal, potable water supply, stormwater management, fire rescue, parks and recreation and similar facilities and services, and potential adverse impacts on adjacent land uses and facilities shall be considered in the review all development proposals. Unless installation of a required improvement is waived pursuant to section 14-408, no final plat or certified survey shall be recorded until the required improvements set forth in section 14-432 which are applicable to the subdivision are completed in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance or their completion is guaranteed by the developer in accordance with the provisions of section 14-416. 
(c)  Standards for and cost of installation. All improvements required shall be built to the standards and specifications as published in this ordinance and the city standards or as required by the city engineer in accordance with acceptable standards of engineering principles. All such improvements shall be installed by and at the expense of the developer. 
(d)  Conformity with other land development regulations. Prior to consideration of any proposed subdivision under the terms of this ordinance, the area to be subdivided shall: 
(1)  Comply with the density, consistency and concurrency requirements and provisions of the administration and capital improvement elements of the comprehensive plan; 
(2)  Be in the proper zoning district and have the necessary zoning approvals required for the intended use; and 
(3)  Comply with and conform to the policies, objectives and goals of the land use and all other elements of the comprehensive plan. 
(e)  Site suitability. No subdivision shall be approved for land unsuitable for such development, unless adequate methods of correction or mitigation are formulated and approved in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. The city engineer may determine that land is unsuitable for subdivision due to unstable or poorly drained soils, frequent inundation, existance of environmentally protected or endangered areas, or conditions or features deemed to be harmful to the health, safety and general welfare of future residents. 
Sec. 14-403. - Application of ordinance. 
(a)  General application. No person, firm, corporation or any other association shall create a subdivision or develop any lot within a subdivision anywhere in the incorporated area of the city except in conformity with this ordinance. No subdivision shall be platted or recorded unless such subdivision meets all the provisions of this ordinance, the provisions of other applicable city ordinances, and those of any applicable laws of the state, and has been approved in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance. 
(b)  Building permits and other approvals. No building permit or certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion or paving permit shall be issued for any structure or construction on any lot if such lot was created in violation of this ordinance or if such lot is not in conformity with the provisions of these regulations. Except as provided in subsection (b)(1) below. Building and paving permits shall not be issued for any structure on a lot for which the final plat or certified survey, as applicable, has not been recorded in the manner prescribed in this ordinance. 
(1)  Temporary structures and permanent structures having a temporary use collectively, ("temporary uses") may receive a building permit or paving permit prior to recordation of the final plat or certified survey for the property only when the use and location is approved pursuant to this subsection. Except for planned unit development subdivisions, the final subdivision plan, or alternate subdivision plan, or certified survey shall show the location of the temporary use as required by paragraph 1011.1.2. The subdivision committee or the city engineer, as applicable, shall apply the criteria and time frames set forth in section 500.21.N of the development code; provided, however, the required applications for extension shall be made to the city engineer. Planned unit developments shall comply only with section 500.21.N of the development code. 
Sec. 14-404. - Previously approved or platted subdivisions. 
(a)  Active subdivision development. All active subdivision developments and all previously platted subdivision developments shall be subject to the requirements of this ordinance in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(1)  Active subdivision plan. Any subdivision development which on February 1, 1990, is proposed to be or is being developed under an active subdivision plan, as defined herein, shall not be subject to the requirements of section 1011.1 or article 1008, as applicable. Any subdivision plan shall be deemed an active subdivision plan when it meets the following requirements and has not been, unless abandoned, modified or vacated, as described in this article, when: 
a.  For developments without development for a planned unit development: The plan of development was approved as a master plan or special exception subdivision by the subdivision committee prior to February 1, 1990; or, the plan was submitted for master plan or special exception subdivision approval prior to February 1, 1990 and is approved by the subdivision committee prior to March 1, 1990; and 
b.  For planned unit developments: A final master land use plan was approved by the site plan review committee prior to February 1, 1990; and the development is otherwise in compliance with the requirements of the development code and any conditions of the zoning special exception approval; or the final master land use plan was submitted prior to February 1, 1990 and certified by the site plan review committee prior to April 30, 1990. 
(2)  Active plat: Any subdivision being undertaken pursuant to an active subdivision plat, as defined below, shall develop the required improvements for the subdivision in accordance with the procedures, design criteria and standards which were in effect at the time of the plat or plan approval, as applicable. Any plat or site plan, as applicable, which meets the following requirements unless abandoned, modified or vacated as described in this section, shall be deemed an active subdivision plat: 
a.  For plats of subdivisions in developments without zoning for a planned unit development: The preliminary plat and construction plans were submitted prior to February 1, 1990 and received technical compliance prior to August 1, 1990; or the preliminary plat and construction plans received technical compliance prior to February 1, 1990 and received a land development permit prior to August 1, 1990; or the certified survey was recorded prior to August 1, 1990 in accordance with an active subdivision plan (as defined above) for a special exception subdivision. 
b.  For plats of subdivisions in a planned unit development: The site plan for the plat was approved by the site plan review committee prior to February 1, 1990 and the corresponding preliminary plat and construction plans received technical compliance prior to August 1, 1990, or the site plan was submitted for site plan review committee consideration prior to February 1, 1990 and approved by said committee prior to April 1, 1990. 
(3)  Subdivision developments which are committed developments or deemed vested: Any development which constitutes a committed development under the comprehensive plan and the concurrency exemption ordinance, or which has otherwise been deemed vested under Florida law, is hereby deemed an active subdivision plan or plat, as applicable. 
(4)  Modifications to an active subdivision plan or plat: Modifications to an active subdivision plan or plat shall subject the development to the requirements and criteria of this ordinance when: 
a.  The modification of an active subdivision plan for a planned unit development cannot be approved by the site plan review committee in accordance with the authority granted to it under section 407 of the development code; or 
b.  The modification of an active subdivision plan for a subdivision development not zoned for a planned unit development could only be approved by the board when applying the criteria governing approvals by the site plan review committee for planned unit developments as set forth article 407 of the development code; or 
c.  The modification of an active plan or plat constitutes more than a minor deviation such that, in the opinion of the city engineer, the construction plans for the required improvements for the subdivision require a new submittal and review. 
(5)  Abandonment of active subdivision plan or plat. When the developer fails to seek subsequent approvals and permits within the time frames required by this ordinance, such failure shall be evidence that the active subdivision plan or plat has been abandoned and the active status of the subdivision plan or plat, as applicable, granted herein shall be void. 
(6)  Authority of the subdivision committee. The subdivision committee shall have the authority to review any subdivision development which does not meet the strict requirements of this section 14-404(a)(1) and to declare the master plan, final land use plan, preliminary or final plat, (and accompanying construction plans), special exception subdivision approval, or site plan, as applicable, to be an active approval when the subdivision committee finds that such declaration would be in accordance with the purpose and intent of this ordinance and in the best interest of the general public. Such reviews shall be made upon application by either the developer or the city engineer, which application shall be on a form prescribed by the subdivision committee. 
(7)  Fees waived for applications by the city engineer: Any fee required for an application made pursuant to this section 14-404(a)(1) is hereby waived for all applications made by the city engineer. 
(b)  Non-conforming subdivisions. The official records of City of Pahokee contain plats recorded prior to the adoption of this ordinance [February 3, 1973] governing subdivision development in the city. Such plats show areas within the city which have been platted as subdivisions, but which have either been partially improved or developed or remain unimproved or undeveloped. These areas, if developed improved further as platted prior to February 3, 1973, would not conform to the policies and objectives of the comprehensive plan for such areas. 
(1)  Authority of the commission to vacate non-conforming plats. The city commissioners of city of Pahokee, Florida, shall have the power, on its own motion, to order the vacation and reversion to acreage of all or any part of the subdivision within the incorporated areas of the city, including the vacation and abandonment of streets or other parcels of land dedicated for public purposes and the vacating of streets and other parcels of land reserved for the use of the owners, including lands maintained by the property owners association. 
(2)  Requirements for vacation of non-conforming plats. Such order of vacation and reversion of subdivision plats may only be made by the city commissioners if the following requirements are met: 
a.  A plat of the subdivision was recorded as provided by law not less than five (5) years before the date of proposed reversion to acreage; and 
In the subdivision or part thereof proposed to be reverted to acreage, not more than ten (10) percent of the total subdivision area has been sold as lots by the original subdivider or his successor in title. 
(3)  Authority of owners to develop non-conforming subdivisions which are subject to vacation by board. The owner or owners of a subdivision subject to vacation and reversion to acreage by motion of the city commissioners may at their option abandon the subdivision or portion thereof in accordance with the procedures of the board, or may improve undeveloped rights of way or rights of way which have been partially improved at their cost and expense, provided such improvements shall comply with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(c)  Public hearing required. Prior to ordering such a vacation and reversion to acreage, the city commissioners shall hold a public hearing relative to the proposed vacation and reversion to acreage, with prior notice thereof being given by publishing in a newspaper of local circulation the date of and the subject matter of the hearing at least twice within the two (2) week period preceding the date of such public hearing. At such public hearing, the vacation and reversion to acreage of subdivided land must be shown to either conform to the comprehensive plan or reduce the nonconformity with the comprehensive plan. 
(d)  Legal access to be maintained. No owner of any parcel of land in a subdivision vacated and returned to acreage or abandoned by the owners shall be deprived by the reversion to acreage or abandonment of any part of the subdivision of reasonable access to such parcel nor to reasonable access therefrom to existing facilities to which such parcel has theretofore had access. Such access remaining or provided after such vacation and reversion or abandonment may not necessarily be the same as theretofore existing, but shall be reasonably equivalent thereto. 
(e)  Improvement of existing partially developed non-conforming subdivisions not subject to vacation and reversion to acreage by motion of the city commissioners. The improvement of non-conforming subdivisions not subject to vacation and reversion to acreage by motion of the city commissioners shall comply with the requirements of this ordinance and the following: 
a.  Streets. The existing right of way for a local street shall be considered sufficient provided it is at least fifty (50) feet wide and the improvements comply with the fifty (50) foot typical section for local street construction as contained in the city standards. If the existing right of way is less than fifty (50) feet wide, additional right of way shall be provided to make a total of not less than fifty (50) feet. 
b.  Positive drainage. Positive drainage shall be established or proven, meeting all requirements for connection to a point of legal positive outfall. Easements for proper drainage shall be provided where necessary at a width adequate to accommodate the drainage facilities. A minimum of twelve (12) feet shall be provided for underground storm drainage installations and where canals or ditches are permitted, the width shall be adequate to accommodate drainage facilities plus twenty (20) feet on one (1) side to permit equipment to enter for maintenance purposes. 
Sec. 14-405. - Planned developments. 
(a)  Definition of planned developments. Any planned development which is to be subdivided shall comply with the requirements of this ordinance after approval, as required by the development code of the final land use plan or final site development plan, as applicable. For the purpose of this ordinance, "planned development" shall mean a planned unit development, a planned residential development, a planned industrial park, a mobile home condominium park, a mobile home rental park, or a recreational vehicle park as defined and regulated in the development code. 
(b)  Alternate subdivision plan approval. Upon submission to the city engineer of the applicable approved final plan, preliminary stormwater management plan and internal traffic circulation analysis for a planned development, the city engineer may deem the submittal as the subdivision plan for the planned development. Within fifteen (15) days of receipt of a complete submittal, the city engineer shall review and act on the application. If approved, the final land use plan or final site development plan, as applicable, shall be declared a final subdivision plan for the planned development, subject to the conditions and requirements of subsections 14-410(e) and (f). If denied, the developer shall comply with section 14-410. When such declaration is made for a planned unit development, the final subdivision plan shall include the site plans approved by the site plan review committee as required by section 500.21 of the development code. Every submittal under section 14-413 and section 14-414 shall be made subsequent to the approval of a site plan by the site plan review committee for the area submitted, and the boundaries of the area shown on such submittal shall coincide with the entire approved site plan, or with a designated phase thereof. An alternate subdivision plan approval shall not be granted for any planned development which has not obtained: 
(1)  A concurrency exemption; or 
(2)  An approved developer's agreement pursuant to a conditional concurrency reservation; or 
(3)  A concurrency reservation. 
(4)  Other comprehensive plan approvals required by section 14.1.24. 
Sec. 14-406. - Alternate designs for rural subdivisions. 
(a)  Scope. This section is to provide a means of establishing a rural subdivision in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this ordinance. 
(b)  Application requirements. Upon submission of the subdivision plan, and an application for a rural subdivision designation, the subdivision committee may approve the application for election to comply with this section. A rural subdivision shall meet the platting requirement of this ordinance. Due to the rural or country nature of the rural subdivision, certain requirements and provisions for the construction of the required improvements are not appropriate. In order to provide a rural environment, the following alternate designs shall be permitted in a subdivision which has been approved for the rural subdivision designation. 
(c)  All of the requirements of this ordinance shall apply except as the design requirements may be modified by this section. 
(1)  Access and circulation systems. Local streets may be developed without a wearing surface but shall be otherwise constructed to the standards required by this ordinance. All other streets of higher classification, as defined in this ordinance, shall be constructed to meet or exceed city standards. Streets constructed without a wearing surface shall be privately maintained and shall not be considered for dedication or acceptance as public streets until paved, reconstructed and tested, as necessary, to meet city standards. Costs of maintenance and further development of the local streets in a rural subdivision shall be borne solely by the owners of the property within the subdivision. Sidewalks and bike paths shall not be required when local streets are constructed without a wearing surface. The developer and any subsequent owner/seller shall fully disclose to the purchaser the method of payment of costs of maintenance and improvements of local streets developed without a wearing surface. The developer shall adequately warrant, by recorded covenant, that the city will not be liable for cost of maintenance or further development of local streets constructed without a wearing surface. 
(2)  Wastewater system. Rural subdivisions within the rural service area shall utilize the individual system in accordance with section 14-435(c) 
(3)  Water system. Rural subdivisions within the rural service area shall utilize the individual system in accordance with section 14-436(c) 
(4)  Utilities Installation. Underground utility installation is not required for rural subdivisions and rural subdivisions shall be excepted from the requirement of section 14-437(b) for such installation. 
Sec. 14-407. - Phased developments. 
(a)  The property encompassed by a final subdivision plan may be developed in two (2) or more increments pursuant to the terms of this section. The developer shall indicate on the final subdivision plan, that the tract will be platted and constructed in phases and shall submit a general phasing plan prior to submission of the first plat within the final subdivision plan. The construction plans and preliminary plat shall coincide with the appropriate phase shown on the final subdivision plan. Construction plans or a preliminary plat for a partial phase shall not be accepted. 
(b)  The improvements of each phase shall be capable of operating independently of any unconstructed phase with respect to drainage, access, utilities (including water and sewer), and other required improvements, except as provided herein. A dependent phase may be constructed if the improvements of the foundation phase are under construction pursuant to a land development permit; provided, however, if the required improvements of any unconstructed foundation phase are not secured pursuant to a guarantee posted with a contract for construction of required improvements, then the required improvements for all phases dependent on the foundation phase shall only proceed if: (1) all dependent phases are constructed under a contract for construction of required improvements prior to platting, or (2) sufficient security has been posted to guarantee the completion of all interdependent improvements in both the foundation phase and the dependent phase. A dependent phase shall not be acknowledged as completed until the improvements in the foundation phase are acknowledged as completed; provided, however, that such acknowledgement of completion may occur simultaneously and provided, further, that the city engineer may permit the posting of surety to guarantee the installation at a later time of the recreational facilities and other required improvements which are not necessary to provide drainage, access, or utilities to a such phases. 
(c)  The phasing plan and all phasing construction shall conform to any phasing plan approved under the certificate of concurrency. 
(d)  The phasing plan and all phasing construction shall be completed in accordance with any phasing controls and time frames required by the development code which are applicable to the development. 
(e)  When the final subdivision plan is to be developed in phases or stages requiring more than one (1) final plat, successive plats must be filed so that construction and development activity shall be of a reasonable continuous nature. In no event, however, shall more than two (2) years elapse between the filing of successive plat, unless the time is extended as provided herein. Upon the expiration of any time period established by this section, the approval for the subdivision development shall be subject to mandatory review by the subdivision committee. 
(f)  When the final subdivision plan is to be constructed in phases, the following sequence must be adhered to: 
(1)  The recreation facility or recreation facilities, required by section 14-434 to serve the entire development, shall be platted prior to the platting of more than forty (40) percent of the total permitted dwelling units. 
(2)  The commercial facilities shall not be platted prior to the platting of at least twenty (20) percent of the total permitted dwelling units for projects encompassing less than one thousand (1,000) acres and of at least ten (10) percent of the total permitted dwelling units for projects encompassing more than one thousand (1,000) acres. 
(3)  The gross density of an individual plat shall not exceed the maximum density permitted for the entire development unless the total of all previously recorded plats of record and the plat under review produces an average density less than or equal to the approved maximum density for the entire development. 
(g)  Time extension. The city engineer may extend the time for filing successive plats for a total of no more than two (2) years. Each time extension shall not exceed one (1) year in length and the total amount of all extensions shall not exceed two (2) years. 
Sec. 14-408. - Exceptions to general requirements. 
(a)  Authority. The subdivision committee is hereby empowered to make certain exceptions to the platting requirement and required improvement installation requirement of section 14-404 in accordance with the policies and procedures set forth in this section. A plat waiver or required improvement installation waiver shall not be granted for any development which has not obtained: 
(1)  A concurrency exemption; or 
(2)  An approved developer's agreement pursuant to a conditional concurrency reservation; or 
(3)  A concurrency reservation. 
(b)  Plat waiver; certified survey. If, after review of the preliminary subdivision plan by the subdivision committee, it is determined that the proposed subdivision meets one (1) of the conditions given in subsection (b)(1), the requirement to file a plat may be waived and a certified survey, meeting the requirements of this ordinance, shall be recorded in lieu of a plat. 
(1)  Applications For Exceptions To Platting Requirement. In order to determine whether platting may be waived, the developer shall submit a preliminary subdivision plan in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance together with a statement demonstrating that the subdivision meets at least one (1) of the following conditions: 
a.  The division is for the purpose of constructing not more than one (1) townhouse cluster in compliance with the development code. 
b.  The division is to be into no more than three (3) contiguous lots and at least one (1) of the following circumstances applies: 
1.  Unusual conditions are created by ownership or development of adjacent lands; or 
2.  The land concerned is isolated or removed in its relationship to other platted or improved lands; or 
3.  Dedications or reservations are not required for the installation or maintenance of the required improvements, and the improvements and dedications existing on the land are substantially in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance. 
c.  Rural lots: The division of an area of land not exceeding eighty (80) acres in size into lots of at least ten (10) acres and which area meets the following additional conditions: 
1.  Legal access to the area to be subdivided exists; and 
2.  Legal access to the proposed lots exist or will be established and dedicated to and to be maintained by a property owners association or water control district; and 
3.  Legal positive outfall exist and the appurtenant drainage easements are dedicated to, maintained and accepted by either by a property owners' association or water control district. 
d.  Combination/recombination of lots: The change in lot lines is for the purpose of combining or recombining lots or portions thereof, platted or unplatted, where all the resulting lots meet the requirements of the comprehensive plan and development code or reduce the degree of non-conformity to the requirements of the comprehensive plan and development code, as applicable, and the dedication of right of way or installation of improvements either would not be required pursuant to this ordinance or would be required and their installation would be guaranteed by the developer pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance. Provided, however, that any application hereunder for lands shown on a record plat recorded after February 3, 1973, shall be limited to any necessary to correct errors in the recorded plat or to make an adjustment due to an error created in an isolated instance by construction of a dwelling unit or other building. In such cases, the improvements shall be in compliance with the standards in effect at the time of recording the plat or with any approved variance to such standards. 
e.  Lots abutting public streets: The division is proposed in such a manner that all lots created would abut a public street, and dedication of right of way is neither necessary to service the lots pursuant to this ordinance nor required under the comprehensive plan or other land development regulation of the city, and 
f.  Antiquated subdivisions: The lot or lots were created as part of an antiquated subdivision and the subdivision committee finds that the subdivision substantially complies with the intent, purposes and requirements of this ordinance. In making such determination, the subdivision committee shall consider the following information and any other information it deems appropriate: 
1.  The total area of land encompassed by the antiquated subdivision, 
2.  The number of lots created within the antiquated subdivision, 
3.  The prior and subsequent subdivision of the area encompassed by the antiquated subdivision and whether such subdivision was platted or otherwise surveyed and placed of record, 
4.  The need for dedications or reservations to ensure installation and continued maintenance of the required improvements, 
5.  The extent of deviation from the requirements of this ordinance, 
6.  The extent of ownership fragmentation, including the number of lots sold and the number of lots developed, 
7.  The degree of compliance with other city land development regulations, including but not limited to the comprehensive plan and the development code, 
8.  The number of lots to be created, and 
9.  The extent of development in the surrounding area. 
g.  Recombination for density requirement of comprehensive plan. The recombination or resubdivision is required in order for the new lot or lots to meet the density requirements of the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  Effect of approval . Additionally, the recorded certified survey shall constitute the approved final subdivision plan for the subdivision. When such subdivision is not encompassed by a final subdivision plan approved pursuant to section 1011. The granting of a plat waiver in no manner reduces or waives the requirements of this ordinance to install the required improvements. 
(c)  Exceptions to installation of improvements requirement. If, after review of the preliminary subdivision plan by the subdivision committee, it is determined that all or any of the required improvements meets the requirements of this section, the installation of such required improvement may be waived. The developer shall submit a preliminary subdivision plan in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance together with a statement asserting that the subdivision meets at least one (1) of the following conditions: 
(1)  Unusual conditions are created by ownership or development of adjacent lands, or the land concerned is isolated or removed in its relationship to other platted or improved lands, and the improvements and dedications existing on the land and serving the land are substantially in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance; or 
(2)  The installation of improvements required by this ordinance or by the levels of service in the comprehensive plan is not applicable to the land in that: 
a.  Dedication of right of way or reservation of the street(s) is not necessary to service the lots, and 
b.  It is not necessary to construct any street in order to provide access to the lots, and 
c.  Public utilities, including but not limited to water, sewer, communication services and electricity, are currently and immediately available to the site and exist in substantial compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance. 
(3)  The granting of a waiver to the installation of improvements requirement in no manner reduces or waives the requirement of this ordinance to file a plat. 
(d)  Applications and procedures for waivers. Applications made pursuant to this section shall be made on the form(s) prescribed by the city engineer, which shall include the requirements for preliminary subdivision plans contained in subsections (c)1 and (c)2. 
Sec. 14-409. - Administration of ordinance. 
(a)  (1)  Duties of the city engineer. For the purpose of coordinating, enforcing and administering this ordinance, the city engineer shall be deemed the administrative officer of this ordinance. The responsibilities of the city engineer may be delegated in whole or in part, and he shall employ those persons necessary for the administration and enforcement of this ordinance. The city engineer shall adopt policies and procedures for administering and enforcing the provisions of this ordinance including, but not limited to the setting of fees pursuant to the policies of the board. The city engineer shall serve as chairman of the subdivision committee, as established herein, and may appoint non-voting members to the subdivision committee as he deems necessary. 
(2)  Subdivision committee. There is hereby established a subdivision committee consisting of the members, or their duly authorized representatives, named below. The members of the subdivision committee shall elect a vice-chairman to serve in the event of the chairman's absence. Engineering, environmental, land use, utilities and fire rescue shall be represented as follows: 
a.  Engineering: The city engineer; representatives of the land development, survey and traffic divisions of the engineering department. 
b.  Environmental: The city environmental control officer; the director of the department of environmental resources management; and the director of the public health unit. 
c.  Fire rescue: The chief of City of Pahokee fire rescue. 
d.  Land use: Representatives of the planning, zoning and building divisions; and the director of the parks and recreation department. 
e.  Utilities: The director of the city's water utilities department. 
(3)  Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the subdivision committee shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  Review and act on preliminary and final subdivision plan applications in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance and other applicable land development regulations of the city and state. 
b.  Imposition of conditions to be met by the developer prior to the recordation of the plat or certified survey, or any other time set by the committee, when the committee deems such conditions necessary to ensure compliance with the intent, purpose and/or criteria of this ordinance. The authority to impose conditions shall include, but is not limited to, the right to require deeded rights of way and easements, reservations and other limitations or conditions of use in order to secure the installation of the required improvements and their maintenance as is necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this ordinance. 
c.  Upon request of the city engineer, review written applications to the board of adjustment for variances from the terms of this ordinance and report their findings and recommendations to the city engineer for forwarding to the board of adjustment. 
d.  Review and act on applications for exceptions to this ordinance pursuant to section 14-408. Such authority shall include the power to waive compliance with the procedures of sections 14-412 through 14-416 when the subdivision committee finds that compliance with such procedures is unnecessary due to the following reasons: 
1.  The subdivision committee granted both a plat waiver and a waiver for all required improvements for the property; or 
2.  The subdivision committee granted both a plat waiver and a waiver for some of the required improvements and the remaining improvements will be met by one (1) of the following methods: 
(a)  Contribution of cash; or 
(b)  Construction of the required improvements will occur at the time of building construction and the installation of such improvements can be monitored as part of the building permit process or other City permitting process. Such improvements include, but are not limited to, drainage improvements limited to lot grading, and installation of well and/or septic tank; or 
(c)  A combination of (a) and (b) above. 
(d)  Review any and all restrictive covenants for a subdivision or development which comes before it. 
f.  Require additional information or reviews deemed necessary for its consideration. Such information may include, but is not limited to, written and oral statements with respect to the nature, condition and maintenance responsibility of the streets, stormwater management facilities, or other required improvements, and reviews by other city and state agencies, and any information necessary to assure that the proposal would conform to the comprehensive plan or reduce the degree of non-conformity to the comprehensive plan. 
g.  Upon determining the facts of each application, the subdivision committee shall also determine whether: 
1.  The proposal would be in harmony and compatible with present and future development of the area as contemplated under the comprehensive plan, and 
2.  The proposal makes adequate provisions for public requirements, including but no limited to, safe and convenient traffic and pedestrian circulation, access, stormwater management, utilities, water supply and wastewater disposal. 
(4)  Actions. The subdivision committee may approve an application upon a determination of fact that the proposal would be in harmony and compatible with the present and future development(s) of the area concerned, would be in accordance with the policies, goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan and implements the various development performance standards of the city. 
(5)  Meetings of the subdivision committee. The subdivision committee shall meet on the first and third Wednesday of each month. The subdivision committee meeting shall be open to the public and any person interested in any application before the subdivision committee may attend any such meeting and present any appropriate matter thereat. 
(6)  City attorney duties. The city attorney shall serve as legal counsel and parliamentarian to the subdivision committee. 
(7)  Notice of meeting. Upon official acceptance of the application, the city engineer shall distribute copies to the members of the subdivision committee and the city attorney's office. The developer shall be advised of the time and place of the subdivision committee meeting at which his application will be considered. 
(b)  Applications and fees. 
(1)  Applications. The city engineer shall, as he deems necessary and from time to time, promulgate application forms and procedures for any review, inspection, waiver, exception, permit, and variance procedure set out in or made pursuant to this ordinance and any other law, permit or procedure requiring the review or approval of the city engineer. 
(2)  Fees. The board shall establish a schedule of fees for all publications; applications; advertising; reviews; procedures; and, any other services or processes made pursuant to this ordinance. Any lack of provisions for a fee in any section, paragraph, sentence, or clause shall not be construed as a limitation on the authority of the board to adopt a related fee. Such fee schedule may be adopted by resolution of the city commissioners. 
(3)  Time of payment. All applications for approvals and utilization of the procedures of the city engineer shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount established by the board unless otherwise required by the city engineer. 
Sec. 14-410. - Preliminary subdivision plan procedure. 
(a)  Professional services required. The developer shall retain the services of an engineer or surveyor registered in Florida, to prepare the subdivision plan (preliminary and final) and may employ a land planner, landscape architect, architect and other technical or professional service to assist in the design and layout of the subdivision plan. The subdivision plan shall be coordinated with the major utility suppliers involved with providing services. 
(b)  Purpose of preliminary subdivision plan review. The purpose of the preliminary subdivision plan review is to provide: 
(1)  An optional forum for the review of preliminary subdivision plans and accompanying applications for a proposed subdivision to allow the developer and the subdivision committee the opportunity to consult informally prior to the preparation of the final subdivision plan; and 
(2)  A mandatory forum for reviewing and acting on applications made under section 14-408 for plat waivers and for waivers to the required improvement installation provisions. 
(c)  Application requirements. The developer shall submit a written application for preliminary subdivision plan approval in the form and number prescribed by the city engineer. The application shall contain the information and data described in subsections (c)1 and (c)2. 
(1)  Statement requirement of preliminary subdivision plan. The preliminary subdivision plan application shall include a written statement generally describing the condition of the site and the proposed development of the entire subdivision, including, but not limited to the following information: 
a.  Existing covenants; 
b.  Location of utility facilities; 
c.  Topography; 
d.  General soil characteristics; 
e.  Information describing the subdivision proposal, including but not limited to number of units, typical lot size, public areas, anticipated utility source; and 
f.  Any other information considered pertinent. 
(2)  Drawing requirement of preliminary subdivision plan. The preliminary subdivision plan application shall also include a drawing on a sheet(s) no larger than twenty four (24) inches by thirty six (36) inches, which clearly depicts the following information: 
a.  A vicinity sketch showing the location of the land to be subdivided in reference to other areas of the city; 
b.  Approximate acreage; 
c.  Natural features such as low or swampy areas, streams, lakes or canals; 
d.  Identification and description of adjacent lands; including but not limited to the topography and natural features; 
e.  A written description of the land to be subdivided; 
f.  Name, telephone number and address of the developer; 
g.  Date; 
h.  North arrow; 
i.  Existing and proposed streets within the property to be subdivided; 
j.  General lot and block layout, including typical lot dimensions; 
k.  Layout of all adjoining streets; including but not limited to pavement and right of way widths and median locations. 
l.  Zoning classification and Land Use Plan classification of the tract and adjacent properties; 
m.  Location of existing improvements; and 
n.  Any other significant features. 
(3)  Effect of decisions on applications for optional review of proposed subdivision. In the case of applications for a proposed subdivision for which either a certificate of concurrency reservation or concurrency exemption has been issued, after consultation with the subdivision committee the developer may proceed with the preparation and formal application for approval of the final subdivision plan as required by section 1011 of this ordinance. In the case of applications for a proposed subdivision development for which a conditional certificate of reservation has been issued, the subdivision committee shall make a recommendation on the proposed developer's agreement and direct the city engineer to schedule the agreement for consideration by the board. The city engineer shall schedule the matter for final subdivision plan review by the subdivision committee at the meeting following the scheduled board's meeting in accordance with the application deadline policy of the city engineer. The developer shall be notified of these dates pursuant to subsection (6) Upon approval of the developer's agreement, the developer shall comply with all requirements for the final subdivision plan application contained in section 14-411. 
(4)  Effect of decisions on applications for mandatory review of proposed subdivision. In the case of mandatory applications, the developer shall proceed as follows: 
a.  Applications for exceptions to the platting requirement. Upon approval of an application for plat waiver, the developer shall proceed to construction plan review under section 14-413 unless such requirement has been waived under separate application. Upon denial, the developer shall prepare a final subdivision plan as required by section 14-411 of this ordinance. 
b.  Applications for exceptions to the installation of required improvements criteria. Upon approval of an application for an exception to the installation of improvements requirement, the developer shall proceed to preliminary plat review under section 14-412, unless such requirement has been waived under separate application. Upon denial, the developer shall prepare construction plans and construct the improvements as required by this ordinance. 
c.  In the event the developer simultaneously applied for and received waivers from the platting and required improvement provisions of this ordinance pursuant to section 14-408 and compliance with section 14-412 through section 14-416 have been waived by the subdivision committee pursuant to its power in section 14-409, the developer shall submit to the city engineer the appropriate recordation [fee] and any documents required by the subdivision committee within thirty (30) days of the approval. Failure to comply with the required time shall void the approvals. 
Sec. 14-411. - Final subdivision plan procedure. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 14-405 planned developments, and section 14-408(b), plat waiver; certified survey, the developer of every proposed subdivision shall submit an application for final subdivision plan approval. Such application shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements set forth herein. The application shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Concurrency requirement. In order to be eligible to submit an application for final subdivision plan review, the development shall have obtained the following approvals in accordance with the comprehensive plan and other plan or concurrency related ordinances of the city: 
a.  Certification for density, and 
b.  Certification for consistency with plan and code, and 
c.  A concurrency exemption, or 
d.  Either a certificate of concurrency reservation, or a developer's agreement approved by the board and a conditional concurrency reservation. 
A copy of the above certificates or exemptions shall be attached to and made part of the application. 
(2)  Drawing requirements: The final subdivision plan, shall be on a sheet not larger than 24" X 36", drawn to stated scale not smaller than 1" = 200'. If multiple sheets are necessary to depict the proposed project area in adequate detail, sheets shall be consecutively numbered with the total number of sheets indicated. Match lines shall be provided and clearly labeled to relate drawing segments, and an index map shall be provided relating the location of each sheet to the overall plan. The subdivision plan shall be considered a unified drawing containing all of the following information in pictorial, note, or tabular form as appropriate. 
a.  Name of subdivision or identifying title which shall not duplicate or closely approximate the name of any other subdivision in the incorporated or unincorporated area of the city. 
b.  A vicinity sketch showing the location of the tract in reference to other areas of the city. 
c.  North arrow, graphic scale, written scale and date. 
d.  Name, address, and telephone number of the developer, along with the name and address of the engineer and surveyor responsible for the plan, plat and supporting data. 
e.  The location and names of adjacent subdivisions, if any, and plat book and page reference. 
f.  The tract boundary with bearings and distances along with a written description. 
g.  Existing topographical conditions of the tract and of adjacent lands to a distance of one hundred (100) feet beyond the tract boundary or as otherwise determined by the city engineer to adequately represent the patterns and characteristics or surface water flows into, upon, through and adjacent to the tract. Off-site topography shall extend to the full width of any streets adjacent to the parcel. Elevations shall be shown by contour lines of equal intervals not to exceed one (1) foot. Elevations shall be based on NGVD (1929), and at least one (1) benchmark shall be located and referenced on the plan. All existing water courses, drainage ditches, water bodies, wetlands, excavations, and significant topographical features shall be delineated and identified. 
h.  The location of all existing streets and alleys on or adjacent to the tract including the street name, right of way or tract width, pavement width and established centerline elevations at high and low points. Existing streets shall be dimensioned to the tract boundary. 
i.  The location, purpose and effect on the proposed subdivision of all existing property lines, easements and rights of way. 
j.  The location, purpose, and width of all proposed streets, alleys, rights of way, easements and the proposed layout of the lots and blocks. 
k.  The incorporation and development of affected present and future major streets pursuant to the policies, objectives and goals of the traffic circulation element of the comprehensive plan. 
l.  Street connections within the development and street connections to major streets showing their compliance to the access requirements established by this ordinance. 
m.  All existing South Florida Water Management District or Water Control District facilities and their ultimate right of way requirements as they affect the property to be subdivided. 
n.  General description of subsurface conditions on the property, plus location and results of tests made to ascertain subsurface soil conditions and ground water depth. 
o.  Zoning classification of the tract. 
p.  Utilities such as telephone, power, water, sewer, gas, etc. on or adjacent to the tract including existing or proposed water treatment plants and sewage treatment plants. The subdivision plan shall contain a statement that all utility services are available and have been coordinated with all required utilities. 
q.  Sites proposed for parks, recreational areas, and schools. 
r.  The locations of all temporary structures or permanent structures having a temporary use (collectively, "temporary uses"), including mobile homes or trailers used for pro shops, real estate sales trailers, construction trailers and security trailers or other temporary use. Temporary uses shall comply with subsection 14-403(b)(1) prior to issuance of any permit. 
(3)  Internal traffic circulation study. An internal traffic circulation analysis shall be submitted with each final subdivision plan application. This analysis shall be prepared by a professional engineering using the trip generation rates stated in the Fair Share Contribution for Road Improvement Ordinance 79-7, as amended from time to time, and shall include projected traffic splits for all internal streets. The internal traffic circulation analysis shall be used to determine the classification of streets, the number of lanes, the requirement for traffic lights and other traffic control devices, and the capacity of the street system proposed or affected by the development, as well as the phasing of improvements. 
(4)  Stormwater management plan. A preliminary stormwater management plan outlining the conceptual tertiary and secondary stormwater management facilities proposed for the proper development of the subdivision shall be submitted along with and considered to be part of the final subdivision plan. The preliminary stormwater management plan shall consist of an engineering drawing(s) and a written report including all pre-development information required for the final stormwater management plan pursuant to section 14-415(e) and indicating the proposed method of drainage, estimated design water elevations, one hundred (100) year storm elevation, stormwater treatment and control methods, detention and management areas, and any other information pertaining to the control and management of storm and ground water. In cases where modification or improvements are neither planned nor required for tertiary and secondary facilities, this requirement may be satisfied by so indicating on the final subdivision plan. 
(b)  Resubmittals. A new final subdivision plan application shall be required for more than one (1) resubmittal of a final subdivision plan required by the subdivision committee due to corrections or revisions requested by it, or for any revision by the developer. 
(c)  Effect of decision. During consultation with the developer, the subdivision committee shall inform the developer that the plan and data as submitted do or do not meet the provisions of this ordinance. 
(1)  Application approved. When the subdivision committee finds that the final subdivision plan and required data meet the provisions of this ordinance, the subdivision committee shall sign the final subdivision plan indicating their approval and authorize the developer to proceed with the preparation of the construction plans and preliminary plat as required by this ordinance. The subdivision committee, upon such findings, shall express their actions in writing to the developer within seven (7) days, and return to him a signed copy of the approved final subdivision plan. Approval of the final subdivision plan shall not be effective until signed by the subdivision committee. 
(2)  Application fails. When the subdivision committee finds that the final subdivision plan and required data do not meet the provisions of this ordinance, it shall advise the developer at the time of the meeting what corrections or revisions are necessary to meet the provisions of this ordinance and shall, within seven (7) working days, express the reasons in writing to the developer. Upon such findings, the developer shall make the corrections or revisions and resubmit the final subdivision plan and required data to the office of the city engineer. The subdivision committee shall reschedule the matter for review at the next regularly scheduled meeting in accordance with established submittal deadlines. 
(d)  Major deviations to final subdivision plan. Any change to a final subdivision plan, however approved, which would either increase or decrease the number of units or would, in the opinion of the city engineer, cause a substantial change or revision to the plat and construction plans of any preliminary or final plat under review or approved pursuant to this ordinance shall require a new submittal and fee for such plat and construction plans. Such determination shall deem as void any affected plat and construction plans abandoned and shall void any approvals issued for same pursuant to this ordinance. Such determination shall be in writing and forwarded within ten (10) days to the Developer's Engineer, with a copy to the director of community development if the determination was caused by a change in a final master land use plan or site development plan. 
(e)  Expiration of final subdivision plan approval. Except as provided below, approval of a final subdivision plan shall only be valid for a period of two (2) years from the effective date. Provided, however, that if the developer has commenced development and is continuing development of the subdivision in accordance with such approval and pursuant to the terms of this ordinance, the final subdivision plan shall remain valid for as long as the subsequent approvals are effective. 
(1)  Expiration of final subdivision plans for planned developments. In the case of any planned development which has had it final master land use plan or site development plan, as applicable, approved as the final subdivision plan pursuant to section 14-405, such final subdivision plan shall be valid for the same time period set forth for the final master land use plan or site development plan, as applicable, pursuant to the development code. 
(f)  Extensions of time. If, after review of an application for an extension of time, the subdivision committee finds that the developer could not proceed with platting or construction of the subdivision due to reasons beyond the developer's control, the subdivision committee may grant an extension in accordance with this subsection. Two (2) extensions may be granted for a total period of time not to exceed one (1) year from the original expiration date. Each extension shall only be valid for six (6) months and a new application must be submitted and reviewed for each possible extension. Provided, however, that any greater time granted under the development code for a planned development shall control. 
Sec. 14-412 - Development procedure. 
(a)  General application of development procedure. The procedures and time frames set forth in section 14-413 and section 14-416 ("development procedure") shall apply to all developments required to file a plat, record a certified survey, or construct required improvements under the provisions of this ordinance. 
(b)  Outline of development procedure and required approvals. The development procedure shall be commenced prior to the expiration of the final subdivision plan approval, as established in this ordinance, and all steps in the procedure must be completed within the required time frames in order for the applicable approval to remain valid. 
(1)  After approval of the final subdivision plan the Developer shall apply for technical compliance review. Technical compliance shall be issued prior to recordation of any plat/survey which has been granted a required improvement waiver. 
(2)  After issuance of technical compliance, the developer shall apply for land development permit review which, if approved, results in issuance of a land development permit. Issuance of the land development permit authorizes commencement of construction, which shall be in accordance with the construction procedure and time frames contained in sections 14-415 and 14-416. 
(3)  The next step in the development procedure is recordation of the plat or survey, as applicable. Recordation of the plat or survey authorizes sale of lots. 
Sec. 14-413 - Technical compliance application and review. 
(a)  Technical compliance application submittal. Prior to the expiration of the final subdivision plan approval and prior to the sale of lots and to commencing construction, the developer shall have prepared and shall submit to the city engineer an application for technical compliance review, which shall be accompanied by required fee and the required number as established by the city engineer, of the following documents and information, as applicable to the development: 
(1)  Preliminary plat. The preliminary plat in compliance with the requirements of section 14-431. 
(2)  Certified survey. Developments for which the requirement to plat has been waived pursuant to this ordinance shall submit the certified survey in compliance with the requirements of section 14-432. 
(3)  Construction plans and supplemental engineering reports. Except when the requirement for installation of required improvements has been waived pursuant to section 14-408 of this ordinance, constructions plans for all the required improvements shall be submitted for each subdivision. Construction plans shall comply with the requirements of Section 14-415. 
(4)  Site plan information. Every technical compliance application shall include the following information about the site plan upon which the submittal is based: 
a.  Date of approval by site plan review committee. 
b.  Exhibit number of site plan. 
(b)  Review of the technical compliance submittal. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete submittal, the city engineer shall review the submittal for conformity with this ordinance and shall advise the developer's engineer and developer of his findings in writing. 
(1)  Submittal fails to meet ordinance. When the city engineer determines that the technical compliance application submittal does not meet the provisions of this ordinance, the written statement shall reference the specific article, section and paragraph or policy with which the submittal does not comply. Within sixty (60) days of receipt of the comments letter, the developer's engineer shall make the corrections or revisions as defined in the comments letter and shall resubmit the required documents and information. Failure to resubmit within the required timeframe shall be deemed an abandonment of the submittal and any subsequent submittal shall require a new technical compliance application. 
(2)  Submittal meets ordinance. When the city engineer determines that the technical compliance application submittal meets the provisions of this ordinance, the submittal shall be deemed to technically comply with the provisions of the ordinance and a statement of technical compliance shall be issued. 
(c)  Technical compliance. The statement of technical compliance ("technical compliance") shall be in writing and furnished to the developer and the developer's engineer. The statement shall contain the following conditions and information: 
(1)  The name of the documents reviewed; 
(2)  The amount of surety for the construction of required improvements, established in accordance with subsection 14-414(a)(6)c.1. of this ordinance; 
(3)  The amount of recording fees due for recordation of the final plat or certified survey, which fees are payable to the clerk of the circuit court of Palm Beach County; 
(4)  A requirement to submit with the land development permit application a copy of all applicable property owners' association documents; and 
(5)  Any other conditions deemed necessary by the city engineer, which conditions shall be fulfilled prior to plat or certified survey recordation or completion of the required improvements or at such other time determined by the city engineer. Such conditions shall include, but not be limited to, submittal of supplementary material deemed necessary by the city engineer, such as (but not limited to) deeds, easements, covenants and other recorded documentation for access, drainage, or utility services, which service could not be accomplished through dedications or reservations on the plat. 
(d)  Effect of technical compliance. Approval for technical compliance of the submittal is only an expression of acceptance of the subdivision layout as a guide to the preparation of the final plat and shall not constitute acceptance of the final plat. Technical compliance shall not be construed as authority for filing the plat or certified survey, as applicable, with the clerk of the circuit court of the county, nor as authority for the sale of lots with reference thereto. 
(e)  Expiration of technical compliance. The statement of technical compliance shall expire six (6) months after its date of issuance. Failure to make a land development permit application submission prior to the expiration of the statement of technical compliance shall constitute an abandonment of the technical compliance application submittal and any subsequent submittal shall require a new technical compliance application. 
Sec. 14-414. - Land development permit application and review. 
(a)  Land development permit application submittal. Except when the installation of required improvements has been waived pursuant to section 14-408, the final plat or certified survey, as applicable, shall not be recorded until the developer has either installed the improvements or has guaranteed the installation of the improvements pursuant to the requirements of section 14-415 and 14-416. As the final step in the review procedures to obtain development approval under this ordinance, the developer shall have prepared and shall submit, prior to expiration of the technical compliance, an application for land development permit. the application for land development permit shall be accompanied by the required fee and the required number as determined by the city engineer, of the following documents as applicable to the development: 
(1)  Final plat. Developments which are platting shall submit the final plat complying with section 14-431, and a check for the plat recordation, payable to the clerk of the circuit court of the county, in the required amount. 
(2)  Certified survey. Developments for which the requirement to plat has been waived pursuant to this ordinance shall submit a check payable to the clerk of the circuit court of the county for the recordation of the survey. When construction plans are not required, the certified survey may be recorded without further review, provided, however, that the city engineer shall review any documents submitted in compliance with (3) below. 
(3)  Property owners association and other documents. A copy of the property owners association documents and any other documents required by the city engineer as a condition of technical compliance shall be submitted. The property owners documents shall indicate the maintenance responsibility for improvements within the subdivision. 
(4)  Construction plans and supplemental engineering information. Construction plans shall conform with the plans which received technical compliance or, if modified, shall be accompanied by a written statement of the developer's engineer which details and explains the modifications. Construction plans shall comply with the requirements of section 14-415, and prior to issuance of a land development permit, shall have all applicable approvals of requisite governmental agencies. 
(5)  Certified cost estimate. The developer's engineer shall prepare and submit a certified cost estimate, which shall include the cost of installing all required improvements as required by section 14-432. In the alternative, the city engineer may, at his sole discretion, accept the contract price received by the developer for the construction of the required improvements. 
(6)  Agreements for construction of required improvements. The application shall indicate whether the required improvements are to be constructed prior to recordation or after recordation of the plat or survey, and the applicable agreements shall be attached, as follows: 
a.  When the required improvements are to be constructed after recordation: A bonded agreement for the construction of the required improvements, executed in triplicate, in the form approved pursuant to section 14-460. The agreement shall incorporate and have attached to it the guarantee required by c. below. 
b.  When the required improvements are to be constructed prior to recordation: An agreement for the construction of the required improvements prior to recordation, executed in triplicate, in the form approved pursuant to section 14-460. 
c.  Guarantees on construction of required improvements. All guarantees shall be in one (1) of the forms prescribed in this ordinance or in an alternate form approved pursuant to section 14-460. The guarantee shall be in an amount equal to one hundred ten (110) percent of the construction cost of the required improvements. The guarantee shall be in one (1) of the following types: 
1.  Cash bond: The agreement may be secured by cash deposited by the developer with the city or in an account subject to the control of the city, and an agreement on such deposit or account. The developer shall be entitled to receive any interest earned on such deposit or account. 
2.  Letter of credit: The agreement may be secured by an unconditional and irrevocable letter of credit issued to the city by a State of Florida or United States banking institution, in accordance with city policy. The expiration date of the letter of credit shall be at least three (3) months after the expiration date of the land development permit. 
3.  Performance or surety bond: The agreement may be secured by a performance or surety bond obtained from a company having a best's rating acceptable to the city and guaranteeing that the all work will be completed in full accordance with the approved land development permit. 
4.  Escrow deposit: The agreement may be secured by an executed escrow agreement, between the developer and a bank, approved by the city, and requiring that release of the funds is subject to city approval. 
(b)  The city engineer shall examine the submittal for compliance with this ordinance. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete submittal, the city engineer shall review the submittal for conformity with this ordinance and shall advise the developer's engineer and developer of his findings in writing. 
(1)  Submittal fails to meet ordinance. When deficiencies exist, the city engineer shall reference in writing the specific article, section and paragraph or policy with which the land development permit submittal does not comply. The developer shall correct such deficiencies within thirty (30) days of receipt of the written report. Failure to respond within the given time shall deem the submittal abandoned and any subsequent submittal shall require a new application and submittal for a land development permit. 
(2)  Submittal meets ordinance; land development permit. When the land development permit submittal meets the provisions of this ordinance, the city engineer shall, not later than fifteen (15) days from such determination, schedule on the next available board agenda the agreement for construction of required improvements, the land development permit, and, when applicable, the plat for approval by the board. 
(3)  Land development permit. Except when installation of the required improvements have been waived pursuant to section 14-408 a land development permit shall be required prior to commencement of construction of any required improvement. The effective date of the land development permit shall be the date the board approves the agreement for construction of required improvements. The land development permit shall expire twenty one (21) months from the effective date, unless extended pursuant to section 14-416(b). 
Sec. 14-415. - Construction plans and supplemental engineering information. 
(a)  Duties of developer's engineer. When the development is to be engineered by more than one (1) firm, the developer shall appoint a single engineering firm or state registered professional engineer to coordinate the submission of the construction plans and construction of the required improvements. 
(b)  Submittal requirements. Construction plans and supplemental engineering information shall be submitted under separate cover for each of the categories of improvements listed in this section. 
(1)  Submittals for required improvements. The following construction plans shall be submitted for the required improvements set forth in section. 14-432, when applicable. Construction plans shall be signed and sealed by a state registered professional engineer and shall be submitted in the number required by the city engineer. 
a.  Paving, grading and drainage. 
b.  Bridges: for each required submittal. 
c.  Water and sewer systems: 
1.  For technical compliance submittal: the proposed plans submitted for public health unit approval; 
2.  For land development permit submittal: construction plans stamped for technical compliance and having public health unit approval. 
(2)  Submittals for other improvements. Construction plans shall be submitted for the following additional improvements which the developer may elect to construct: 
a.  Landscaping, guardhouse, gates or other structures within streets: for each submittal, one (1) set for minor streets, and two (2) sets for major streets. 
b.  Landscaping and bulkheads, docks and other structures in water management tracts or lake maintenance easements: See section 14-417(a). 
(3)  Completeness of construction plans. All construction plan submittals shall be so complete that from them a complete review and analysis can be made without research of any outside data. Design data, calculations and analyses shall also be submitted to address important features affecting design and construction and shall include, but not be limited to, those for design high water, drainage facilities of all kinds, subsurface soil data, alternate pavement and subgrade types, and radii at intersections when minimum standards of the department of transportation are inadequate. 
(4)  Format and content of construction plans for required improvements. All construction plan submittals for the installation of required improvements shall consist of and contain, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
a.  A cover sheet, including a vicinity sketch. 
b.  Typical sections. 
c.  Construction details showing compliance with city standards, or with any alternate design approved by the city engineer pursuant to section 14-417(c). 
d.  Special profile sheets, if necessary, showing special or unique situations. 
e.  Bench mark, based on NGVD (1929) datum. 
f.  Special conditions and specifications pertaining to the subdivision in note form on the construction plans, such as, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  Required compliance to this ordinance, including, but not limited to, all notes, information, data and drawings required by the provisions of chapter 2, required improvements. 
2.  Where applicable, required compliance with state standards as currently adopted and in use. 
3.  Minimum standards for materials. 
4.  Test requirements for stabilization, base and backfill. 
5.  Required installation of subsurface construction such as water lines, sewer lines, public utilities, and storm drainage prior to compaction of subgrade for roadway construction. 
g.  When parking areas are required to be constructed by table 14-433-B, they shall be depicted on the construction plans, and the following information shall be clearly indicated: 
1.  Designation of each clustered lot, and 
2.  Designation of each parking area serving more than one clustered lot when such lots do not abut a street. 
(3)  Final stormwater management plan: The technical compliance application shall include the final stormwater management plan, based upon and consistent with the preliminary stormwater management plan, in separate report form detailing the design of all secondary and tertiary stormwater management facilities, including, as a minimum, the following design data and information: 
a.  Pre-development and post-development drainage basin maps showing site topography, drainage basins, catchment areas, and stormwater inflow/outflow locations for the site; 
b.  Pre-development and post-development site characteristics affecting runoff such as ground cover, soil profile, wet season mean high water table elevations and recurring high water elevations in receiving watercourses or waterbodies; 
c.  Individual catchment area characteristics used for design, including area, times-of-concentration, runoff factors, and breakdown of pervious/impervious areas; 
d.  A statement of applicable design and/or performance assumptions and criteria for each part of the system providing drainage, treatment, or discharge control; 
e.  Evidence of existing access to legal positive outfall(s); 
f.  Complete hydrologic and hydraulic calculations for design of storm sewers, retention/detention area, and discharge structures; 
g.  Identification of standard methods and/or proprietary models used for hydrologic and hydraulic analysis, noting that methods or models other than those of the department of transportation, South Florida Water Management District, SCS, the rational method, the SBUH method, the puls method or common modifications of such methods, may require additional documentation; 
h.  A listing of specific city and South Florida Water Management District requirements used as the design basis for street drainage, lot grading, finished floor elevations, floodplain storage compensation, retention/detention volumes, and discharge limits. 
(f)  Soils report. The technical compliance application shall include a soils report describing soil profiles of the work site to such depth and extent necessary to determine special design and/or construction needs. In lieu of items (4) and (5) below, the developer may submit as part of the report a certified statement from a state registered professional engineer that he has investigated the subsurface conditions of the site and has determined that such conditions are suitable for the work as shown on the construction plans. The soils report should include, but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  A map, drawn to stated scale, showing boring, penetrometer, and/or test pit locations; 
(2)  Results of each boring or other soil test, keyed to the map; 
(3)  Soil profiles with horizons described according to the USDA, ASTM, or unified standard soils classified system; 
(4)  Location and extent of muck, hardpan, marl, or other deleterious materials which may require special consideration in design and/or construction; and 
(5)  Groundwater conditions which may require special consideration in design and/or construction. 
Sec. 14-416. - Construction of required improvements. 
(a)  Developer's duty. Upon issuance of the land development permit, the developer shall coordinate the construction with the city engineer. 
(b)  Time of completion of required improvements. All required improvements shall be completed within twenty-one (21) months from the date of issuance of the land development permit. 
(1)  A one (1) year time extension may be granted by the Board upon the recommendation of the city engineer. The developer shall present a written application and statement of justification for extension to the city engineer. 
(2)  Completion prior to recordation. When the developer elected to complete required improvements prior to recording of the final plat or certified survey, the following requirements shall apply: 
a.  The signed, final plat or certified survey, as applicable, shall be recorded upon approval of the document by the city engineer and acknowledgement of completion by the board of the required improvements pursuant to section 14-416(e). 
b.  When the city engineer finds that the final plat or certified survey, as applicable, and completion of the required improvements is in compliance all requirements of this ordinance, he shall, as applicable, either schedule the final plat for the next available board meeting and upon approval, the plat shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the circuit court, or cause the certified survey to be recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court. 
(3)  Completion after recordation. When the developer elected to guarantee the construction of the required improvements in order to complete same after recordation, the following requirements shall apply: 
a.  Reductions in amount: Reductions in the amount of the guarantee may be approved by the board as follows: 
1.  Cash deposit: The developer shall be entitled to secure draws from such deposits or accounts as installations progress at stages of construction established by the city engineer, but not more frequently than monthly. A draw from such cash deposit or account shall be made only when the costs of required improvements installed equal or exceed the amount of the draw requested, plus any previous draws made, and the city engineer has reviewed the required improvements and authorized the draw. The city engineer shall have the right to reduce the amount of any requested draw to an amount justified, based on his review of the required improvements. The city engineer shall also have the right to refuse to approve any requested draw, so long as the developer fails to be in compliance with any of the terms and conditions of the plat or plans and specifications for the required improvements. 
2.  Personal bond with letter of credit: Semiannually during the process of construction and upon request by the developer, the city engineer may recommend to the city commissioners, for their approval, reduction in the dollar amount of the bond on the basis of work completed, provided, however, sufficient funds shall remain to complete the required improvements. 
3.  Surety bond: Semiannually, except during the process of construction and upon request by the developer, the city engineer may recommend to the city commissioners, for their approval, reduction in the dollar amount of the bond on the basis of work completed, provided, however, sufficient funds shall remain to complete the required improvements. 
4.  Escrow deposit: The release of funds from the Escrow shall be upon the written approval of the city, not more than once a month, and upon the recommendation of the city engineer in amounts due for work done to date, based on the percentage completion of the work multiplied by the respective work costs, less ten (10) percent and, further, that upon completion of the work, the city shall approve the release to the developer, on the recommendation of the city engineer, of any remainder to the developer. 
b.  Release of guarantee. The guarantee shall only be released upon acknowledgement of completion of the required improvements made pursuant to section 14-416(e). 
(c)  City use of funds; failure of developer to complete. The city, after thirty (30) days written notice to the developer, with a copy to the agency issuing the guarantee, shall have the right to any funds available under the guarantee to secure satisfactory completion of the required improvements in the event of default by the developer or failure of the developer to complete such improvements within the time required by this ordinance. 
(d)  Administration of construction. 
(1)  Construction standards. Construction standards shall be those prescribed in the current city construction standards and details and those prescribed by the current department of transportation standard specifications for road and bridge construction. 
(2)  Inspections, reports, and stop work orders. The city engineer shall be notified in advance of the date of commencement of construction pursuant to the land development permit, and of such points during the progress of construction for which joint review by the city engineer and developer's engineer are required. 
a.  Construction shall be performed under the surveillance of, and shall at all times be subject to, review by the city engineer; however, this in no way shall relieve the developer of the responsibility for ensuring close field coordination and final compliance with the approved plans, specifications and the requirements of this ordinance. 
b.  The developer shall require progress reports of the construction of the required improvements from the developer's engineer. The developer's engineer may also be required to submit construction progress reports, directly to and at points of progress prescribed by the city engineer. The developer's engineer shall coordinate joint reviews of the construction with the city engineer at points specified by the city engineer. 
c.  The city engineer shall have the right to enter upon the property for the purpose of reviewing the construction of required improvement during the progress of such construction. The city engineer shall have the authority to stop the work upon failure of the developer or his engineer to coordinate the construction of the required improvements as prescribed by this ordinance. 
(3)  Measurements and tests. During construction, the developer's engineer shall make or cause to be made such measurements, field tests and laboratory tests necessary to certify that the work and materials conform with the approved development plans and the provisions of this ordinance. The city engineer may require, at his discretion, specific types and locations of tests and measurements which he deems necessary to demonstrate conformance with approved plans and specifications. 
(4)  Engineer's certificate of completion. The required improvements shall not be considered complete until a certificate of completion and the final project records have been furnished to, reviewed and approved by the city engineer. The certificate shall be signed and sealed by the developer's engineer and shall be in the following substantive form: 
"As a registered engineer in the State of Florida, to the best of my knowledge, information, and belief, it is my professional opinion that the subdivision required improvements for [(Plat Name)] based on field reviews under my responsible charge, have been constructed in substantial accordance with the approved construction plans and the Subdivision and Development Regulations of City of Pahokee, Florida, in effect on the date of plan approval. Attached, as itemized below, are copies of measurements, tests and reports made on the work and materials during the progress of construction, along with a "Record Drawing" copy of each of the construction plans on a high quality, time-stable, reproducible mylar, showing the original design in comparison to the actual finished work with all material deviations noted thereon. In my professional opinion, the deviations, if any, noted will not impair the intended functioning of the required improvement." 
Attachments to this completion statement areas follows: 
(Reports, measurements, tests, reproducible mylars and drawings shall be included.) 
Dated: ____________ 
____________ 
(Developer's Engineer) 
Address: ____________ 
____________ 
Phone: ____________ 
(e)  Acknowledgment of completion and maintenance of required improvements. 
(1)  Workmanship and material agreement. The developer shall execute an agreement guaranteeing the required improvements against defect in workmanship and material for one (1) year after acknowledgment of completion by the city commissioners. Said agreement shall be submitted to the city engineer along with the completion certificate, and project records. 
(2)  Acceptance of dedication and maintenance of improvements. The acceptance of any dedication to the board of public space, parks, rights of way, easements or the like on the plat shall be by resolution of the board and shall not constitute an acceptance of the responsibility to maintain or improve the improvements by the city. Acceptance of the maintenance responsibility for dedications to the city shall be made by resolution of the board. 
a.  Acceptance of dedications. The resolution accepting dedications to the board shall be adopted at the time of approving the recordation of the final plat. 
b.  Acceptance of maintenance by board. The resolution accepting the responsibility to maintain and improve the improvements dedicated and accepted by the board shall be adopted at such time as all improvements meet or exceed the standards set forth by this ordinance. The city engineer upon satisfactory completion and receipt of the agreement shall certify that the developer has complied with all of the provisions of this ordinance and shall recommend to the city commissioners the acceptance of the maintenance of the required improvements. 
c.  City completion of required improvements in recorded subdivisions. The city shall complete the required improvements, under the guarantees provided by the developer, when a plat has been recorded and the developer fails to complete the required improvements as required by this ordinance. In such case, the city commissioners shall direct the city engineer to call upon the guarantees to secure satisfactory completion of the required improvements. Notice of said call shall be deemed upon posting via certified mail. Upon the completion of such action, the city engineer shall report to the board and the board shall accept by resolution the dedication and maintenance responsibility as indicated on the plat. In such cases, the remaining guarantees posted by the developer shall be retained for a period of one (1) year after completion in lieu of the agreement. Any defects occurring during this period shall be repaired using funds remaining in the guarantee. 
d.  Developer's failure to complete improvements in unrecorded subdivisions. Where a developer has elected to install the required improvements prior to recordation of the plat and fails to complete such improvements within the time limitations of this ordinance, all approvals of the subdivision shall be null and void and the land shall revert to its original state. No reference shall be made to the plat with respect to the sale of lots, issuance of building permits, unless and until the plat has been resubmitted with all of the supplementary material and approvals as herein prescribed have been granted. 
Sec. 14-417. - Supplemental procedures. 
(a)  Construction and landscaping in lake maintenance easements and water management tracts. 
(1)  Declaration of intent. It is the purpose of this subsection(a) to allow for the construction or placement of structures and plants adjacent to, or over, water bodies within water management tracts; while, taking measures to ensure that adequate water quality and drainage will exist so as not to constitute a nuisance or be otherwise detrimental to the health, safety, general welfare, or convenience of the general public, or the persons responsible for, or affected by, a water body or water management tract. 
(2)  Special definitions. Except as specifically defined in this subsection (a), all terms and phrases in this subsection (a) shall have the meanings set forth in section 14-402 and, for purposes of this subsection (a), the following terms shall also apply: 
Bulkheads - structures of concrete, wood, or other permanent material affixed to the land adjacent to a water management tract or other water body for the purpose of establishing a vertical surface at the waters edge and stabilizing the land behind the bulkhead. Provided water control structures and endwalls around outfalls and bridges shall not be considered bulkheads. 
Compensatory littoral zone or area - that underwater area within the water management tract or water body graded and planted in accordance with this Section VI as compensating for lost littoral zones from bulkheading or shading from structures over the water. 
Decks, docks, piers - structures of concrete, wood or other permanent material affixed to the land, generally designed for pedestrian travel. 
Lake finger - that portion of a deadend water body which is less than fifty (50) feet in width and longer than one and one-half (1 1/2) times its width, as measured from the point at which the deadend water body is less than fifty (50) feet wide; provided, however, if said described portion of the deadend water body opens up to more than seventy five (75) feet wide and has a surface area of more than seventy-five hundredths (0.75) of an acre between the points at which it is fifty (50) feet wide or greater, said described deadend water body shall not be considered a lake finger if it is within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the lake of at least one (1) acre and one hundred (100) feet wide. 
Landscape architect - an individual regulated by, and in compliance with, F.S. ch. 481, Pt. II. 
Shrub - a self-supporting woody perennial plant more than thirty (30) inches in height at maturity, characterized by multiple stems and branches continuous from the base. It shall not include trees. 
Tree - a self-supporting woody plant of a species normally growing to a mature height of at least fifteen (15) feet in the city. 
(3)  Permit required. The placement or construction of trees, shrubs, or structures within any water management tract established for purposes of wet detention/retention in an open water body, or easement or berm adjacent thereto established for purposes of maintenance of the water body or water management tract or structures and facilities therein, is hereby prohibited, except in strict conformance with the provisions of this subsection (a) 
(4)  Application requirements. Persons desiring to construct bulkheads, docks, piers or other structures within or along water management tracts or within lake maintenance easements, shall apply to the city engineer on the form required by the city engineer. Such application may be pursued independent of other applications, or may be part of an application for technical compliance or land development permit approval pursuant to this ordinance. 
(5)  Authority of city engineer. The city engineer shall apply the standards set forth herein to approve the placement of trees or shrubs or construction or placement of structures within water management tracts or lake maintenance easements. The city engineer shall ensure that adequate conditions are imposed, and appropriate documents are executed and, if appropriate, recorded to ensure compliance with the provisions of this subsection (a) and approvals granted pursuant to this ordinance. 
(6)  Bulkheads. The following criteria shall apply to bulkheads: 
a.  Bulkheads may be constructed only on lakes having a surface area at the controlled water level of one (1) acre or more, and with an average minimum width of one hundred (100) feet lake fingers shall be excluded from the calculation of the lake size and dimensions. 
b.  Bulkheads may not be placed along not more than thirty (30) percent of the perimeter of the lake as measured at the controlled water elevation. The bulkhead shall be constructed along the property line so as to establish building setbacks from the bulkhead. The perimeter and surface area of lake fingers shall not be included in calculating the perimeter and area. Bulkheads shall not be permitted within the lake finger. Bulkheads may be constructed on channels between lakes, provided the compensatory littoral area is located in the adjoining lakes and in close proximity to the bulkheaded channel. No outfalls may be permitted through bulkheads unless the water area adjacent to the bulkhead is at least fifty (50) feet wide. All shorelines of the lake shall be included in establishing the perimeter length. 
c.  The bulkhead shall be designed and constructed in accordance with and pursuant to all applicable laws, statutes, ordinances, codes, rules, regulations, and approvals. All required permits shall be obtained. In the event other requirements are more stringent, those requirements shall prevail. 
d.  Bulkheading shall not be permitted where the subject water body or water management tract is not being comprehensively designed to allow for bulkheading, compensatory littoral zones, and lake maintenance easements, all in accordance with the standards of this subsection 1017.1. If an existing development has a property owners' association, appropriate approvals shall be obtained. 
(7)  Decks, docks, piers. The following criteria shall apply to the construction and maintenance of decks, docks, and piers. 
a.  Decks, docks, piers or other structures shading the water may be placed in, on, or over the water management tract or lake maintenance easement, but shall not, in the aggregate, cover more than one and one-half (1/2) percent of the water surface of the lake at the controlled water level. The perimeter and surface area of lake fingers shall not be included in calculating the perimeter and area. All shorelines of the lake shall be included in establishing the perimeter length. 
b.  Decks, docks, piers or other structures shall not be placed in, on, or over lakes having less than one (1) acre of surface area as measured at the controlled water level. Lake fingers shall be excluded from the calculation of the lake size and dimensions. 
c.  Decks, docks, piers or other structures shall be designed and constructed in accordance with and pursuant to all applicable codes, rules, regulations, and approvals. All required permits shall be obtained. In the event other requirements are more stringent, those requirements shall prevail. 
d.  Decks, docks, and piers shall not be permitted where the subject water body or water management tract is not being comprehensively designed to allow for docks, decks, piers, or other structures, compensatory littoral zones, and lake maintenance easements, all in accordance with the standards of this subsection (a). If an existing development has a property owners' association, appropriate approvals shall be obtained. 
e.  "No Swimming or Diving" signs shall be posted by the property owner. 
(8)  Structures or plantings. This subsection may be utilized for structures and plants that may be easily removed. It shall be utilized to allow the installation of structures in, on, or over lake maintenance easements, water management tracts, or water bodies and which will be removed at the expense of the property owner when necessary to accommodate the use of the lake maintenance easement, water management tract, or water body. The following criteria shall apply to the installation of structures and plantings made pursuant to this section. 
a.  No structures, except as may be easily removed, shall be permitted in the lake maintenance easement. Examples of impermissible structures are houses, garages, concrete block walls, concrete decks, affixed permanent sheds, and pools. Examples of permissible structures are thatch sheds, wood decks, and non-concrete fences. 
b.  Trees or shrubs shall not be planted, nor structures placed, in the lake maintenance easement where the planting or placement of such would obstruct access by equipment to outfalls or water control structures. 
c.  A removal declaration in a form acceptable to the city attorney's office shall be recorded, at the expense of the property owner. 
d.  The property owners' association's consent to the specific structures(s), tree(s), or shrub(s) shall be required where a property owners' association has the lake maintenance responsibility. If any other entity has an interest in the easement or a responsibility for lake maintenance, that entity's consent shall be required. 
e.  Trees or shrubs planted pursuant to this subsection shall be those species permitted in the city landscape code. 
(9)  Compensatory littoral zone. For each lineal foot of bulkhead as measured at the controlled water level sixteen (16) square feet compensatory littoral zone shall be provided in the same lake. For each square foot of surface area covered by a deck, dock, pier, or other similar structure as measured at the controlled water level, two (2) square feet of compensatory littoral area shall be established in the same lake; provided, on lakes of two (2) acres or less, a deck, dock, pier or other similar structure with a total area over the water not exceeding fifteen one hundredths of a percent (0.15) may be permitted without a compensatory littoral zone. On lakes of two (2) acres or more, decks, docks, piers or other similar structures with a total area over the water not exceeding one hundred thirty (130) square feet may be permitted without a compensatory littoral zone. The lineal distance of the littoral area shall be measured at the controlled water level. The maximum depth of the compensatory littoral area measured at the controlled water level shall be no more than two (2) feet. No drainage outfalls shall be placed so as to discharge within compensatory littoral areas. The compensatory littoral area shall be planted with species of plants and in accordance with the design, plans and specifications, and planting method approved by the city engineer. Said planting shall not be done until the construction of all structures within the water management tract and drainage easements associated therewith, and the final grading of the water management tract and the adjacent area draining directly into the water management tract is complete. 
a.  Planting procedure and plans. The approval of the city engineer shall be received prior to planting. Plans shall be submitted to the city engineer at the time of final subdivision plan approval or, if no subdivision master plan approval is required; at the time of the submission of the preliminary plat; or, if none is involved, prior to commencement of construction, regrading, or modification. The plans shall detail the species of plants to be used, the location and dimensions of the compensatory littoral area, the location and dimensions of the structures(s) for which the compensatory littoral area is required, the method of planting and ensuring survival of the plants, and other reasonable matters required by the city engineer. 
b.  Plans. The design and species shall be such that the plants as shown on the plans have an anticipated survival rate of at least eighty (80) percent at the end of one year after plantings. The signator of the plans and specifications shall have a personal familiarity with the site and soil conditions based upon a field review. The plans approved by the city engineer shall be signed and sealed by either: (1) a landscape architect; or (2) other appropriate professional licensed by the department of professional regulation who has a demonstrated expertise in the field of aquatic biology. After review and approval by the city engineer of the plans, the city engineer shall issue a permit. 
c.  List of plants. The city engineer, upon the advice of professionals having expertise in the area of aquatic botany, shall maintain a list of acceptable species of plants for use in compensatory littoral zones, and the percentages of use, the locations of use, and any special circumstances or conditions related to such. The list may be amended for general application as more information becomes available. The list shall be open for public inspection and distribution at the land development division of the city engineer's office. 
d.  Performance security. Upon completion of planting, and concurrently with the submittal of the certifications and as-built set drawing forth in subsections (9)e. and (9)f. the developer shall submit performance security with a term of fifteen (15) months from the date of the planting certification. It shall be in the amount of one hundred (100) percent of the estimated cost of regrading, and replanting, as approved by the city engineer. The form and terms of the performance security shall be approved by the city attorney's office. At a minimum, the performance security shall guarantee at least an eighty (80) percent survival rate at the end of one (1) year after the planting certification, as set forth below, and shall be subject to being levied against by the city engineer if such survival rate has not occurred. It shall be a separate document from that performance security required to ensure construction of other required improvements. 
e.  Planting certification. The individual certifying the plans and specifications as set forth above, or, if not reasonably available, a landscape architect, or other appropriate professional with expertise in the field of aquatic botany and regulated by the department of professional regulation, shall certify to the director of community development, as follows: 
The undersigned personally conducted on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ , a field inspection and reviewed the plans and specifications, and, based upon such inspection and review, the installation of the aquatic plants is substantially in accordance with the code and the plans and specifications. 
f.  Record drawings. Record drawings shall be submitted with the planting certification certifying the configuration of cross sections of the compensatory littoral zone at intervals not greater than fifty (50) feet. 
g.  Six month survivability report. The individual certifying the plans and specifications as set forth above, or, if not reasonably available, a landscape architect, or other appropriate professional with expertise in the field of aquatic botany and regulated by the department of professional regulation, shall submit to the county department of community development a survivability report setting forth the percentage of survival of each species. The report shall be set forth conditions existing at six (6) months after the initial certification. It shall be submitted no later than the seventh (7th) month following the initial certification. 
h.  Inspection to release performance security. Twelve (12) months after the date of the certification set forth in subsection (9)e., above the city department of community development shall, upon the written request of the developer, conduct an inspection to determine if the compensatory littoral zone is in accordance with the plans and specifications and the required survival percentage, as set forth in this subsection (a) has been achieved. The performance security shall be released only after the department of community development has approved the release in writing, or if the department of community development has not responded within thirty (30) days after receipt of the written request for inspection. If no written request for inspection is made to the department of community development within thirteen (13) months after the planting certification set forth below, the performance security shall be drawn upon. If an inspection by the department of community development reveals an unacceptable survival rate, the department of community development shall notify the developer and city engineer, and the performance security shall be drawn upon by the city engineer. Written notice of such shall be sent to the developer from the city engineer. If provisions are made and approved by the city engineer and the department of community development to ensure replanting and survivability in accordance with the specifications of this section, the city engineer need not draw the funds. Upon failure of the developer to comply with the provisions, the city engineer, upon the advice of the department of community development, shall notify the developer and draw upon the performance security. 
i.  Littoral area of record. The compensatory littoral area shall be graphically or verbally identified on the plat or, if the plat is already recorded, by separate instrument to be recorded, and be specifically and separately dedicated to the property owners association as its perpetual maintenance responsibility, without recourse to City of Pahokee or other governmental entity or agency. The plat, or instrument shall provide that the compensatory littoral area shall exist from the edge of the controlled water level, as it changes, to a depth of not more than two (2) feet and with sufficient square footage to comply with the provisions of this Section. The property owners association is hereby deemed to have accepted such maintenance responsibility. The plat, property owners association documents, or other instrument of record shall contain the following statement: 
"It is a punishable violation of City of Pahokee Laws, Ordinances, Codes, Regulations and approvals to alter the approved slopes, contours or cross sections, or to chemically or manually remove, damage, destroy, cut or trim any plants in the compensatory littoral zone in the water management tract except upon the approval of the City of Pahokee Department of Community Development. It is the responsibility of the property owners association to maintain the compensatory littoral zones." 
(10)  Violations, enforcement, penalties. It shall be a violation of this ordinance to alter the approved slopes, contours or cross-sections or to chemically or manually remove, damage, destroy, cut, or trim any plants in the compensatory littoral zones except upon the approval of the city department of community development. 
a.  Said violations shall constitute a violation of the City of Pahokee Environmental Control Act, Chapter 77-616, Special Acts, Laws of Florida, as amended from time to time, and shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions of that Act and of the City of Pahokee Environmental Control Ordinance No. 78-5, as amended. 
(11)  Repair, reconstruction modification. Any repair, reconstruction, or modification, except ordinary maintenance, to the water management tract, lake maintenance easement, compensatory littoral zone, or any planting or structure approved pursuant to this subsection (a), shall be done only after being approved pursuant to this section. 
(b)  Dredge, fill and construction in water of the state. 
(1)  Scope. When a developer designs a subdivision with waterfront property adjacent to existing or proposed waters of the state, including canals, lakes, streams, and wetlands, such subdivision shall comply and conform to the requirements of this subsection (b). 
(2)  Easements or rights-of-way. Where a proposed subdivision is adjacent to existing or proposed waters of the state, there shall be provided a floodway or floodplain easement or a drainage right of way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse or water body and of such further width or construction or both as will be adequate for the purpose. Additional easement or of way width may be required where necessary for maintenance, safety and convenience. Each required easement and right-of-way shall be deeded or dedicated to the public or to the appropriate water control district. Maintenance responsibility and use limitations applicable to said easements and rights of way, or any facilities placed therein, shall be in accordance with all applicable permit conditions and shall be stated or referenced by note on the appropriate plat(s). 
(3)  Design. Where canals, watercourses, lakes, streams, drainage ways or channels are adjacent to or exist upon the property to be subdivided, they shall retain natural characteristics or be so designed and protected that they do not present a hazard to life and safety. Except where bulkheads, retaining walls, or armored revetments are permitted and constructed, access waterways serving the subdivision shall have a side-slope no steeper than 4(H):1(V) from existing ground to a depth of six (6) feet below the annual mean water surface elevation or, in tidal waters, to a depth of two (2) feet below mean low water. 
(4)  Permits. Where proposed dredge or fill or construction affects public property or sovereign land, the construction plans shall be approved by the governing agency having control over public property or sovereign lands. This requirements shall include the board of trustees of the internal improvement fund, corps of engineers, department of natural resources or any other public agency having jurisdiction in such matters. Prior to the construction of any seawalls, bulkheads, dock or pier, a construction permit shall be obtained from the city building department in addition to all required permits or expressed exemption from permitting for construction in waters of the state. 
(5)  Dedication. Where canals, watercourses, lakes, streams, drainage ways or channels are proposed or exist upon the property to be subdivided, they shall be identified, dedicated and maintenance obligations defined on the plat. Where public rights for drainage purposes are proposed within a waterway, the easement shall be dedicated to the public, and the remainder of the waterway shall be dedicated reserved to a property owners' association or reserved for the use of the residents of a subdivision when the subdivision is developed as a condominium or cooperative development as defined by Florida Law, or in lieu of the foregoing, the waterway in its entirety may be dedicated to a legally constituted drainage district. 
(6)  Maintenance. Rights-of-way or easements for canals, watercourses, lakes, streams, channels, or other water management areas shall be dedicated to the public, a drainage control district, or reserved to a property owners' association, homeowners, condominium or cooperative apartment association for the maintenance and operation of said enumerated water management areas. 
(7)  Exceptions. This subsection (b) shall not apply to drainage easements containing subsurface drainage systems or drainage ditches permitted under this ordinance where the width does not exceed sixty (60) feet, nor does it apply to the operation or activities of a governmental water control district. 
(c)  Alternate design, construction standards, and types of materials. Alternate designs, construction standards, and types of materials which, in the opinion of the city engineer, are equal or superior to those specified may be approved in accordance with this subsection. 
(1)  Application requirement. Written application, as promulgated and amended from time to time by the city engineer, for such approval shall be accompanied by written data, calculations and analyses, and drawings which are necessary to show, by accepted engineering principals, that the proposed alternates are equal or superior to those specified or are necessary due to environmental considerations. Within forty-five (45) working days of receipt of such application, the city engineer shall either approve or deny the application and shall advise the developer's engineer and the developer in writing of his determination. 
(2)  Environmental considerations. In the interest of the preservation of existing trees and other natural features at the developer's request, or as required by other regulations, the city engineer may vary the design and construction requirements upon presentation by the developer of substantial evidence that environmental conditions will be enhanced, that proper performance of the approved stormwater management system will not be impaired, and that safety, stability, and design life of structural improvements will not be compromised. 
Secs. 14-418-14-429. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 14-430. - Requirements for the certified survey. 
    The city engineer shall adopt and amend, from time to time, the criteria for the certified survey. At a minimum, the certified survey shall meet the requirements for surveys established by Florida law. 
    Certified survey recordation. The certified survey shall not require approval of the board. 
Sec. 14-431. - Requirements for the preliminary and final plat. 
(a)  Preliminary plat. The preliminary plat shall meet the requirements of the final plat, except that it shall be submitted without the required signatures and seals. It may also be submitted without restrictive covenant documents, condominium documents, deeds or other legal documents not related to the survey or engineering design of the project. 
(b)  Final plat. The final plat shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of F.S. ch. 177, as amended, and shall conform to the requirements of this section. 
(1)  The final plat shall be drawn or printed on twenty-four (24) inch by thirty-six (36) inch linen, chronoflex, mylar or other approved material. 
(2)  The final plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor currently registered in the state and is to be clearly and legibly drawn with black permanent drawing ink or veritype process to a scale of not smaller than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, or as otherwise determined by the city engineer. 
(3)  Name of subdivision: The plat shall have a name acceptable to the city. When the plat is a new subdivision, the name of the subdivision shall not duplicate or be phonetically similar to the name of any existing subdivision. When the plat is an addition to a recorded subdivision, it shall carry the same name as the existing subdivision followed by a suitable phase designation or similar modifier, when applicable. 
(4)  Title: The plat shall have a title printed in bold legible letters containing: 
a.  The name of the subdivision, printed above and in letters larger than the balance of the title; 
b.  The name of the city and state; 
c.  The section, township and range as applicable or if in a land grant, so stated; and 
d.  When the plat is a replat, amendment or addition to an existing plat of record it shall include the words "section, unit, replat, amendment, etc." 
e.  Planned developments. All plats for lands in a planned unit development shall contain as part of the development's name, the phrase "PUD" within the title. Likewise, all other planned developments shall contain the appropriate acronym for such designation within the title. 
(5)  Description: There shall be lettered or printed upon the plat a full and detailed description of the land embraced in the plat. The description shall show the section, township and range in which the lands are situated or if a land grant, so stated, and must be so complete that from it without reference to the map the starting point can be determined and the boundaries run. 
(6)  Index: If more than one sheet is required for the map, the plat shall contain an index sheet on page 1, showing the entire subdivision on sheet indexing the area shown in each succeeding sheet and each sheet shall contain an index delineating that portion of the subdivision shown on that sheet in relation to the entire subdivision. When more than one sheet must be used to accurately portray the lands subdivided, each sheet must show the particular number of that sheet and the total number of sheets included, as well as clearly labeled match lines to each sheet. 
(7)  Survey data: The final plat shall show the length of all arcs together with central angles, radii, and points of curvature. Sufficient survey data shall be shown to positively describe the boundary of each lot, block, right-of-way, street, easement, and all other areas shown on the plat and all areas shall be within the boundary of the plat as shown in the description. The survey data contained on the plat shall also include the following: 
a.  The scale, both stated and graphically illustrated, on each sheet. 
b.  A prominent north arrow shall be drawn on every sheet included showing any portion of the lands subdivided. The bearing or azimuth reference shall be clearly stated on the face of the plat in the notes or legend. 
c.  The point of beginning shall be boldly shown together with the letters P.O.B. in bold letters. 
d.  All intersecting street lines shall be joined by the long chord of a minimum radius of twenty-five (25) feet and all dimensions shall be shown. 
e.  All adjoining property shall be identified by a subdivision title, plat book and page or if unplatted, the land shall be so designated. 
f.  Permanent reference monuments shall be shown in the manner prescribed by F.S. ch. 177, as amended. All information pertaining to the location of "P.R.M.s" shall be indicated in note form on the plat, such as underground installations, etc. Permanent control points and permanent reference monuments shall be designed and set as prescribed by F.S. ch. 177, as amended, and this ordinance. 
g.  There shall be reserved on each sheet of the plat a three (3) inch by five (5) inch space in the upper right-hand corner to be used by the clerk of the circuit court for recording information and each sheet shall reserve three (3) inches on the left margin and a half (1/2) inch margin on all remaining sides. 
h.  The map shall mathematically close within 0.01 feet and shall be accurately tied to all city township, range and section lines occurring within the subdivision by distance and bearing. In addition, the initial point in the description shall be accurately tied to the nearest quarter section corner or section corner or government corner. 
i.  The cover sheet or first page of the plat shall show a vicinity sketch, showing the subdivision's location in reference to other areas of the city. 
(8)  Lot and block identification: Each lot and block shall be numbered or lettered. All lots shall be numbered or lettered by progressive numbers or letters individually throughout the subdivision or progressively numbered or lettered in each block. Blocks in each incremental plat shall be numbered or lettered consecutively throughout a subdivision. 
(9)  Street names: The plat shall contain the name of each street shown on the plat. Proposed streets which are in alignment with other existing and named streets shall bear the same name of the existing street. In no case, except as indicated in the preceding sentence, shall the name of the proposed street, excluding a numerical system, duplicate or be phonetically similar to existing street names, regardless of the use of the suffix street, avenue, boulevard, drive, place, court, etc. 
(10)  Not included parcels: Not included or excepted parcels must be marked "not a part of this plat." Where a not included parcel is completely surrounded by areas included within the plat, sufficient easements or rights of way to provide necessary access, utilities, and drainage to the not included parcel shall be provided. No strip or parcel of land shall be reserved by the owner unless the same is sufficient in size and area to be of some particular use or service. The intended use of all reserved areas shall be shown on the plat in note form on the cover sheet. 
(11)  Streets and easements: All street, right-of-way and easement widths and dimensions shall be shown on the plat. The plat shall show the name, location and width of all existing or recorded streets intersecting or contiguous to the boundary of the plat, accurately tied to the boundary of the plat by bearings and distances. 
(12)  Restrictions, reservations and restrictive covenants: The following actions, circumstances and restrictions shall require the establishment of restrictive covenants and such covenants shall be noted on the plat: 
a.  The establishment, use and maintenance of private streets, parking areas which are required to be shown on the plat, open space, buffer areas and walls, drainage and other easements, water management tracts and other water management areas and common recreation facilities; 
b.  The creation or existence of a property owners association; 
c.  Restrictions pertaining to the type and use of water supply; type and use of sanitary facilities; use and benefits of water areas, canals and other open spaces; odd-shaped and substandard parcels; 
d.  Restrictions controlling building lines; establishment and maintenance of buffer strips and walls; and restrictions of similar nature. Documents pertaining to restrictions regarding land use shall be submitted with the final plat and shall be approved by the city attorney prior to recordation of the plat. 
(13)  All streets and their related facilities which are designed to serve more than one lot or dwelling unit shall be dedicated to the public use, unless otherwise required or permitted by this paragraph or elsewhere in this ordinance. Any street and related facilities which is to be reserved as a private street, as permitted by this ordinance, shall be identified as a tract for street purpose. Such street tracts shall be reserved as the perpetual maintenance responsibility of the named owners or property owners association without recourse to the city or any other public agency. Private Streets may only be permitted when such streets are subject to a recorded declaration of covenants subjecting the streets to the jurisdiction and control of all lot owners deriving access from such streets, their successors and assigns. When parking areas are required to be constructed by section 14-433(b), they shall be reserved to and shall be the perpetual maintenance of a property owners' association, which association shall have jurisdiction over the parking area and the clustered lots. Parking areas and any related facilities shall be clearly identified and reserved as tracts for parking and access purposes. 
(14)  Restriction on use of easements. The plat shall contain a statement that no buildings or any kind of construction or trees or shrubs shall be placed on easements which interferes with the dedicated use of the easement or which do not have the prior written consent of all easement beneficiaries. Prior to issuance of any permit to construct or plant in such easement, a removal agreement, signed by the property owner and witnessed by two witnesses, shall be recorded in the public records of the city. Said removal agreement shall be recorded and run with title to the land and covenant for the current and future owners that the building, structure or plantings, as described therein, shall be removed at the owner's expense when requested by the easement beneficiary or the city. 
(15)  Certification and approvals: The plat shall contain on the face or first page the following certifications and approvals, acknowledged as required by law, all being in the form set forth in this ordinance: 
a.  Dedication and reservation: In addition to the other dedication and reservation requirements of this section, the purpose of all reserved areas shown on the plat shall be defined in the dedication on the plat. All areas reserved for use by the residents of the subdivision shall be so dedicated. All areas dedicated for public use, shall be dedicated by the owner of the land at the time the plat is recorded. Such public areas include, but are not limited to, parks, rights-of-way for streets or alleys, however the same may be designated; easements for utilities, rights-of-way and easements for drainage purposes and any other area, however designated. 
b.  Mortgagee's consent and approval: All mortgages along with the mortgagee's consent and approval of the dedication shall be required on all plats where mortgages encumber the land to be platted. The signature(s) or [of] the mortgagee or mortgagees, as the case may be, must be witnessed and the execution must be acknowledged in the same manner as mortgages are required to be witnessed and acknowledged. In case the mortgagee is a corporation, the consent and approval shall be signed in behalf of the corporation by the president or vice president and the secretary or an assistant secretary, respectively, by and with the authority of the board of directors. 
c.  Certification of surveyor: The final plat shall contain the signature, registration number and official seal of the land surveyor, certifying that the plat is a true and correct representation of the land surveyed under his responsible direction and supervision and that the survey data compiled and shown on the plat complies with all of the requirements of F.S. ch. 177, as amended, and this ordinance. The certification shall also state that permanent reference monuments, "P.R.M.", have been set in compliance with F.S. ch. 177, as amended, and this ordinance. When the permanent control points, "P.C.P.'s", are to be installed after recordation, the certification shall also state that the P.C.P.'s will be set under the direction and supervision of the surveyor within one (1) year from the date the plat was recorded. When required improvements have been completed prior to the recording of a plat, the certification shall state that P.C.P.'s have been set in compliance with the laws of the state and ordinances of the city. 
d.  Board approval: The plat shall contain the approval and signature block for the city commissioners and the acknowledgement and signature block of the clerk of the circuit court. Upon adoption of a resolution approving the plat, the chairman of the board shall execute the plat and the plat shall be presented to the clerk of the circuit court by the city engineer for recording. 
e.  City engineer: The plat shall contain the approval and signature block of the city engineer. 
f.  Certification of title: The face or first page of the plat shall contain a title certification. The title certification must be an opinion of an attorney-at-law licensed in Florida, or the certification of an abstractor or a title insurance company licensed in Florida, and shall state: 
1.  That the lands as described and shown on the plat are in the name, and apparent record title is held by the person, persons or organizations executing the dedication; 
2.  That all taxes have been paid on said lands as required by F.S. ch. 177, Pt I, as amended; and 
3.  All mortgages on the land and indicate their official record book and page number. 
g.  Instrument prepared BY: The name and address of the natural person who prepared the plat shall be contained on the plat as required by F.S. § 695.24, as amended. The name and address shall be in statement form consisting of the following words: 
This instrument was prepared by 
____________ 
 (name) 
____________ 
 (address) 
(c)  Special requirements for mobile home, recreational vehicle, and manufactured housing subdivisions: Areas to be subdivided for the purpose of a mobile home, recreational vehicle or manufacture housing development shall also comply with this subsection. Except as to the lots indicated for other purposes, the dedications and reservations on the plat of a mobile home subdivision shall include the following additional provisions or wording equal thereto: "Said owner(s) hereby reserve(s) the lots shown on the plat exclusively for (mobile home, recreational vehicle, or manufactured housing), parking and uses incidental thereto, and, except as to these lots, mobile home or trailer parking is prohibited elsewhere." Areas indicated as parks or playgrounds are to be reserved for the use of the owners of the lots shown on the plat. 
Sec. 14-432. - Required improvements. 
(a)  Minimum required improvements for all developments. Except when waived pursuant to section 14-408, the improvements set out herein shall be the minimum required improvements for all development in order to provide the physical improvements necessary to implement certain performance standards, objectives and policies of the capital improvements element and other elements of the comprehensive plan. These required improvements shall be installed prior to recordation of the plat or certified survey unless the developer furnishes a guarantee assuring their installation in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. Except as provided in this section, the cost of all required improvements shall be guaranteed. 
(1)  Access and circulation systems: All streets and required sidewalks, and, when required under section 14-433(a)(2)a., parking areas shall be constructed by the developer in accordance with the design and construction requirements of section 14-433. The guarantee for these requirements shall be as follows: 
a.  The cost of installing all street improvements shall be guaranteed. 
b.  The cost of installing parking areas need not be guaranteed since the plat establishes legal access and such areas are required to be installed prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
c.  Except as provided in this paragraph, the cost of installing the sidewalks and paths pursuant to the approved pedestrian circulation system shall be guaranteed. The required guarantee may be waived by the city engineer when the paving, grading and drainage plans contain a note, acceptable to the city engineer, stating that such sidewalks or paths will be constructed concurrent with construction of the dwelling unit for such abutting lot. Installation of sidewalks and paths in streets abutting open space, common areas, recreation areas, water management tracts, and other areas which will not have a dwelling unit constructed thereon shall be guaranteed. 
(2)  Land preparation: The developer shall grade and fill the land pursuant to section 14-434. 
(3)  Stormwater management system: The developer shall install the secondary and tertiary systems for the development in accordance with section 14-435. Provided, however, that in subdivisions where the lot is intended for building construction, the final grading of lots, consistent with section 14-435 or any approved grading plan, shall be done in conjunction with unit construction. 
(4)  Wastewater system: The developer shall install the required wastewater system for the development in accordance with section 14-437. 
(5)  Potable water system: The developer shall install the required potable water system for the development in accordance with section 14-438. 
(6)  Parks and recreation: The developer shall satisfy the requirements of section 14-436(b)(1). Only the installation of on-site recreation improvements shall be guaranteed, unless otherwise required by the city engineer. 
(7)  Utilities: The developer shall satisfy the requirements for underground installation of water and sewer services and for utility site location, when applicable, of section 14-439. 
(8)  Fire rescue services: The developer shall comply with the requirements of section 14-440. The cost of installing the required hydrants may be included in the cost for the central water system. 
(9)  Subdivision design and survey requirements: Except when not required for a certified survey, the developer shall install the permanent control points in accordance with section 14-440(d). When the permanent control points are to be installed after recordation, the cost of installing permanent control points shall be guaranteed. 
(b)  General design requirements. The design of the required improvements shall be in accordance with acceptable engineering principles. The design of required improvements shall be accomplished in such a manner that they shall be equal to or exceed current city standards and those contained in this ordinance. Should the developer elect to provide improvements in excess of the minimum requirements, such improvements shall be considered on an individual basis. All such alternatives shall be submitted for approval by the city engineer in accordance with section 14-417(c). 
Sec. 14-433. - Access and circulation systems. 
(a)  Vehicular circulation systems. 
(1)  Required improvement to be constructed by developer. All streets, required alleys and related facilities required to serve the proposed development shall be constructed by the developer. The construction shall consist of, but not be limited to, street grading, base preparation, surface course and drainage. All streets, whether intended for public dedication or private reservation and use, shall be constructed to the minimum standards established by this ordinance and the city standards. Additionally, the developer shall construct any parking area within a development which provides access to clustered lots that do not have a front property line in common with a street. Construction of such parking areas shall be completed prior to issuance of any certificate of occupancy for any dwelling unit located on a clustered lot served by such parking area. Construction of the parking area may be done in conjunction with building construction on the lot the area is to serve. When such construction is to be done, the paving, grading and drainage plans shall be noted in a form acceptable to the city engineer. When the parking area is to be completed upon building construction, prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy for any dwelling unit or building served by such parking area, the developer shall execute a certificate of compliance on a form approved by the building department. Such certificate shall state that the parking area was completed in accordance with the requirements of section 500.17 of the development code. 
(2)  Minimum access requirement. There is hereby established a hierarchy of access. Except when a lot is permitted by the unified development code to have its front line abutting or coincide with the line of a parking area or parking lot, each proposed LOT shall abut a means of vehicular access meeting or exceeding the minimum requirement set forth in Chart 1 14-433-A Chart of Access Hierarchy. 
a.  Parking areas: When access to a lot is permitted by the unified development code to be by a parking area, such parking area shall meet the requirements for off-street parking of the unified development code. When a parking area serves more than one (1) lot, it shall be dimensioned and depicted on the construction plans and reserved on the plat as a "parking tract" or "access tract." Said tract shall be reserved for parking and access purposes to the property owners association having jurisdiction over the parking area and the abutting lots. 
b.  Driveways: When access to a lot is permitted by the development code to be by a driveway, such driveway shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in length except when approved by the city engineer. The city engineer may waive the length requirement if the driveway serves more than one (1) dwelling unit but not more than four (4) dwelling units and there exist unusual circumstances, including, but not limited to, topography, rural nature of use, lot size, and designation of the abutting lots as clustered lot, which, in the opinion of the city engineer, warrants the granting of an exception. 
(3)  General design considerations. The proposed street layout shall be integrated with the city's traffic circulation network, and shall be coordinated with the street system of the surrounding area. Streets shall be classified and designed in accordance with the traffic circulation element of the comprehensive plan and Chart 1 14-433-B, minor streets, consideration shall be given to: 
a.  Existing and planned streets; 
b.  Relation to topographical conditions, to public convenience, safety; 
c.  Relation to the proposed use of the land to be served by such streets; 
d.  The continuation of existing streets in adjoining areas not subdivided; 
e.  The proper projection of non-plan collector and plan collector streets; 
f.  Carrying the proposed street system to the boundary of the tract proposed to be subdivided to promote reasonable development of adjacent lands and to provide continuity of street systems; and 
g.  Discouraging through traffic in the design of local and residential access streets. 
(4)  Double frontage lots: Where a lot has two frontage lines, the frontage line shall be determined as follows: 
a.  Residential lots: When one (1) line is adjacent to a non-plan collector street, or a major street, the frontage line for said lot shall be on a local street or street of a lower classification. The rear line of a lot adjacent to major street shall be buffered in accordance with the provisions of section 14-441(b). 
b.  Non-residential lots: The line adjacent to or shared with the street of the lowest classification shall be the front line unless otherwise permitted by the development code. 
(5)  Construction in muck or clay areas. Construction in muck or clay areas shall be done in accordance with the city standards. 
(6)  Street connections (intersections) and, street jogs. Local street and residential access street connections to non-plan or plan collector streets shall be spaced a minimum distance of two hundred (200) feet, centerline to centerline. Intersections which warrant traffic signalization shall be spaced a minimum distance of one thousand three hundred (1,300) feet, centerline to centerline. Connection of local streets or residential access streets to arterial streets may be permitted by the city engineer only where other access is unavailable. Local street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet are prohibited. 
(7)  Through and local traffic. Through traffic shall be directed along non-plan collector streets within the subdivision. Local streets shall be laid out to accommodate local or neighborhood traffic and to discourage their use by through traffic. 
(8)  Marginal access streets. Except as permitted by the city engineer, marginal access streets shall be designed and constructed to provide access to property abutting any major street in order to control access to major streets in the traffic circulation network and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
(9)  Railroads in or abutting subdivisions. When a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right of way, a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right of way may be required at a distance suitable for an appropriate use of the intervening land. 
(10)  Alleys. Alleys may be required in subdivisions when they are necessary, in the opinion of the city engineer, to the subdivision for the safe and convenient movement of traffic and pedestrians. Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided and alleys shall be constructed in accordance with the following criteria: 
a.  Residential areas: Alleys shall be paved ten (10) feet wide in a minimum twelve (12) foot right of way, with appropriate radii for the intended use. 
b.  Commercial and industrial areas: Eighteen (18) feet wide in a minimum twenty (20) foot right-of-way, with appropriate radii for the use intended. 
(11)  Bridges and culverts. Bridges or culverts shall be provided as necessary to facilitate the proposed vehicle and pedestrian system. The bridge or culvert requirement is subject to the agency having jurisdiction over the facilities or as required by the proposed street layout of the development in conjunction with a proposed waterway. Bridges shall be designed in general accord with the current department of transportation practices and shall include planning for utility installation. They shall be reinforced concrete, however, other low maintenance materials may be used upon request and approval, having a clear roadway width between curbs two (2) feet in excess of the pavement width in each direction and shall provide four (4) foot wide sidewalks on each side. All bridge structures shall be designed for H-20-S16-44 loading, incorporating adequate erosion protection. 
(12)  Street markers. Street markers shall be provided at each intersection in the type, size and location required by the current city standards. Street name signs shall carry the street name shown on the plat of record and shall be in compliance with the current city standards. 
(13)  Traffic control devices. The developer shall install traffic control devices, including but not limited to, traffic lights on roads within and interfacing with the subdivision. A traffic impact analysis meeting the approval of the city engineer shall determine the traffic light requirements. 
a.  Pavement or lane delineators. Pavement or lane delineators meeting the requirements of Palm Beach City shall be installed on all arterial streets. Upon approval by the city engineer of sufficient lighting, pavement or lane delineators shall not be required. 
b.  The design of traffic control devices shall be in accordance with state standards, specifically, the Manual for Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
c.  Pavement widths. Pavement widths for streets, whether the street is dedicated as right of way or as a tract for street or access purposes, shall be in accordance with [Chart] 14-433-B. 
(15)  Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets of a permanent nature shall be prohibited except when designed and constructed as a cul de sac in accordance with the city standards. Dead-end streets shall not exceed one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet in length except where natural geographic barriers exist necessitating a greater length. 
(16)  Materials and construction. Pavement construction shall consist of, at a minimum, a subgrade, base and wearing surface. All materials and construction shall be in accordance with the current city standards. 
(17)  Stabilized shoulders. On all streets with a width of fifty (50) feet or more, stabilized shoulders shall be provided for distress lanes unless non-mountable curbing or paved lanes are provided. Sod, when required, shall be installed prior to acceptance of the required improvements. No time extensions to any contract for the construction of required improvement will be granted on the basis of incomplete stabilized shoulders. 
(18)  Street grades. Street grades shall be determined in relation to the drainage installations for the subdivision and shall be in accordance with city standards. Street grades shall be shown on the construction plans indicating the direction, percent of fall and a centerline lineal distance between control points. 
(19)  Non-conforming streets. Streets which cannot meet the design and constructions standards of this ordinance or the city standards shall not be permitted except where satisfactory assurance for dedication of the remaining part of the street or reconstruction of the street in accordance with current criteria is provided. Whenever a tract to be subdivided abuts an existing half or partial street, the other part of the street may be required to be dedicated and constructed within such tract. A proposed subdivision that adjoins or includes an existing street which does not conform to the minimum street width requirements of these regulations shall provide for the dedication of additional land for such street along either one (1) or both sides of said street so that the minimum right of way requirements of these regulations can be established. The city shall not accept non-conforming streets for ownership or maintenance pursuant to this ordinance. 
a.  Acceptance of non-conforming streets. The city shall not accept dedication of, title to or responsibility for maintenance of any street not conforming to the street width, pavement width and construction standards required by this ordinance or the city standards in effect at the time of the original construction of the street, unless the person(s) seeking such transfer of ownership or maintenance responsibility makes the street conform or provides assurances, in a form acceptable to the city attorney, that the expense of making such street conforming will not be borne by the general taxpayers. Acceptable forms of assurances include, but are not limited to, special taxing districts and performance bonds. 
(20)  Limited access easements. Limited access easements shall be required along all non-plan collector streets and all major streets in order to control access to such streets from abutting property. Easements for controlling access to local and residential access streets may be required by the city engineer in order to ensure continued control of access to such streets from abutting property. All limited access easements shall be conveyed or dedicated to the city. 
(21)  Street names. Proposed streets which are in alignment with other existing and named streets should bear the same name of the existing street. All street names shall have a suffix and in no case, except as indicated in the preceding sentence, shall the name of the proposed street duplicate or be phonetically similar to existing street names regardless of the use of the suffix street, avenue, boulevard, drive, place, court, etc. Department of Community Development shall administer this section. 
(22)  Alignment, tangent, deflection, radii. Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two (2) streets shall be prohibited. The point of curvature of any local street shall not be closer than one hundred (100) feet to a curve at any intersection measured along the centerline from the extension of the intersecting street lines. All intersections shall be designed to provide adequate stopping and sight distance in accordance with the current edition of the Green Book. When the centerline of a local street deflects by more than ten (10) degrees, it shall be curved with a radius adequate to assure safe sight distance and driver comfort. Property lines at street intersections shall be the long chord of a twenty-five (25) foot or greater radius and street pavement return radii shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet. 
(23)  Street lighting. If street lighting is installed it shall be maintained by a property owners' association and said association should not be created exclusively for the purpose of maintaining street lighting. Unless street lighting installation conforms to the standards of the requisite utility company, street lights shall be placed outside of rights of way, road tracts, or any other areas designated for road purposes. Streets lighting shall be wired for underground service except where aerial service is permitted pursuant to section 14-439. 
(24)  Median strips. Median strips which are part of a right of way may not be utilized for any purpose other than by the city or public utility. However a developer or property owner may install landscaping in a median strip or within shoulders in accordance with the unified development code and pursuant to any permitting requirements of the city engineer. 
(25)  Subdivision entranceways. Subdivision entranceways consisting of walls, fences, gates, rock piles or other entrance features are not permitted within the median strip or other areas in a public street. Decorative entranceways must be constructed upon plots of land adjacent to a public street in compliance with applicable city codes and placed so as not to constitute a traffic hazard. 
(26)  Guardhouses. A guardhouse, located so as not to create a traffic hazard, may be constructed in the median of an entrance to a subdivision having private streets. The minimum setback to a guardhouse shall be one hundred fifty (150) feet, measured from the extension of the intersecting street lines, unless waived by the city engineer. Two (2) lanes shall be required on each side of the median in the area of the guardhouse. 
14-433-A 
CHART OF ACCESS HIERARCHY 
Major streets: Streets which constitute the traffic circulation network as contemplated under the comprehensive plan. Listed from highest to lowest category. 
Expressway 
Arterial 
Plan Collector 
Minor streets: Streets which constitute the internal circulation network of a development and which are not classified as a major street. Listed from highest to lowest category. 
Non-Plan Collector 
Marginal Access 
Local streets: 
  Standard Local 
Residential Access: 
40 FOOT 
32 FOOT 
Alley (secondary access only) 
14-433-B 
CHART OF MINOR STREETS 
CLASSIFICATION MIN. 
STREET WIDTHS 
PAVEMENT MAX. ADT DIRECT ACCESS 
PERMITTED TO 
CMRL. RES. NON-PLAN COLLECTOR 80 24 13,100 y n MARGINAL ACCESS 50 24 N/A y y LOCAL:*   RESIDENTIAL 50 20 1,500 n y   COMMERCIAL 80 20 1,500 y y RESIDENTIAL ACCESS* 40 20 800 n l 32 20 150 n l  
l = limited to clustered lots only. 
*Exceptions: The following are exceptions to or excluded from the above requirements: 
(1)  Streets within rural subdivision shall be a minimum of sixty (60) feet when the are to be unpaved. 
(2)  Residential lots permitted by the unified development code to abut a parking area or parking lot are excluded. 
(3)  Commercial and industrial lots permitted by the unified development code to abut a parking area or parking lot are excluded. 
Other restrictions: 
(1)  Dead end length of all classifications limited to one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
(2)  Pavement width does not include any required paved shoulder width. 
(b)  Pedestrian circulation system. 
(1)  Requirement for sidewalks. Except as provided in this section, sidewalks shall be constructed on both sides of all streets. For marginal access streets and streets with a width of less than 50 feet and greater than thirty-two (32) feet a sidewalk on one (1) side is required, and no sidewalk is required in streets with a width less than thirty-two (32) feet. Required sidewalks shall be constructed by the developer except as provided in paragraph (2) below. 
(2)  Master pedestrian circulation plan; waiver of requirement. The subdivision committee may approve a master pedestrian circulation plan and, upon such approval, may waive, in whole or in part, the requirement for sidewalks within a plat when it finds that the pedestrian circulation system meets or exceeds the continuity and safety of the pedestrian system which would be provided by the required sidewalks. The master pedestrian circulation plan shall be for all property encompassed by the final subdivision plan. 
a.  Requirements for master pedestrian circulation plan: The developer may apply to the subdivision committee for waiver of one (1) or more required sidewalks within a subdivision. An application, the required fee and the required number of copies of a master pedestrian circulation plan shall be filed with the city engineer for placement on the agenda of the subdivision committee. The master pedestrian circulation plan shall be a reproducible copy of the approved final subdivision plan and shall not be of a size smaller than the approved final subdivision plan. The plan shall be modified, when necessary, to include the following information: 
1.  The number and type of dwelling units, and the location of all lots. 
2.  The classification and dimension of all streets. 
3.  The location, dimension and type of all paths, including sidewalks to be contained in the street lines and bicycle paths. 
4.  Location of connections to pedestrian systems outside the development. 
b.  Upon approval of a master pedestrian circulation plan, a copy of the approved plan shall be forwarded to the zoning department, building department and metropolitan planning organization. 
(3)  Maintenance responsibility of sidewalks and paths. The control, jurisdiction and maintenance obligation of paths not located within the street and of sidewalks within private streets shall be placed in a property owners association or an improvement district which shall agree upon the plat or by a separate instrument filed in the public records to accept such obligation. 
(4)  Reduction of street width. When pedestrian circulation is to be accomplished solely by paths, the subdivision committee may reduce the street widths required by this ordinance or the city standards by no more than eight (8) feet if such reduction would not reduce the street's carrying capacity, and safety nor compromise the safety of pedestrians. 
(5)  Crosswalks. When the block length exceeds nine hundred (900) feet, crosswalks between streets may be required where deemed essential by the city engineer to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities. 
Sec. 14-434. - Clearing, earthwork, and grading. 
(a)  Minimum required improvement. The developer shall be required to clear all rights of way and to make all grades for streets, alleys, lots and other areas, compatible with on-site tertiary drainage patterns established by the approved drainage design. 
(b)  Replacement of unsuitable materials within the streets and proposed public areas shall be satisfactory to and meet with the approval of the city engineer, who shall require soil tests of the backfill and the underlying strata at the cost of the developer to certify the extent of removal, type of replacement material and method of placement. 
Sec. 14-435. - Stormwater management. 
(a)  Minimum required improvement. The following shall be the minimum required improvement for all developments to implement the level of service under the drainage subelement and capital improvements elements of the comprehensive plan. 
(1)  A complete, fully functional tertiary drainage system, including necessary lot grading, ditches, canals, swales, storm sewers, drain inlets, manholes, headwalls, endwalls, culverts, and other appurtenances, shall be required in all subdivisions for the positive drainage of storm water runoff in conformance with the approved drainage plans. 
(2)  A complete and fully functional secondary system shall be required in all subdivisions in conformance with the approved stormwater management plan. 
(3)  A means to convey all stormwater discharge from the development site to at least one (1) point of legal positive outfall shall be provided as an integral part of the required stormwater management system, including construction of all necessary conveyance facilities and establishment of appropriate easements for operation and maintenance of said off-site facilities. 
(4)  Adequate physical and legal means shall be provided to ensure the continued conveyance of all pre-development flow of surface waters into or through the development site from adjacent lands. Unless otherwise specified by ordinance, regulation, or condition of development approval, such conveyance may be accomplished by incorporating the inflow into the on-site stormwater management system or diverting the inflow to its pre-development location of outflow from the development site, including construction of all necessary conveyance facilities and establishment of appropriate easements to accommodate said inflow. 
(5)  All temporary and/or permanent facilities necessary to meet requirements for stormwater treatment, off-site discharge control, and conveyance of existing inflows applicable to that portion of the site under construction must be in place and operational at the time of commencement of construction, and shall be maintained by the developer until such time that all required improvements are acknowledged as complete. 
(b)  General criteria. Secondary and tertiary drainage facilities for each subdivision, and for each lot, street, and other development site within the subdivision, shall be designed and constructed so as to: 
(1)  Prevent flooding and inundation to a degree consistent with levels of protection adopted by the comprehensive plan for buildings, streets, lots, parking areas, recreational areas, and open space; 
(2)  Maintain stormwater runoff rates at levels compatible with safe conveyance and/or storage capacities of drainage facilities and established legal limits applicable to receiving waters at the point of discharge; 
(3)  Mitigate degradation of water quality and contravention of applicable state water quality standards in surface and groundwaters receiving stormwater runoff; 
(4)  Provide facilities for conveyance to legal positive outfall of all allowable discharges of stormwater runoff from each development site without causing or contributing to inundation of adjacent lands; 
(5)  Provide for continued conveyance of pre-development stormwater runoff and surface waters that flow into or through the development site from adjacent lands; 
(6)  Provide for long-term, low maintenance, low cost operation by normal operating and maintenance methods; 
(7)  Provide for necessary maintenance of the pre-development range of groundwater levels to prevent adverse impacts on land uses and water resources of the development site and adjacent lands; and 
(8)  Promote percolation, recharge, and reuse of stormwater. 
(c)  Hydrologic design data. Unless otherwise specified by a particular design or performance standard, hydraulic and hydrologic data used in design of stormwater management facilities shall be based on: 
(1)  Rainfall intensity-duration-frequency curves for FDOT-Zone 10; 
(2)  Rainfall hyetographs of twenty-four (24) hour total rainfall as published in South Florida Water Management District - Management and Storage of Surface Waters Permit Information Manual - Volume IV; 
(3)  Rainfall quantity (or intensity) vs. time distributions in accordance with those published by SFWMD, or FDOT, or the SCS - Type II (South Florida Modified) distribution; 
(4)  Post-development runoff characteristics, such as slopes, available soil storage, runoff coefficients, ground cover, channelization, and overland flow routing, applicable to the development site and contributory off-site areas after complete development has occurred; 
(5)  Maximum operating tailwater elevations at the outlet of each conveyance or discharge facility, determined as the peak receiving water surface elevation resulting from a twenty-four (24) hour duration rainfall with a return period equal to that of the design storm applicable to the facility, or as otherwise established by the agency having operational jurisdiction over the receiving water elevation. 
(d)  Design flood elevation determination. Unless otherwise specified by a particular design or performance standard, the 100-year flood elevation applicable to a development site shall be determined as the highest of: 
(1)  The base flood elevation specified for the area of development located within zones designated A, AH, or A1-30 as delineated on the appropriate federal flood insurance rate map (FIRM); 
(2)  The wind or current driven wave elevation specified for the area of development located within zones designated V1-V30 as delineated on the appropriate FIRM; 
(3)  The inundation elevation obtained by adding the depth of shallow flooding to the area-weighted mean pre-development elevation of the area of development located within zones designated AO as delineated on the appropriate FIRM; 
(4)  The 100-year inundation elevation established by SFWMD within specific sub-areas of the C-51 Canal and C-18 Canal watersheds pursuant to Chapter 40E-41, F.A.C.; or 
(5)  Where not otherwise established by Chapter 40E-41, F.A.C., or by a city drainage plan adopted pursuant to the comprehensive plan, the maximum inundation elevation resulting from the total on-site storage of runoff produced by the 100-year, three-day rainfall event assuming fully developed site conditions and no discharge of surface water from the development site. 
(e)  Tertiary system design and performance. The tertiary system shall consist of all drainage features and facilities such as storm sewerage, swales, gutters, culverts, ditches, erosion protection, and site grading necessary for the immediate drainage and rapid removal of stormwater from building sites, streets, and areas of other land uses subject to damage or disruption by inundation in accordance with acceptable levels of service as established by the comprehensive plan. 
(1)  In order to provide for such levels of service, tertiary drainage for buildings and lots shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
a.  The minimum finished floor elevation of the principal building(s) to be constructed on a lot or portion thereof shall be at or above the 100-year flood elevation applicable to the building site. 
b.  Site grading immediately adjacent to the perimeter of each building shall be sloped so as to drain away from the structure. 
c.  Each single family residential lot shall be graded to drain along or within its property lines to the street or parking area providing immediate access, unless adequate common drainage facilities in expressed drainage easements with an established maintenance entity are provided to accommodate alternative drainage grading. 
d.  Each residential lot with gross area of one-quarter (1/4) acre or less shall have a finished grade not lower than the maximum water surface elevation produced by the three (3) year, twenty-four (24) hour rainfall event in any detention or retention facility receiving stormwater runoff from the lot. 
e.  Each residential lot with a gross area greater than one-quarter (1/4) acre shall have a finished grade as in paragraph d. above within twenty (20) feet of any principal building site. The remainder of the lot shall be graded at sufficient elevation to ensure that inundation does not persist for more than eight (8) hours following cessation of the three (3) year, twenty-four (24) hour rainfall event, unless such area is designated for stormwater management purposes and included in an expressed easement for drainage, floodplain, or the like. 
(2)  Local street drainage. Local streets shall have tertiary drainage meeting or exceeding the following minimum requirements: 
a.  The minimum edge of pavement elevation of any street segment shall be no lower than two (2) feet above the control elevation of any detention or retention facility receiving runoff from that segment. 
b.  Roadside swales shall conform to applicable City standards and shall be designed and constructed such that: 
1.  The flowline gradient is at least thirty hundredths (0.30) percent, but not greater than two and one-half (2.5) percent unless approved erosion protection is provided; 
2.  The flowline gradient is equal to or slightly exceeds the longitudinal gradient of adjacent pavement; 
3.  The water surface elevation of swale flow resulting from peak runoff based on the three (3) year rainfall event shall remain below the adjacent edge of pavement at any point along the swale run. However, at least one (1) storm sewer inlet or other acceptable discharge facility shall be provided for every six hundred (600) linear feet of swale, and no single swale run shall exceed four hundred (400) feet to an inlet; and 
4.  The soil adjacent to each inlet is protected from local scour by installation of a four (4) foot wide perimeter apron sod or concrete. 
c.  Curb and gutter drainage shall conform to applicable city standards and shall be designed and constructed such that: 
1.  The flowline gradient is at least twenty hundredths (0.20) percent; 
2.  The water surface elevation of flow resulting from peak runoff based on the three (3) year rainfall event shall not exceed the adjacent centerline elevation of pavement at any point. However, at least one (1) storm sewer inlet or other acceptable discharge facility shall be provided for every six hundred (600) linear feet of pavement, and no single gutter run shall exceed four hundred (400) feet to an inlet; and 
3.  Surface flow of runoff across street intersections is prevented by provision of corner inlets and cross drains or by grading of gutters to flow away from the intersection. 
(3)  Non-plan collector street drainage. Non-plan collector street shall have tertiary drainage meeting all appropriate requirements for local streets except that: 
a.  Conveyance capacity of road drainage facilities shall be based on peak runoff resulting from the five (5) year rainfall event; and 
b.  The water surface elevation of gutter flow resulting from peak runoff based on the five (5) year rainfall event shall not exceed the adjacent centerline elevation of the outermost travel lane at any point. 
(4)  Residential parking lot or area drainage. Each residential parking lot serving three (3) or more dwelling units and all non-residential parking lots shall have a finished grade elevation not lower than the maximum water surface elevation produced by the three (3) year, twenty-four (24) hour rainfall event in any retention, detention, or conveyance facility receiving storm-water runoff from the lot. However, where detention or retention is provided by subsurface exfiltration systems the finished grade shall be no lower than the maximum storage elevation produced by the five (5) year, twenty-four (24) hour event. 
(5)  Storm sewerage. Storm sewerage shall be designed and constructed so as to meet or exceed the following requirements: 
a.  All storm sewer system capacity design shall, at a minimum, provide for conveyance of peak inflow from the applicable catchment, based on the three (3) year rainfall event, such that the hydraulic gradient elevation does not exceed the grate or cover elevation at any inlet or manhole under tailwater conditions pursuant to paragraph 2005.3(e). 
b.  Inlet times assumed for determining required street drainage system capacity shall not exceed ten (10) minutes, unless adequate justification for use of longer times is submitted. 
c.  Storm sewer pipe shall have a nominal diameter of not less than fifteen (15) inches, or equivalent oval pipe size. 
d.  Storm sewerage shall be designed to attain design flow velocities of not less than two and one-half (2.5) feet per second in all pipe runs serving two or more inlets, nor greater than ten (10) feet per second in any pipe run. 
e.  A suitable access structure such as a manhole, junction box, or inlet must be installed at each junction or change in pipe size slope, or direction. 
f.  The maximum pipe run between access structures shall be: 
Three hundred (300) feet for fifteen (15) inch and eighteen (18) inch pipe 
Four hundred (400) feet for twenty-four (24) inch - thirty-six (36) inch pipe 
Five hundred (500) feet for forty-two (42) inch and larger pipe. 
g.  All pipe used in the storm sewer system shall be either reinforced concrete or metal, covered by and conforming to current ASTM, AASHTO, or ANSI standard specifications for materials and fabrication of barrel and joints, and shall meet current FDOT standard specifications and policies applicable to the intended use. 
h.  Concrete pipe shall have gasket joints. 
i.  When metal pipe is used beneath pavement within a street, it shall be designed to provide a joint-free installation or, where joint-free installations are not feasible, shall be jointed with a twelve (12) inch wide band having a mastic or neoprene gasket providing a watertight joint. Other jointing techniques meeting or exceeding these requirements may be used upon submittal to and approval by the city engineer. 
j.  Drainage pipe shall be fitted with headwalls, endwalls, inlets and other appropriate terminating and intermediate structures. Structure design shall meet or exceed city standards. 
(f)  Secondary system design and performance. The secondary system, including all facilities and appurtenant structures for detention, retention, discharge, and conveyance to legal positive outfall, shall be designed and constructed to provide the degree of treatment and control of all stormwater runoff discharged from a development site necessary to meet the requirements of the agency having jurisdiction over receiving waters at the point(s) of legal positive outfall. 
(1)  In addition to requirements expressly stated herein: 
a.  Secondary facilities for development subject to permitting by individual or general permit from South Florida Water Management District pursuant to Chapters 40E-4, 40E-40, and/or 40E-41, F.A.C., shall meet all requirements for issuance of the applicable permit; and 
b.  Secondary facilities for each residential, commercial, and industrial development exempt from South Florida Water Management District permitting pursuant to Chapter 40E-4, F.A.C., except an individual residential lot containing not more than two (2) dwelling units, shall be designed and constructed on site, or otherwise be provided through authorized connection to off-site secondary facilities, so as to: limit the discharge rate at the point of legal positive outfall to not more than the peak runoff rate produced by the site under pre-development conditions for both the three (3) year, one (1) hour and the twenty-five (25) year, seventy-two (72) hour rainfall events, and either: 
1.  Detain the greater of the first one (1) inch of runoff or the total runoff from the three (3) year, one (1) hour rainfall event; or 
2.  Retain the initial portion of runoff in an amount equal to one-half (1/2) of that required to be detained. 
(2)  No discharge of stormwater runoff resulting from rainfall up to and including the twenty-five (25) year, seventy-two (72) hour event shall take place from a development site except by means of one (1) or more approved discharge structures, other than those existing inflows from off-site for which separate, approved means of conveyance through the site have been provided. 
(3)  Facilities for conveyance of discharge to the point(s) of legal positive outfall shall be designed and constructed with adequate capacity to accommodate the combined flow from the applicable discharge structure(s) and all inflows from other contributory areas resulting from the twenty-five (25) year, seventy-two (72) hour rainfall event without overflow to adjacent lands. 
(4)  Except where bulkheading is approved in accordance with section 14-417, each wet detention/retention facility designed for storage of stormwater runoff in an open impoundment shall have: 
a.  Side slopes no steeper than 4(H):1(V) extending to a depth of at least two (2) feet below the design control elevation; 
b.  side slopes no steeper than 2(H):1(V) from two (2) feet below control elevation to the bottom of the facility; and 
c.  A continuous berm, at least twenty (20) feet wide and no steeper than 8(H):1(V), graded adjacent to the shoreline at an elevation not lower than the maximum design water surface elevation resulting from the three (3) year, twenty-four (24) hour rainfall event. Along portions of the impoundment where the design water surface is less than forty (40) feet wide at control elevation a berm shall be required on only one (1) side, provided that adequate legal and physical access is established from a local street to each separate segment of the remaining berm. 
(5)  Dry detention/retention facilities designed for storage in open impoundments shall have side slopes no steeper than 4(H):1(V). 
(6)  All normally exposed side slopes and maintenance berms of open impoundments shall be fully grassed or otherwise protected from erosion. 
(7)  Each piped inlet to an open impoundment shall have a concrete or sand-cement rip-rap endwall designed and constructed with suitable foundation for installation on the slope or bed of the impoundment as applicable. However, the endwall may be eliminated on inlets to wet detention impoundments where the pipe is installed with the crown at least two (2) feet below the control elevation and with the pipe invert protruding at least two (2) feet beyond the side slope. 
(8)  Stormwater runoff from pavement, roofs, and unpaved areas of compacted soil surfaces with no significant vegetative cover shall be directed over grassed, pervious soil surfaces as diffused flow prior to entering wet detention/retention facilities or dry detention facilities in order to promote infiltration, particulate deposition, nutrient removal, and interception of debris or other undesirable materials which may overload, pass through, cause nuisance conditions in, or increase maintenance needs of said facilities. 
(9)  In order to protect against overdrainage of surrounding lands, no control elevation shall be lower than the pre-development average annual mean water table elevation of the detention facility site. 
(g)  Drainage and maintenance access rights. 
(1)  Each secondary system facility for detention or retention of stormwater runoff in an open impoundments shall be placed entirely within a water management tract dedicated or deeded to an acceptable entity responsible for operation and maintenance of the stormwater management system. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided pursuant to this ordinance, there is hereby required around each water management tract established for purposes of wet detention or retention in an open impoundment a lake maintenance easement a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width and graded at a slope no steeper than 8(H):1(V), coinciding with the required maintenance berm. The width of the easement shall be measured from the point at which the grade is not steeper than 8(H):1(V). Lake maintenance from a contiguous local street may be permitted by the city engineer in accordance with good engineering practices. Access to a lake maintenance easement from at least one (1) local street shall be established by expressed easement or other instrument of record. A lake maintenance easement shall be required on only one (1) side of the water body or water management tract if the distance is less than forty (40) feet between the points at which the grade is not steeper than 8(H):1(V). If the water surface at the control elevation is greater than forty (40) feet wide, a lake maintenance easement shall be required on both sides. No lake maintenance easement shall be required behind bulkheads; provided, however, an easement not less than ten (10) feet in width shall be provided behind bulkheads where necessary to provide access to outfalls. 
(3)  Drainage easements. Drainage easements shall be provided where necessary at a width adequate to accommodate the drainage facilities. A minimum width of twelve (12) feet shall be provided for underground storm drainage installations. Where swales are used, the width shall be adequate to accommodate the entire design section between tops of slope. Where canals or ditches are permitted, the width shall be adequate to accommodate drainage facilities plus twenty (20) feet on one (1) side for maintenance purposes. Drainage easements shall be provided to accommodate existing drainage of surface waters from off-site contributory areas. When a subdivision is traversed by existing canals, watercourses, streams, drainage ways or channels, there shall be provided a drainage easement or right of way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse and of such further width or construction or both as will be adequate for the purpose. 
(h)  Certificate of compliance for lots. When the finished lot grading required by subsection 14-435(e)(1) and subsection 14-435(e)(4) is to be completed in conjunction with building construction, prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy the developer shall submit to the building department a certificate of compliance from a Florida registered professional surveyor, engineer, or landscape architect. Such statement shall be in a form approved by the building department and shall state that lot grading was don in accordance with either the approved grading plan for the subdivision or, in the absence of such plan, in accordance with the applicable requirements of section 14-435(a) and section 14-435(d). 
Sec. 14-436. - Parks and recreational areas. 
(a)  Citywide regional, beach or district parks and preservation/conservation areas. Where a planned beach, regional, or district park; or preservation/conservation area is shown on the city's comprehensive land use plan and included in a current five (5) year capital improvement plan; and a proposed development is located in whole or in part of said planned area, the developer shall be required to reserve such area for a period not to exceed two (2) years during which time the city shall either acquire the property or release the reservation. Such time period shall commence with an official action by the city commissioners on the developers or property owners petition for development of such area. 
(1)  In order to ensure sufficient lands or funds or both to provide new regional, beach and district parks necessary to meet the need for such city level parks created by additional residential development, the developer shall comply with the provisions of the City of Pahokee Comprehensive Impact Fee Ordinance, No. 89-18, Division 2, Section 22.41, City of Pahokee Parks Impact Fees, as same may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  On site recreational areas. In any proposed residential development, adequate provisions shall also be made for recreation areas to accommodate neighborhood and community park level recreational needs of the residents of the development. The recreation areas shall consist of a developed recreation area parcel and include recreational facilities of a type consistent with the needs of the residents and having convenient access for the residents of the development. The recreation area shall be reserved by the developer for the perpetual use of the residents of the development. The recreation area shall be the perpetual maintenance responsibility of the developer, or of a property owners association and their successor. 
(1)  The on-site recreation requirements shall be met in one of the following forms: 
a.  The recreation area shall be the equivalent of five (5) acres of land per one thousand (1,000) people population, based on two and four-tenths (2.4) people per unit, in dollar value of land and recreational facilities of a type suitable for general neighborhood or community park use of the residents of the development. The county property appraiser's assessed value of the land, as adjusted at time of final subdivision plan submission, shall be presumed to be the value in the absence of better evidence of value. In neither case shall the land dedicated nor the recreational facilities cost itself be credited for more than fifty (50) percent of the total requirement for the recreational area of this section. The value of the recreational facilities shall be determined by a certified construction cost estimate of the recreational facilities, prepared by the developer's engineer and verified by the parks and recreation department at the time of application for the first plat of the development. The requirements contained in this paragraph may be waived if adequate guarantee is provided prior to platting by the developer for the dollar value of the recreation areas required of this section. 
b.  At the option of the parks department the developer may in lieu of or in combination with (a) above contribute the dollar value of the recreational area requirement of this section for the entire development at the time the first plat is submitted for recording. Such funds shall be held in a non-lapsing park and recreation trust fund for the acquisition and improvement of community or neighborhood parks according to the provisions of paragraphs b.1. and b.2. of this section. 
1.  Monies deposited by a developer pursuant to this section shall be expended within a reasonable period of time for the purpose of acquiring and developing land necessary to meet the need for neighborhood or community parks created by the development in order to provide a system of parks which will be available to and substantially benefit the residents of the developed area. In accordance with the descriptions of neighborhood and community parks contained in the comprehensive plan, monies deposited by a developer pursuant to this section shall be expended to acquire or develop land for these park purposes not farther than five (5) miles from the perimeter of the developed land. 
2.  The city commission shall establish an effective program for the acquisition of lands for development of community parks in order to meet, within a responsible period of time, the existing need for community level parks which will be created by further residential developments constructed after the effective date of this article. The annual budget and capital program of the city shall provide for appropriations of funds as may be necessary to carry out the city's program for the acquisition of land for community level parks. The funds necessary to acquire lands to meet the existing need for city level parks must be provided from a source of revenue other than from the amount deposited in the trust fund. 
(c)  Open space credit. Where developed recreational facilities are provided within tracts required or credited for other open space purposes under the unified development code (i.e., buffer areas, natural preserves, utility easements, rights of way, drainage or water management tracts, etc.), only credit for the cost of approved facilities may be applied towards the recreation area requirement of section 14-436(b) only if the facilities are reserved for the use of the residents of the development. 
(d)  Other Credits. Where private membership clubs, golf courses, and other recreational related facilities exclusive of a property owners association are provided in conjunction with the development, credit of one-half (1/2) the requirement of section 14-436(b) for recreation areas on a per capita basis for the entire development may be applied for those facilities which are available for the use of the residents of the development. 
Sec. 14-437. - Wastewater systems. 
(a)  General requirement. Except in rural subdivisions, complete sewage collection system, sewage treatment and disposal shall be provided for all subdivisions. In the event individual sewerage facilities are allowed under requisite state and city regulations. The developer shall be required to deposit in escrow with the city for the purpose of constructing a sewage collection system, the amount of cash or a guarantee acceptable to the city equal to one hundred ten (110) percent of the sewage collection system's estimated construction and installation cost. The entire sewage collection system and treatment plant must be engineered and coordinated with the city. 
(b)  Central system. The sanitary sewage system shall be designed by a professional engineer, registered in the State of Florida, conforming to acceptable standards of sound practices for sewage collection systems and shall conform to all requirements of state and city authorities. The entire sewerage collection system must be engineered and coordinated with the city's overall plan. The appurtenances to the system shall be equal to or shall exceed the minimum requirements of the current city standards. Upon submittal of construction plans for a central sewage system as prescribed by this ordinance, the design engineer shall supply data, calculations and analyses showing important features affecting design including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Number of units to be built; 
(2)  The character of units and expected population or estimated flow of sewage from any unit designed for use other than domestic; 
(3)  A flow chart indicating the number of proposed connections to the system and the anticipated flow of sewage to the sewer plant; and 
(4)  Any other meaningful information necessary to arrive at estimates of amounts of character of sewage pertinent to the design. 
(c)  Individual system. Where permitted, the individual sewage system shall meet the requirements of this ordinance and all requisite state and city authorities and laws and ordinances. Where an absorption field is required, the lot shall be designed, sized and developed to facilitate the installation of the tank and absorption areas to meet the requirements of all requisite state and city authorities. The location of the system not less than five (5) feet from any building, not less than five (5) feet from any property line and not less than ten (10) feet from water supply pipelines. The system shall not be located less than fifty (50) feet from the recurring high water line of lakes, streams, canals or other waters. The installation of the system shall be in areas having acceptable soil classifications and percolation tests meeting the requirements of the Florida Administrative Code. 
(d)  Wastewater treatment and processing plants. Construction plans and specifications for sewage treatment and processing plants to serve a proposed subdivision shall be engineered and coordinated with the city's comprehensive plan and shall comply with the all requisite laws and ordinances. 
Sec. 14-438. - Potable water systems. 
(a)  General requirement. A complete water distribution and treatment system shall be provided for all subdivisions. In the event individual water facilities are allowed under requisite state and city regulations, the developer shall be required to deposit in escrow with the city for the purpose of constructing a water distribution and treatment system, the amount of the cash or a guarantee acceptable to the city equal to one hundred ten (110) percent of the system's estimated construction and installation costs. The entire system must be engineered and coordinated with the applicable city agency. 
(b)  Central water system. The design of a central water system shall conform to the acceptable standards of sound practices for municipal water supply and fire protection systems. The system shall be designed to provide maximum day domestic requirements set forth in the comprehensive plan. The system shall be designed with minimum four (4) inch mains. Water mains shall be required on all streets and shall be looped. Sufficient storage for emergency pumping facilities shall be provided in accordance with the comprehensive plan. Materials used shall be acceptable to the city engineer. The distribution system shall provide connections to each individual not shown in the subdivision, to each public facility and where median strips are developed. The appurtenances to the system shall be equal to or exceed those required by current city standards. Plans for the system shall be fully approved by all requisite state and city authorities. 
(c)  Individual water system. Where an individual water system is permitted the lots shall be designed to facilitate the system so that a well can be permitted in accordance with the city and other requisite state laws and regulations. 
(d)  Water treatment and processing plants. Construction plans and specifications for water treatment and processing plants to serve a proposed subdivision shall be engineered and coordinated with the applicable city agency. 
Sec. 14-439. - Utilities. 
(a)  Required improvement. All utilities, including franchised utilities, power and light, telephone and telegraph, water, sewer, cable television wiring to street lights and gas shall be installed underground, unless such requirement is waived by the city engineer, as provided in this section. Utilities shall be constructed in easements as prescribed by this article. The developer shall make arrangements for utilities installation with each of the persons, firms or corporations furnishing utility service involved. 
(b)  Easements. Utility easements twelve (12) feet wide shall be provided where necessary to accommodate all required utilities across lots and shall have convenient access for maintenance. Where possible easements shall be centered on lot lines. Where possible, utility easements should be provided for underground utilities across the portion(s) of the lot abutting a street or parking area. When a utility easement is to abut a street, the width may be reduced to ten (10) feet. Additional utility easements may be required by the city when, in the opinion of the city engineer, such easements are necessary for continuity of utility service between subdivisions or other development and where necessary for maintenance and service. Utility easements and drainage easements shall not be combined. Where crossings occur, drainage easements shall take precedent. Easements shall be coordinated with requisite utility authorities and shall be provided as prescribed by this ordinance for the installation of underground utilities or relocating existing facilities in conformance with the respective utility authority's rules and regulations. 
(c)  Application of article. This article shall apply to all cables, conduits or wires forming parts of an electrical distribution system including service lines to individual properties and main distribution feeder electrical lines delivering power to local distribution systems. This article shall not, however, apply to wires, conduits or associated and supporting structures whose exclusive function is in transmission or distribution of electrical energy between subdivisions, generating stations, substations and transmission lines of other utility systems, or perimeter lines located adjacent to a subdivision. 
(d)  Exceptions to underground installation. 
(1)  Standard exception for appurtenant, on the ground facilities. Appurtenances such as transformer boxes, pedestal mounted terminal boxes, meter cabinets, service terminals, telephone splice closures, pedestal type telephone terminals or other similar "on the ground" facilities normally used with and as a part of the underground distribution system may be placed above ground, but shall be located so as not to constitute a traffic hazard. 
(2)  Exceptions requiring approval of city engineer. All other proposals for above-ground installation of utilities shall be submitted to the city engineer at the time of the preliminary submittal. Such request shall be made in writing and noted on the construction plans. The city engineer shall, at the time of the preliminary review, consider the request and all pertinent information, including but not limited to the construction plans, existing installations, and other information he deems necessary. The request shall be either approved or denied. Any approval granted pursuant to this subsection shall be set forth in writing, which may be by separate statement to the developer and the developer's engineer or may be part of the city engineer's response to the preliminary review. 
a.  Any new service which, by virtue of an approved waiver made pursuant to this article, is allowed to be supplied by overhead utilities shall be connected to a service panel that is convertible for underground utility service at a future date. 
(e)  Installation in streets. After the subgrade for a street has been completed, and before any material is applied, all underground work for the water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, gas mains, telephone, electrical power conduits and appurtenances and any other utility shall be installed completely through the width of the street to the sidewalk area or provisions made so that the street will not be disturbed for utility installation. All underground improvements installed for the purpose of future service connections shall be properly capped and backfilled. 
Sec. 14-440. - Fire rescue services. 
(a)  Required improvement. Fire hydrants shall be provided in all subdivisions, where central water systems are provided. Fire hydrants shall be provided in the manner prescribed in this ordinance. 
(b)  Single family developments of less than five (5) units per acre. Fire hydrants shall be spaced no greater than six hundred (600) feet apart and not more than three hundred (300) feet to the center of any lot in the subdivision and shall be connected to mains no less than six (6) inches in diameter. The system shall provide capability for fire flow of at least seven hundred (700) gallons per minute in addition to a maximum day requirement at pressures of not less than twenty (20) pounds per square inch. 
(1)  The system shall have the capability of sufficient storage or emergency pumping facilities to such an extent that the minimum fire flow will be maintained for at least four (4) hours or the current recommendations of the insurance services office, whichever is greater. 
(c)  Multiple family developments of over five (5) dwelling units per acre, commercial, institutional, industrial or other high daytime or nighttime population density developments. In these areas fire hydrants shall be spaced no greater than five hundred (500) feet apart and the remotest part of any structure shall not be more than three hundred (300) feet from the hydrant and shall be connected to mains no less than six (6) inches in diameter. Fire flow shall be provided at flows not less than one thousand two hundred (1,200) gallons per minute in addition to a maximum day requirement at pressures of not less than thirty (30) pounds per square inch. 
(d)  Charges made for the use of the fire hydrant or water consumed therefrom when a fire protection authority uses the fire hydrant in the performance of its official duty shall be as regulated by the public service commission. 
Sec. 14-441. - Subdivision design and survey requirements. 
(a)  Required improvement. The developer shall install the required buffering and, when recording a plat, shall comply with subsection (g). 
(b)  Buffering. Residential developments shall be buffered and protected from adjacent expressways, arterials and railroad rights of way with a five (5) foot limited access easement, which shall be shown and designated on the plat, except where access is provided by means of a marginal access road or where such expressway, arterial or railroad right of way abuts a golf course. 
(c)  Blocks. 
(1)  General considerations. The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
a.  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; 
b.  Zoning requirements as to lot size and dimensions; 
c.  Need for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of vehicular and pedestrian traffic; and 
d.  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
(2)  Maximum length: Block lengths shall not exceed one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet between intersecting streets. Provided, however, that greater lengths may be approved by the city engineer on an individual basis after considering such factors as but not limited to, lot size, the ADT, number of through streets, street layout and other engineering considerations, in accordance with acceptable engineering practices. 
(d)  Lots. All lots shall have the area, frontage, width and depth required by the unified development code or applicable zoning approval. prevailing or approved use zone wherein aid lots are located. 
(1)  Existing structures. When a subdivision is proposed upon land with existing structures that are proposed to be retained, lots are to be designed to as not to cause said existing structures to become nonconforming with respect zoning requirements. 
(2)  Lots abutting major streets. When lots are platted abutting a major street, or non-plan collector access shall be provided by and limited to local streets or residential access streets. No access from individual lots shall be permitted directly to a major street. 
(3)  Through lots. Double frontage lots or through lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography or orientation. Where double frontage lots are developed they shall be buffered as required by this ordinance and unified development code. 
(e)  Minimum safe sight distance at intersections. Corner lot lines at intersecting street lines shall be the long chord of a twenty-five (25) foot radius or of a greater radius where deemed necessary. The corner lots shall be designed to facilitate a safe intersection with respect to a sight distance, and a restriction shall be placed on the lot and defined on the plat prohibiting construction or plantings over thirty (30) inches high within the sight plan established in the design of the lot or adjacent street, based on the crown elevation of the street. 
(f)  Soils. The plan shall show the location and results of test borings of the subsurface conditions of the tract to be developed. When nonpervious soils (hardpan or other nonpervious soils) or unstable soils (peat, muck, etc.) are encountered the plan shall reflect a satisfactory design to cope with such conditions. If the soil analysis reflects that the area contains hardpan or other nonpervious soils or contains peat, muck or other unstable materials, the city engineer shall require such additional design and construction as are necessary to assure proper drainage and development of the area. Test locations shall be mutually determined by the developer's engineer and the city engineer and shall be recorded as to location and result on the construction plans. 
(g)  Survey requirements. 
(1)  Where monuments occur within street pavement areas, they shall be installed in a typical water value cover as prescribed in the current city standards. 
(2)  Permanent control points shall be installed as follows: 
a.  Installation prior to recordation: Where required improvements are constructed prior to the recordation of the plat, the permanent control points shall be set prior to submission of the final plat and certified by the surveyor on the plat. 
b.  Installation after recordation: Where required improvements are constructed after recordation, the permanent control points shall installed within one (1) year of recording the plat and shall be guaranteed as required by subsection 14-431(a)(9). In such case, the surveyor's certificate shall comply with subsections 14-430(b)(15) 14-432(b)(15)c. 
Secs. 14-441-14-449. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - VARIANCES, PENALTIES, AND LEGAL STATUS 

Sec. 14-450. - Variances and exceptions. 
(a)  Administration of variances. A variance from the literal or strict enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance may be granted by the board of adjustment in accordance with the provisions set forth in section 403 of the unified development code. 
(b)  Variances shall not be granted unless a written application for a variance has been submitted to the city engineer demonstrating: 
(1)  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land; 
(2)  That a literal interpretation of the provisions of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties; 
(3)  That the hardship claimed by the applicant is not self created, nor has been aggravated by the actions of the applicant; 
(4)  That the granting of the variances requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this ordinance to other lands. No preexisting conditions of surrounding lands which conflict with this ordinance shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance; 
(5)  That the variance granted is the minimum variance required to make reasonable use of the land; 
(6)  That the variance will be in harmony with the general intent of the ordinance; and 
(7)  That the variance will not create an unsafe condition or be otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
Sec. 14-451. - Penalties and prohibitions. 
(a)  Sale or transfer or property not in conformance with this ordinance. It shall be unlawful for anyone who is the owner or agent of the owner of any land to transfer, sell, agree to sell, or negotiate to sell such land by reference to, exhibition of or other use of a plat of a subdivision of such land without having submitted a plan and plat of such subdivision for approval as required by this ordinance and without having recorded the approved subdivision plat as required. If such unlawful use be made of a plat before it is properly approved and recorded, the owner or agent of the owner of such land shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree, punishable as provided in F.S. §§ 775.082 or 775.083. 
(1)  The city commissioners may bring injunctive action to enjoin such transfer, sale or agreement. 
(2)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall not impair the title of land so transferred or affect the validity of the title conveyed. However, a purchaser of land sold in violation of this section shall, within one (1) year from the date of purchase thereof, be entitled to bring an appropriate action to avoid such sale or to bring action against the seller for any damages which he suffers as a result of the seller's unlawful act, or both. 
Sec. 14-452. - Legal status. 
(a)  Severability. If any section, part of a section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this ordinance is for any reason held or declared to be unconstitutional, inoperative or void, such holdings of invalidity shall not affect the remaining portions of this ordinance and it shall be construed to have been the legislative intent to pass this ordinance without such unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative part therein, and the remainder of this ordinance after the exclusion of such part or parts shall be deemed to be held valid as if such part or parts had not been included therein, or if this ordinance or any of the provisions thereof shall be held inapplicable to any person, group of persons, property, kind of property, circumstances or set of circumstances, such holdings shall not affect the applicability thereof to any person, property or circumstances. 
(b)  Effective date. The provisions of this ordinance shall become effective upon receipt from the department of state of official acknowledgement that this ordinance has been filed with the department of state. Provided, however, where any provisions of this ordinance are amended, the effective date of this ordinance shall mean the effective date of such amendment for the purposes of deciding any question directly controlled by such amendment. 
(c)  Inclusion in code. It is the intent of the board and is hereby ordained, that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made a part of the Code of Laws and Ordinances of City of Pahokee, Florida; that the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered or relettered to accomplish such intentions; and the word "ordinance" may be changed to "section," "article," or other appropriate word. 
(d)  Conflicting regulations repealed. All special laws applying to and within the city, general laws applying only to Palm Beach City, and general law which the city commissioners is specifically authorized by article VIII of the 1968 Florida Constitution to supercede, nullify or amend, and any local ordinance and resolution in conflict with any provision of this ordinance are hereby repealed, including but not limited to Section 1, Special Acts, Chapter 69-1425, 1969, and Sections 20, 21 and 22, Special Acts, Chapter 57-1691. 
Secs. 14-453-14-459. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - STANDARD FORMS 

Sec. 14-460. - Standard forms. 
    The forms contained in the following sections have been approved by the board as a standard form. All agreements, guarantees and documents are subject to the approval of the city attorney. Any alternate form may be approved by the board, provided the city attorney has first approved such alternate form in writing. 
Editor's note- The forms referenced above are on file in the building, planning and zoning office. 
Secs. 14-461-14-469. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 14-470. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purpose of this Code, the following definitions are established: 
    Abandon: To discontinues a use for more than a specified period of time. 
    Abandoned sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Abutting: See "adjoining" or "adjacent" definitions. 
    Access, point of: A paved driveway or other opening intended to provide vehicle or pedestrian access to or from a public or private right-of-way to or from a public or a private premises including off-street parking areas. 
    Accessory use, building, or structure: A use, building, or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal building or structure. 
    Accessory vehicular use area: All land upon which vehicles traverse property, excluding a parking lot. 
    Acre, gross: Forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet. 
    Acre, net: Gross land area, less existing or proposed public and private points of access, roads or streets, roadways, rights-of-way, and easements. 
    Add-on sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Adjacent: Nearby but not necessarily adjoining. 
    Adjoining: A lot or parcel of land sharing all or part of a common lot line with another lot or parcel of land, or two (2) or more structures sharing all or part of a common wall. 
    Adult care facility: A facility licensed and operated in accordance with State of Florida and Palm Beach County standards providing general supervisory care for five (5) or more adults. 
    Adult entertainment uses: 
(1)  Adult bookstore: A business establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, slides or films for sale or viewing on the premises by use of viewers or motion picture devices or coin-operated means, and periodicals, which said items of stock in trade have as their dominant or primary theme matters depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or specified anatomical areas." 
(2)  Adult drive-in theatre: An outdoor theater for the showing of movies, slide shows, closed circuit TV, or similar offerings, and which excludes minors by virtue of age. 
(3)  Adult entertainment cabaret: A nightclub, theater, establishment licensed to serve food and/or alcoholic beverages, or any other business establishments, which feature live performances and entertainment by topless and/or bottomless dancers, "go-go" dancers, exotic dancers, striper, models, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers, which such performances or entertainment is characterized by an emphasis on the display of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
(4)  Adult entertainment uses: Book stores, mini-motion picture theaters, motion picture theaters, entertainment cabarets, motion picture booths, motels and hotels, or other businesses presenting or displaying material depicting or describing "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," regardless of whether or not such material may be dominant or primary theme, depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," whether such material consists of books, periodicals, printed matter, films, slides, motion pictures, or live performances. 
(5)  Adult massage parlor: A business establishment in which massages are offered as a service and which excludes minors by virtue of age and where such massage is characterized by an emphasis on "specified anatomical areas." 
(6)  Adult mini-motion picture theater: A business establishment, with a capacity of less than fifty (50) persons, used for presenting motion pictures or slide material characterized by a dominant or primary theme depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical area," for observation by patrons therein. 
(7)  Adult motel or hotel: A place where motion pictures or slides shown in rooms designed primarily for lodging, if said motion pictures or slides are characterized by a dominant or primary theme depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
(8)  Adult motion picture booth: A booth used for presenting motion pictures or slide material characterized by a dominant or primary theme depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," for observation by patrons therein. 
(9)  Adult motion picture theater: A business establishment, with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons, used for presenting motion picture or slide material characterized by a dominant or primary them depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," for observation by patrons therein. 
(10)  Specified anatomical areas: Defined in or more of the following ways: 
a.  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
1.  Human genitals, pubic region, 
2.  Buttocks, 
3.  Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, 
b.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(11)  Specified sexual activities: Defined as follows: 
a.  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breast, 
b.  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy, whether actual or simulated, 
c.  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
    Advertising structure: Any structure installed for advertising purposes, with or without any advertisement display thereon, situated upon or attached to real property upon which any poster, bill, or printing, painting, or other advertisement or device of any kind whatsoever may be placed, posted, painted, tacked, nailed, or otherwise fastened, affixed, or displayed, provided, however, that this term shall not include buildings. 
    "A" frame sign: See "sign" definition. 
    Airport: A special facility designed to accommodate the departure and landing of aircraft, equipped with hangars, facilities for refueling and repairing airplanes, taxiways, tie-down areas, and various accommodations for passengers. 
    Alley: A public right-of-way which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
    Alteration: Any change in the internal or external arrangement of a building, including work affecting the structural parts of a building or any change in occupancy. 
    Animal hospital: An enclosed facility for the diagnosis, treatment, and convalescence of animal patients which may be boarded on the premises for such purposes. 
    Animal kennel: An establishment offering to the general public lodging and boarding facilities for dogs, cats, and other domestic pets. 
    Animated sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Apartment: A room or suite of rooms intended or designed for use as a residence by a single family, including bath and culinary accommodations. 
    Apartment house: See "dwelling, multiple family." 
    Arcade: An open or enclosed pedestrian-oriented passageway located on the ground floor of a building and connecting two (2) or more public rights-of-way, including streets, alleys, and sidewalks, generally accessible to the public during specific hours. 
    Architect: A person registered by the State of Florida as an architect. 
    Area, buildable: The space remaining upon a lot after deduction of minimum required setbacks, open spaces and yards, and upon which a building may be located. 
    Automated teller machine: An electronic banking facility that is open to the general public and allows customers to perform financial transactions without the assistance of any bank employees. 
    Baby sitting agency: See "child care facility." 
    Background area of sign: A financial institution that is open to the general public and engaged in deposit banking, and that performs closely related functions such as making loans, investments, and fiduciary activities. 
    Barrier: A solid and unbroken visual screen including a masonry or solid wood fence which presents a one hundred (100) percent visually opaque screen. 
    Bed and breakfast small homestay: A private residence, including related buildings, with up to five (5) guest rooms in which the owner occupies the primary building. 
    Bed and breakfast large homestay: A private residence, including related buildings, with six (6) or more guestrooms in which the owner occupies the primary building. 
    Berm: Mounding of soil, which is planted with living plant material designed as a natural landscape feature or buffer to screen incompatible land uses or to absorb or otherwise red e undesirable impacts, such as noise, smoke, or glare, or other similar nuisances. 
    Billboard (off-premise SIGN): See "sign" definitions. 
    Boarding house: A building, other than a hotel, where lodging or lodging and meals are provided on a fee basis for three (3) or more persons. 
    Boatel: A motel and marina combination accessible to boats as well as automobiles and which may include boat sales and servicing facilities, overnight accommodations for transients, and eating and drinking facilities. 
    Borrow pit: A source, other than required excavation, of material for creating embankments, for providing fill, and for related purposes. 
    Buffer or buffer strip: A screening device used to moderate the adverse impacts of one (1) land use upon another. Buffers may include walls, hedges, landscape areas, berms, additional setbacks, or combinations of the above. 
    Building façade: That portion of any exterior elevation of a building extending from grade to the top of parapet wall or eaves and the entire width of any building elevation. 
    Building, height of: The vertical distance from the mean grade of a lot at the frontage of the building to the highest point of the top of structure of a flat roof, or the deck line of a mansard roof, or the mid-height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hop, and gambrel roofs. 
    Building measurement definitions: See "building height," "story," "residential floor area," "floor area ratio." 
    Building official: The director of the department of building and zoning and all inspectors working under that official's authority and direction. 
    Building, principal: A building or, where the context so indicates, a grouping of buildings in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which such building or such group is located. 
    Building setback line: That line establishing building setback distances from street or lot lines, established by the zoning code of the City of Pahokee, Florida. 
    Bulkhead line: A line established in or along a body of water delineating the maximum distance from the existing shoreline within which dredge and fill, bulkhead construction, and related activities may be permitted. 
    Business services: Establishments primarily engaged in rendering services to business establishments on a fee or contract basis, such as advertising and mailing, building maintenance, employment service, management and consulting services, protective services, equipment rental and leasing, commercial research, development and testing, photo finishing, and personal supply services. 
    Carport: A roofed accessory structure open on two (2) or more sides, intended or used for the parking and storage of automobiles. 
    Cemetery: Property used for interring of the dead. 
    Certificate of occupancy: A document signed by a building official that certifies that a building and the use of said building or structure complies with all applicable requirements of this Code, the Building Code, and all other applicable laws and regulations at the date the building permit is issued. Official certification that a premise conforms to provisions of this Code and the Building Code and may be used or occupied. Such a certificate is granted for new construction or for alternations or additions to existing structures. 
    Changeable copy sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Child day care facility: A facility licensed and operated in accordance with county standards where general supervisory care is provided for six (6) or more children at any one (1) time, including children of the supervisor. 
    Child day care facility, family, accessory: A facility licensed and operated in accordance with county standards where general supervisory care is provided for five (5) or fewer children at any one (1) time, including children of the supervisor. 
    Church or other places or worship: Any structure or site used primarily as a place of public or private worship on a permanent basis by a recognized and established religious sect or denomination and registered as a not-for-profit worship on a permanent basis by a recognized and established religious sect or denomination and registered as a not-for-profit organization pursuant to Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954. 
    City: Unless the context clearly discloses contrary intent, city shall mean the City of Pahokee. 
    Clinic: A facility providing medical, dental, surgical, therapeutic, veterinary and related services on an outpatient basis and not providing overnight accommodations. 
    Club or lodge: An establishment operated by a corporation or association or persons for social, literary, political, educational, fraternal, or charitable purposes, registered as a not-for-profit organization pursuant to Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954. 
    Commercial amusements: Establishments engaged primarily in providing amusement or entertainment for a fee or admission charge. 
    Commercial amusement, enclosed: A commercial amusement establishment conducting operations entirely within the confines of an enclosed building or structure, including but not limited to the following: bowling alleys, billiard and pool establishments, skating rinks, video arcades, and indoor theaters, but excluding any adult entertainment uses as defined in this Code. 
    Commercial amusement, temporary: A commercial amusement established as a temporary use, including but not limited to the following: circuses, carnivals, festivals, fairs, and special exhibitions. 
    Commercial amusement, unenclosed: A commercial amusement conducted in an outdoor area or in an unenclosed structure, including but not limited to the following: drive-in theaters, miniature golf courses, golf driving ranges, animal or mechanical race tracks, amusement parks, and excluding any adult entertainment uses as defined in this Code. 
    Commercial vehicle: Any motor vehicle licensed by the State of Florida as a commercial vehicle. 
    Communications tower: A tower, constructed as a free standing structure or in association with a building or other permanent structure, containing, transmitting or receiving antennas for such uses as telephonic, containing, transmitting or receiving antennas for such uses as telephonic communications, radio and television signals, microwave transmissions, and similar forms of electronic communications. 
    Comprehensive plan: A plan adopted by the city meeting the requirements of F.S. §§ 163.3177 and 163.3178 (Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act). 
    Concurrency: The demonstration that specific public facilities will be available at the adopted level of service, as described in the city's comprehensive plan, concurrent with the impact of the development. 
    Construction sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Contiguous: Next to, abutting, or touching and having all or a portion of a boundary which is conterminous. 
    Convenience store: A retail sales containing less than two thousand (2,000) gross floor area store located near residential areas whose principal activity is the sale of foodstuffs and related commodities; however, stores of this nature may offer for sale such items as foodstuffs prepared on the premises and motor vehicle-related products, such as gasoline and motor oil. 
    Copy area of a sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    County: Unless the context clearly discloses contrary intent, county shall mean Palm Beach County. 
    Cultural and civic facility: A building or complex of buildings that houses public or private not-for-profit facilities, offices or services and which may include civic or community centers, theaters predominantly used for live performances, libraries, zoological or botanical gardens, historical landmarks, and similar facilities. 
    Dedication: A conveyance of land to the public for a specified public purpose made by written instrument and accepted by a governmental agency. 
    Density: A measure of the intensity of land use and development per unit area of land, usually expressed as the number of persons, families, or dwelling units per acre or as a floor area ratio. 
    Development sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Diameter at breast height (DBH): The standard measurement of a single-stemmed tree at four and one-half (41/2) feet above grade. 
    Directional sign: Any sign permanently or temporarily installed on public property by or with approval of the city or any authorized governmental agency. 
    District: Any section of the city for which the zoning regulations are uniform. 
    Double-faced sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Dripline: An artificial line along the ground which conforms to the perimeter of the crown of a tree as projected vertically to the ground. 
    Drive-in business: Any place of business or premises which serves, sells, or otherwise makes its services to customers situated in motor vehicles. 
    Drive-through or drive-in window: A window or other opening in the wall of a principal or accessory building through which goods or services are provided directly to customers in motor vehicles. 
    Dry cleaner/laundry, commercial: A professional dry cleaning/laundry establishment serving individual or commercial customers. 
    Dry cleaner/laundry, self-service: An establishment open to the public that provides coin-operated laundry and dry cleaning machines, including clothes washers and dryers. 
    Duplex: See "dwelling, two-family." 
    Dwelling: Any building or portion thereof designed for or used for residential purposes. 
    Dwelling, single-family: A detached dwelling designed for only one (1) family. 
    Dwelling, two-family: A building designed for only two (2) families with separate housekeeping, sanitary, and cooking facilities for each family. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family: A building designed for three (3) or more families, with separate housekeeping, sanitary, and cooking facilities for each family. 
    Dwelling unit: A room or group of rooms within a dwelling that forms a single independent habitable unit used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, sanitation, cooking, and eating purposes by only one (1) family. A dwelling unit may be used for owner occupancy, rental, lease, or other occupancy on a weekly or longer basis. 
    Easement: A grant of one (1) or more rights by a property owner to another individual, group, or governmental unit to make limited use of a portion of real property for a specified purpose. 
    Electric sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Engineer: A person registered by the State of Florida as a professional engineer. 
    Entrance sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Family: One (1) or more persons occupying a single housekeeping, unit and using common facilities, provided that unless all members are related by blood or marriage, no such family shall contain over five (5) persons. This term shall not include a fraternity or sorority, club, rooming house, or similar uses. 
    Farm: An area used for the growing of farm products, such as vegetables, fruits and grain, and their storage, as well as for raising poultry and animals, and grazing, pasture, or running areas. Also, the operating of an area for one (1) or more of the above uses including dairy farms with the necessary accessory uses for treating or storing the product; provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of the normal farming activities. 
    Fence: A free-standing structure of any material or combination of materials erected for confinement, screening, or partition purposes. 
    Filling station: See "motor vehicle fuel sales and service." 
    Fixed projecting sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Flag, commercial: A cloth emblem or banner that is a recognized representation or symbol of any non-public agency or establishment, including not-for-profit organizations, political parties, commercial or business establishments, and similar organizations; including emblems, banners, and similar devices with or without letters or symbols that are placed for the purpose of advertising or attracting attention. 
    Flag, official: A cloth emblem or banner that is the officially recognized representation or symbol of the United States, or any state, county or municipal government or agency thereof, including special districts created by the State of Florida. 
    Flashing sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Flat or wall sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Floor area ratio: A regulatory technique, generally expressed in numeric fashion, which relates total developable site area and the size (square feet) of development permitted on a specific site. 
    Floor area ratio, commercial: A numeric rating assigned to each city-wide or CORE commercial zoning district which determines the total gross square feet of a structure, as measured from the structure's exterior walls, based upon the actual land area of the parcel upon which the structure is to be located. Total gross square feet calculated using the assigned floor area ratio shall not include such features as parking lots or structures, aerial pedestrian crossovers, open partially enclosed plazas, or exterior pedestrian and vehicular circulation areas. 
    Food vendor, mobile: A mobile food-vending cart or similar conveyance, licensed by the county, offering food and beverages for general public consumption at one (1) or more locations during the day. 
    Fraternity or sorority house: A building occupied by and maintained exclusively for college or university students who are affiliated with a social, honorary, or professional organization recognized by the college, university, or other institution of higher learning that the students attend. 
    Free standing sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Frontage: All or a portion of a lot line directly abuts an officially recorded street or separates property from a street, excluding alleys and private driveways. 
    Frontage, street façade: That portion of an exterior elevation of a building extending from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves and the entire width of the building wall elevation which parallels a street. In the event the parapet wall or eaves are over forty (40) feet high, only the first forty (40) feet shall be considered the frontage street facade. 
    Garage, apartment: A detached, accessory structure of not more than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet, that contains a private garage permanently available for the parking or storage of at least one (1) auto-mobile and one (1) dwelling unit. 
    Garage, residential: An accessory building or a portion of a main building, including a carport or porte cochere, designed and used for the parking or storage of vehicles owned or used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory use. 
    Garage, public: A building or a portion thereof, other than a private or storage garage or service station, designed or used for equipping, servicing, repairing, hiring, selling, or storing of motor vehicles. 
    Garage, commercial: A building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for pre-arranged or short-term storage of motor vehicles, excluding daily storage furnished to transients, and at which motor fuels and oils are not sold, and motor vehicles are not equipped, repaired, hired or sold. 
    Grade of lot: The average finished or final elevation of a lot measured at the front building line. 
    Grass: Green herbage, commonly referred to as grass or sod, commonly grown year round in the City of Pahokee. 
    Grocery store: A retail store whose principal activity is the sale to the public of foodstuffs and consumer commodities for human consumption. Such foodstuffs may be pre-packaged or prepared on the premises for consumption off the premises. 
    Ground cover: Low-growing or low-maintenance living plant material or inanimate material. 
    Ground sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Group homes/congregate living facilities: Facilities which provide short-term or long-term lodging, meals, and resident support services, such as counseling, guidance, and varying levels of medical care. The following classes of group homes/congregate living facilities are established: 
(1)  Type I: A facility providing lodging, meals, or related services for no more than five (5) unrelated individuals. Resident support services may be provided. 
(2)  Type III: A facility providing lodging, meals, or related services for six (6) or more unrelated individuals resident support services may be provided. 
(3)  Type V: A facility providing lodging, meals, or related services for any number of unrelated individuals when residents include such classes of individuals as former substance abusers, inmates participating in supervised work release programs, parolees, etc. 
    Grubbing: The mechanical or manual removal of any type of rooted vegetation and associated soil. 
    Heavy machinery: Mechanical land-clearing, earth-moving, or earth-working equipment with a gross weight in excess of five thousand (5,000) pounds, including all machinery which utilizes steel tracks for traction. 
    Hedge: A solid, unbroken row of shrubs or certain tree species maintained at a desired or required height and width, including such plant material as Ficus benjamina, Figustrum lecidum, Podocaarpus macrophylla, Hibisucs rosa-sinensus, and Murraya paniculata. 
    Height of structure: The vertical distance from the average elevation of the finished grade of the structure to the highest portion of the structure, subject to specified height requirements of this Code. For buildings, the height shall be measured as the vertical distance from the average elevation of the finished grade of the building to the highest point of top of structure of a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. 
    Historic tree: A tree determined to be of notable historic interest to the city, due to its age, type, size, or historic association with the community, and designated as such by the city commission. 
    Home nameplate: A nameplate indicating only the name of the occupant. 
    Home occupation: Any occupation or activity carried on as an accessory use by a member of the immediate family residing within a dwelling unit. 
    Hospital: An institution licensed by the Florida Department of Health and Rehabilitation Services which have facilities for one (1) or more overnight patients, which provide services for in-patient medical or surgical care of sick or injured humans, and which may include related facilities such as laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities, state offices, utilities, and support facilities. 
    Hotel: A public lodging establishment licensed by the State of Florida which offers transient or permanent lodging accommodations to the general public, and may provide additional services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms, and recreation facilities. 
    Hotel unit: A room or suite of rooms in which lodging or boarding is provided. 
    Identification sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Illuminated sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Impervious surface: Any surface incapable of being penetrated by water under normal circumstances, including such surfaces as roofs, areas paved or covered with concrete, asphalt, or similar materials, etc. 
    Inanimate materials: Rocks, gravel, pebbles, driftwood, garden ornaments, statuary, sculptures, artificial grass, or similar non-living objects. 
    Industrial activity: The treatment, processing, fabrication, preparation, assembly, packaging, cleaning, servicing, testing, or repairing of material, products, or equipment on the premises. 
    Install: To erect or place into position. 
    Institution: A governmental facility, non-profit corporation, or a non-profit establishment existing for public or quasi-public purpose use, including such uses as churches, schools, hospitals, government buildings, and parks or open space. 
    Instructional sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Junk vehicle: A vehicle which cannot be moved under its own power. 
    Junk yard: A commercial establishment where waste or discarded or salvaged materials are stored or handled, including but not limited to auto-wrecking yards, used lumber yards, and places or yards for salvaged house wrecking yards, and places or yards for salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment or salvaged machinery, used furniture and household equipment, and the processing of used, or discarded, or salvaged materials as part of manufacturing operations. 
    Kennel: See "animal kennel." 
    Land area definitions: See "lot" definitions, residential land area; and rear, side and front yard open space. 
    Land clearing: The removal from land of any type of vegetation or structure by mechanical, manual, or other means. 
    Landscape strip: A strip containing trees, barriers, ground cover, or other plant material. 
    Land use plan: An element of the comprehensive plan, as defined in F.S. ch. 163.3161 (The Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act.) A set of documents and maps that categorize existing patterns of land development and set guidelines for the desirable intensity, density, quantity, type, location, and timing of future development based upon the goals and policies set forth in the adopted comprehensive plan. 
    Lawn grass: See "grass" definition. 
    Loading, off-street: Space located outside of any street right-of-way and designed to accommodate the temporary parking of vehicles used for pickups and deliveries. 
    Lot definitions: 
(1)  Lot: A parcel of land possessing specific boundaries established by a legal instrument such as a deed or record plat, recognized as a separate legal entity for purposes of transfer of title. 
(2)  Lot, corner: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more intersecting streets. 
(3)  Lot, double frontage: A lot, excluding corner lots, having frontage on more than one (1) street. 
(4)  Lot line: The boundary of a lot. 
a.  Front lot line: The line separating a lot from a street, road, or other public or private right-of-way; in the event a lot abuts more than one (1) public or private right-of-way, the front lot line is designated and recorded by the building and zoning department. 
b.  Rear lot line: The line separating a lot from abutting property, an alley or other secondary means of access, and easement, or similar items. 
c.  Side lot line: Any lot line which is not a front or a rear lot line. 
(5)  Lot depth: The horizontal length of a straight line drawn from the midpoints of the front and rear lot lines. 
(6)  Lot, Non-Conforming: A legally subdivided lot shown on a legally recorded plat, existing at the time regulations were adopted, requiring greater minimum width or area than provided on such lot or establishing other limitations which such lot does not meet. 
(7)  Lot of record: A lot which is part of a platted subdivision or a parcel of land described by a deed, for which the subdivision plat or deed has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the circuit court of the county. 
(8)  Lot width: The horizontal length of a straight line drawn from the midpoints of the side lot lines. 
(9)  Lot area: The total area contained within the lot lines. 
(10)  Lot, irregular: A lot containing curved, uneven, reversed, or other asymmetrical lot lines. Required measurements, including lot area, width, depth, etc., shall be determined on an individual basis by the city engineer. 
(11)  Lot, interior: A lot abutting only one street or right-of-way. 
    Lot, parking: See "parking lot." 
    Low and moderate income household: A family or individual whose annual income is less than or equal to the annual income level established by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development for eligibility to participate in the Section 8 Housing Program. 
    Main building: The principal building situated or erected on a lot. 
    Maintenance and storage facility: Land, buildings, or structures devoted primarily to the maintenance or storage of equipment and materials. 
    Mangrove: Any or all of the following species of aquatic woody plants: 
Red mangrove (Rhizophora mangle), 
Black mangrove (Avicennia nittida or avicennia germinans), 
White mangrove (Laguncularia racemosa), 
Buttonwood or button-mangrove (Conocarpus erecta). 
    Manufactured building: Structures designed for residential, commercial, industrial, and related uses, constructed in whole or in part away from the building or installation site and constructed pursuant to F.S. ch. 553, Pt. IV. 
    Marina, commercial: A facility for mooring, launching, storing, sales, construction, and repairing of boats, including the sale of marine supplies and services. 
    Marquee sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Massage parlor, licensed: An establishment offering massages and related treatments by masseurs, licensed and operated pursuant to F.S. ch. 480. 
    Microwave tower: See "communications tower." 
    Minor: Any person who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years, or as otherwise defined by the State of Florida. 
    Mixed use: A real estate project characterized by all of the following: 
(1)  Three or more mutually supporting, revenue-producing uses, including retail, office, hotel/motel, recreation, and residential component, 
(2)  Functional and physical integration of project components (and thus a highly intensive use of land), including uninterrupted pedestrian connections; 
(3)  Development in conformance with a coherent plan which stipulates the type and scale of uses and related items. 
    Mobile home: A single or multi-family dwelling unit constructed on an integral chassis that is transportable over the roadway on wheels attached to the chassis in one (1) or more sections and containing appropriate connections for plumbing and electrical service and that is constructed to standards by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
    Mobile home park: An area of land under unified control and operation designed exclusively for use by mobile homes that are residential dwelling units. 
    Model dwelling unit or home: A residential structure used for demonstration or sales purposes, open to the public for inspection, and designed for ultimate sales or re-use or a mobile home unit used for demonstration or sales purposes which will be removed from the site upon completion of project. 
    Motel: A public lodging establishment licensed by the State of Florida which contains units with sleeping accommodations easily accessible to guests with an exit to the outside of each unit, daily or weekly rates, off-street parking for each unit, and a bath for each rental unit. 
    Motel unit: A room or suite of rooms in which lodging or boarding is offered to the public for compensation and access to the outside is provided for each unit. 
    Motor vehicle repair, heavy: An establishment that provides vehicle repair services, including body repair and painting, axle straightening, brake system repair, carburetor and fuel system repair, electrical and electronic system repair, exhaust system service, frame repair, generator and starter service, glass repair and replacement, muffler installation, radiator repair, transmission repair, and front end and wheel alignment services. 
    Motor vehicle repair, light: An establishment that provides motor vehicle repair services, excluding body repair and painting, axle straightening and frame repair; but including brake system repair, carburetor and fuel system repair, exhaust system service, front end and wheel alignment services, generator and starter service, glass repair and replacement, muffler installation, and transmission repair. 
    Motor vehicle sales and rental establishments (no service): Establishments for the storage and display for sale or rental or new and used motor vehicles, excluding repairs and service. 
    Motor vehicle sales and service agencies: Establishments for the storage and display for sale or rental of new and used motor vehicles, including repairs and service. 
    Multiple-faced sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Nonconforming lot: See "lot" definitions. 
    Nonconforming sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Nonconformities: 
(1)  Administrative nonconformities: Any lot, structures, or use which lacks any administrative approval required by this ordinance. Administrative approval shall mean special use approval, planned development approval, site plan approval or any other administrative or quasi-judicial approval required by this ordinance. 
(2)  Dimensional nonconformities: Nonconformity with any requirements pertaining to any of the following: 
a.  Minimum yard size, 
b.  Minimum structure or use setback, 
c.  Maximum lot coverage by buildings, 
d.  Maximum height for structures, 
e.  Maximum floor area ratio, 
f.  Maximum impermeable surface, 
g.  Limitations on lighting, 
h.  Limitations on the number of ingress and egress points or lanes, 
i.  Limitations on grades or slopes, 
j.  Limitations on mechanical and utilities equipment, 
k.  Limitations on plant material, 
l.  Other maximum or minimum limitations. 
(3)  Lot nonconformities: Nonconformity with any requirements pertaining to lot area or dimension. 
(4)  Required site improvement nonconformities: Nonconformities with any requirements pertaining to any of the following: 
a.  Required parking spaces, 
b.  Required loading spaces, 
c.  Required dumpster or other trash receptacle space, 
d.  Required vehicle stacking spaces for drive-in services, 
e.  Required access lanes for parking, loading, and trash receptacle spaces, 
f.  Required emergency access lanes, 
g.  Required screening, landscaping, and related site improvements, 
h.  Required building design characteristics, 
i.  Required pedestrian circulation, 
j.  Required overhead weather protection, 
k.  Required signs, 
l.  Required lighting, 
m.  Other site improvements requirement. 
(5)  Structures: See "structure" definition. 
(6)  Nonconforming structure or building: A structure or building possessing size, dimensions, or location which were lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of this Code, but which fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment, to conform to the present requirements of a particular zoning district. 
(7)  Nonconforming use: A use or activity which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment or this Code, but which fails, by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment, to conform to the present requirements of a particular zoning district. 
(8)  Nonconformity: A lot, structure, or use of land, or any combination thereof, which was lawful before the adoption, revision, or amendment of this Code, but which would be prohibited under the terms of this Code. 
    Non-tree removal verification statement: A statement signed by an applicant for a land clearing or grubbing permit, land use permit, or building permit certifying that removal of one (1) or more protected trees is not required for construction purposes. 
    Not-for-profit use or facility: See "public or quasi-public not-for-profit use or facility." 
    Nursing home: A facility for unrelated individuals providing lodging, meals, "intermediate care level one" and "intermediate care level two" medical services, as defined by the Florida Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services, and related support services. 
    Official zoning map: A map depicting the boundaries and identification of the zoning districts established by this Code. 
    Off-premise sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    On-premise sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Open space: An open, unenclosed area consisting of setbacks, landscaping, buffers, vehicular and pedestrian circulation features, and surface parking. 
    Open-space measurement: The aggregate of all of the components of open space expressed in square footage. 
    Outdoor storage: The keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than twenty-four (24) hours. 
    Painted sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Parapet: That portion of the facade wall which extends vertically above a roof line. 
    Parcel of real property: See "premises." 
    Parking lot: A paved area upon which more than four (4) or more motor vehicles may be parked. 
    Parking, off-street: Space located outside of any street right-of-way or easement and designed to accommodate the parking of motor vehicles. 
    Parking space, interior: Any parking space which is not adjacent to a required landscape strip. 
    Party wall: A common wall or parallel, adjacent solid walls with no visible separation between walls. 
    Pawnbroker: A person who is regularly engaged in the business of making pawns, but does not include a bank or financial institution as defined in this Code or any person who regularly loans money or any other thing of value on stocks, bonds, or other securities. 
    Pedestrian oriented activity: A wide variety of commercial land uses which attract pedestrian interest and stimulate walk-in traffic from passers-by, including but not limited to the following: department stores and other large scale retail uses; restaurants and delicatessens, both enclosed and open-air; specialty shops; theaters; banks and financial institutions; government offices; and other commercial activities which, by their very nature, attract people to window shop and browse. 
    Person: The word "person" shall include individuals, partnerships, associations, and corporations. 
    Personal service, commercial: An establishment that primarily provides services, involving the care of an individual or his/her apparel, including but not limited to the following: barber shops, beauty salons, seamstress shops, shoe repair shops, dry cleaning and laundry pickup facilities, coin-operated laundry and dry cleaning facilities, health spas, and similar establishments providing related services. 
    Planning board: That body created by the City Charter, Special Laws of Florida, 1965, as amended. 
    Plant material: Grass, ground cover, shrubs, vines, and trees. 
    Point of purchase sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Pole sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Political sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Premises: Any land together with any structures occupying it. 
    Professional services: The conduct of business in any of the following related categories: law, architecture, landscape architecture, medicine, dentistry, engineering, planning, music, art, finance, and insurance. 
    Projecting sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Protective barrier: A physical structure limiting access to a protected area, composed of suitable material, which complies with the specification requirements and intent of this Code. 
    Protective services, private: Private firms serving the general public for a fee, providing emergency or non-emergency police, rescue, ambulance, security, and related services, excluding funeral homes. 
    Protective services, public: Emergency or non-emergency services, including but not limited to police, fire, rescue, and ambulance services, operated by a unit of local government and financed through publicly generated revenues. 
    Public, quasi-public, or not-for-profit use or facility: The use of land, buildings, or structures by a governmental agency or not-for-profit institution registered under the provisions of Section 501(c), U.S. Internal Revenue Code of 1954, to provide cultural, educational, governmental, scientific, medical, and related services directly to the general public. 
    Public or private utility: A public or closely regulated private enterprise with an exclusive franchise for providing a public service, including but not limited to the following: water, electricity, natural gas, sewage treatment or telephone service. 
(1)  Public or private utility, heavy: A centralized facility for the provision of a public utility that is of sufficient scale and intensity to warrant special site considerations to limit the impact on surrounding properties. Heavy utility uses include, but are not limited to transmission towers, electrical power-generating plants and facilities, sewage treatment and disposal facilities, utilities supply yards, electrical transmission lines in excess of twenty-three (23) kilovolts, electrical substations, and water purification facilities. 
(2)  Public or private utility, light: A facility used in the transmission or delivery of a public or private utility, in which the facility is relatively small in scale and which can, with suitable screening, be compatible with residential and other low intensity uses. Light utility uses include but are not limited to electrical distribution facilities and transformers, sewage pumping facilities, water storage, control and pumping facilities, and structures, equipment and rights-of-way for telephone, electricity, gas, or water services, and electrical transmission lines of twenty-three (23) kilovolts or less. 
    Public parks and recreation areas: A use, area, building, or structure, including parks, playgrounds, athletic fields, piers, docks, and boat launching areas, that are publicly owned and used for recreational purposes by the general public and under the control and management of the city or other public agency. 
    Public property: Property owned by any governmental entity, including public right-of-way, streets, alleys, sidewalks, and parks, and all structures located upon such property, including but not limited to street and traffic signs, utility poles, fire hydrants, parking meters, trees, newspaper racks, and telephone booths. 
    Publishing and printing plant: A commercial establishment primarily engaged in preparing, publishing, and printing newspapers, periodicals, books, and other reading material, or similar printed materials. 
    Pylon sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Quasi-public: An activity, use of structures, or land and related or accessory operations generally open to the public on a non-profit basis for religious, cultural, medical, entertainment, and similar purposes. 
    Real estate sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Recreation facility, commercial: A recreation facility operated as a business and open to the public for a fee, excluding adult entertainment uses. 
    Recreational vehicle: A self-propelled or non-motorized vehicle that may be primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreation, camping, or travel purposes, including but not limited to travel trailers, camping trailers, truck campers, and motor homes, as defined by F.S. § 320.01, as amended. 
    Remove or removal: The actual removal of a tree or causing the effective removal of a tree by damaging, poisoning, or other direct or indirect actions. 
    Residence/residential: A structure or structures intended privately for human habitation. 
    Restaurants (excluding drive-ins): Establishments, excluding drive-ins, where the principal business is the sale of food, desserts, or beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state where the design or principal method of operation includes one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  Customers are provided with a menu and are served generally by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter at which said items are consumed, 
(2)  Ice cream parlors and other small specialty restaurants having floor area exclusively within a shopping or office center and sharing common parking facilities with other businesses within the center, 
(3)  A cafeteria or cafeteria-type operation where foods, desserts, or beverages generally are served and consumed within the restaurant building, 
(4)  Customers purchase food, desserts, or beverages for carryout. 
    Restaurants (drive-ins): Establishments selling food and beverages in a form ready for consumption where all or a significant portion of the consumption takes place or is intended to take place in a motor vehicle or at another location. 
    Restaurants, take out: Establishments selling food and beverages in a form ready for consumption, all or a significant portion of the consumption occurs off the premises. 
    Recreational vehicle park: An area under unified control which is and designed exclusively for temporary accommodations for travel trailers, camping trailers, truck campers, and motor homes, and which is not intended as an area to establish permanent residency. 
    Retail sales and services, general: Establishments which sell products and services required to meet the recurring day-to-day commercial needs of a community as well as the less frequent consumer demands for more durable commercial products or services. These establishments include but are not limited to convenience stores, variety stores, hardware and garden supply stores, apparel and footwear stores, florists, gift shops, jewelry stores, book and stationery stores, office equipment and supplies, automotive supply stores, appliance stores, and similar retail sales and services. General retail sales and services expressly exclude the sale of motor vehicles, except small parts and accessories, sale of construction materials, except paint fixtures, and hardware, vehicular service and maintenance activities including service stations, and the commercial storage or rental of vehicles. 
    Retail sales and services, marine-related: Establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise or providing services that are supportive of waterfront activities. 
    Retail shops, specialty: Commercial establishments such as boutique shops and other specialty shops that cater to custom markets, such as tourists, collectors, design clientele, and similar specialized user groups, and offering goods not generally available in convenience or more general goods establishments. 
    Revolving sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Right-of-way: A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription, or condemnation and intended to be occupied or is occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer, and other similar uses. 
    Roof sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Rooming house: A public lodging establishment providing lodging on a fee basis for three (3) or more individuals, excluding the following: single and multi-family dwelling units, dormitories operated in conjunction with an educational institutions, fraternity and sorority houses, hospitals, group homes, hotels, motels, and apartments. 
    Rotating sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Sandwich sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Satellite dish antenna: A commercial or noncommercial communications device installed as an accessory use and designed to receive television or radio signals broadcast from communications satellites or other remote, wireless sources. 
    Savings and loan: See "bank" definition. 
    School, private: An educational institution, licensed by the State of Florida, and operated by any person, agency, or organization other than a school district, the State University System, or the Florida Department of Education, excluding child or adult care centers. 
    School, public: Educational institutions operated by a school district, the State University System, or the Florida Department of Education, providing kindergarten, primary, secondary, post-secondary, vocational, adult, and other specialized forms of learning. 
    Semi-free-standing sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Service station: See "vehicular service and maintenance establishment." 
    Setback line: A line marking the required building setback distance from one (1) or more lot lines. 
    Setback, front: Required open space extending across the full width of the front of a lot between the front property line and the required building setback line. 
    Setback, rear: Required open space extending across the full width of the rear of a lot between the rear lot line and the required building setback line. 
    Setback, required: The minimum setback required by this Code. Any setback provided in excess of the minimum amount specified shall not be deemed to be a part of the required setback. 
    Setback, side: Required open space extending across the full width of the side of a lot between the side property line and the required building setback line. 
    Shopping area: A commercial establishment or a group of commercial establishments related in its location, size, and types of shops to the trade area which the unit serves. 
    Shore line: The mean high water level. 
    Shrubs: Self-supporting, woody, evergreen plans smaller than a tree and usually branching from or near the ground, including such plant material as Hibiscus rosa-sinehsus, Ligustrum lucidium, Podocarpus macrophylla, and Murry paniculata. 
    Sidewalk sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Sign: A display of banners and flags, characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentations, or the complete structure on which any such characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentations are stated or applied, excluding buildings used for identification, directional advertising, or promotional purposes, provided, however, that the term shall not be construed so as to include self-contained fixtures approved by the National Board of Fire Underwriters of nonelectrical display, wholly contained within a store building and not visible from any public right-of-way. 
(1)  Abandoned sign: A sign advertising a business that is no longer licensed, no longer has a certificate of occupancy, or is no longer doing business at that location. 
(2)  Add-on sign: An additional sign added to a previously permitted on conforming sign. 
(3)  A-frame sign: A movable sign not secured or attached to the ground. 
(4)  Animated sign: A sign with action or motion using electrical energy, electronic or manufactured sources of energy, or wind-actuated elements, including rotating, revolving, or flashing signs. 
(5)  Background area of sign: The area of a sign under which a copy can be placed. To determine the area of a sign background, only the face which can be seen only from one (1) direction at one (1) time shall be utilized. 
(6)  Billboard (off-premise sign): A sign or framework installed for the purpose of advertising merchandise, services, or entertainment that are sold, produced, manufactured, or furnished at places other than the location of sign. 
(7)  Changeable copy sign: A sign which is characterized by changeable copy or letters, regardless of method or attachment. 
(8)  Construction sign: A temporary sign identifying those engaged in construction on any building site, including but not limited to the following: the builder, contractor, developer, architect, engineer, painter, plumber, or other persons or artisans participating in the construction activities. 
(9)  Copy area of a sign: The actual area of the sign copy applied to any background. The copy area is computed by straight lines drawn closest to copy extremities, encompassing individual letters or words. 
(10)  Development sign: A temporary sign advertising the sale or rental of structures under construction. 
(11)  Double-faced sign: A sign with two faces which are parallel to each other and back to back. 
(12)  Electric sign: See "Illuminated Sign". 
(13)  Entrance sign: An identification structure located at the main entrance to a city-approved subdivision or development. 
(14)  Fixed projecting sign: A sign projecting at an angle from the outside wall or walls of any wall building and rigidly affixed thereto. 
(15)  Flashing sign: A sign used for identification, directional, advertising, or promotional purposes, including approved lighting fixtures which flash, blink, operate intermittently, and are used as exterior signs or interior signs visible from a public right-of-way. 
(16)  Flat or wall sign: A sign erected parallel to the facade or on the outside wall of any building and supported throughout its length by the wall of the building. 
(17)  Free-standing sign: A sign which is supported by one or more columns, uprights, or braces in or upon the ground, including pole and ground signs. 
(18)  Ground sign: See "free standing sign." 
(19)  Identification sign: A sign painted on a wall used to identify the name of the business located therein, its principals, and its address. 
(20)  Illuminated sign: A sign in which an internal or external source of light is used to make the text or copy legible. 
(21)  Instructional sign: A sign conveying instructions with respect to the premises on which it is maintained, such as, but not limited to, "exit," "entrance," "parking," etc. 
(22)  Marquee sign: A sign attached to the side of or front of or hung under a marquee. 
(23)  Multiple-faced sign: A sign with more than two faces. 
(24)  Nonconforming sign: A sign which does not comply with the regulations of this zoning code or subsequent amendments. 
(25)  Off-premise sign: See "billboard." 
(26)  On-premise sign: See "point of purchase sign." 
(27)  Painted sign: A sign painted on any surface, including the roof or any building, visible from any public right-of-way. 
(28)  Point-of-purchase sign: A structure, device, display board, screen surface or wall, characters, letters, or illustrations where the matter displayed is used for advertising a product or service activity offered for sale or rent on the premises. 
(29)  Pole sign: See "free-standing sign." 
(30)  Political sign: A sign urging the election or defeat of any candidate seeking any political office or urging the passage or defeat of any ballot measure. 
(31)  Projecting sign: A sign projecting at an angle from the outside wall or walls or any building and rigidly affixed thereto. 
(32)  Pylon sign: An advertising structure projecting from a wall or extending over the roof of any building, comprising a framework and display surface, the structural members of which are an integral part of the building upon which the sign is installed. 
(33)  Real estate sign: A sign installed by an owner or his agent on a temporary basis, advertising that the real property upon which the sign is located is for rent or for sale, excluding rooming house signs. 
(34)  Revolving sign: See "animated sign." 
(35)  Roof sign: Any outdoor advertising display sign installed, constructed or maintained on or above the roof or any building. 
(36)  Rotating sign: See "animated sign." 
(37)  Sandwich sign: See "A-frame sign." 
(38)  Semi-free standing sign: A sign which is supported by one or more uprights or braces in or upon the ground and partially attached to any building. 
(39)  Sidewalk sign: See "A-frame sign." 
(40)  Sign background: That part of a sign which is around or between elements of the sign content. 
(41)  Sign Code: Article ____________ of the Code of the City of Pahokee, Florida. 
(42)  Sign content: Any letters, numbers, illustrations, decorations or ornamentations which convey information or attract attention. 
(43)  Sign face: A surface of a sign on which the content of the sign is located. 
(44)  Sign height: The vertical distance from the natural grade over which the sign is placed to the highest point on the sign. 
(45)  Sign structure: A structure including any trailer or other vehicle, which supports or is designed to support or hold together a collection of sign content or sign background; including any trailer or other vehicle, and any balloon or similar device attached to the ground or anything thereon, and any other device which is readily movable and designed or used primarily for the display of signs. A sign structure shall be limited in accordance with this article. 
(46)  Snipe sign: A sign of any size, made of any material, including paper, cardboard, wood, and metal, when such sign is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued, or otherwise attached to trees, poles, fences, or other objects, containing advertising matter that is not applicable to the premises upon which such sign is located. 
(47)  Swinging sign: A sign that swings freely from or on supports, regardless of the guy wires used in connection therewith. 
(48)  Time and temperature sign: A display containing illuminated numerals flashing alternately to show the current time and temperature. 
(49)  Vee shaped sign: A sign other than a flat or wall sign, that is attached to a building other than a flat or wall sign, and which has two (2) faces which are not parallel. 
(50)  Vehicular sign: A sign affixed to or painted on a motor transportation vehicle or trailer for the purpose of business advertising, excluding signs affixed to vehicles or trailers for identification purposes as required by licensing ordinances of the city or other governmental agency. 
(51)  Wall sign: See "flat or wall sign." 
(52)  Wall mounted sign: A sign which is painted on or affixed to any building exterior wall and is completely supported by said wall. 
(53)  Window sign: A sign installed or maintained in the window of any building and visible from any public right-of-way. 
    Sign Code: See "sign" definitions. 
    Snipe sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Sorority house: See "fraternity house." 
    Special non-commercial events or public interest, minor: A public event sponsored by a religious institution, public or private school, or non-profit organization, as defined by Section 501(c) or the Internal Revenue Code of 1954. 
    Special non-commercial events of public interest, major: A public event sponsored by a non-profit organization, as defined by Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, and held in an area greater than 1.50 acres. 
    Special use: A specific use that generally would not be appropriate within a particular zoning district, but that may be permitted subject to specific limitations and restrictions. 
    Specimen tree: A tree which has been determined, in the judgment of a professional forester, landscape architect, arborist, horticulturist, or similar expert, to be of high value to the community, because of its type, age, or other professional criteria, and has been so designated by the city commission. 
    Story: That portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
    Story, half: A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three (3) feet above the top floor level, and in which space not more than sixty (60) percent of the floor area is finished for use. A half story may be used for occupancy only in conjunction with, and by the occupants of, the floor immediately below. 
    Street: A public right-of-way which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Street line: The right-of-way line abutting the frontage of a lot. 
    Streetscape: That part of the urban environment which is within the normal field of vision of a person walking at ground level and which can generally be considered to include everything within public view extending upward from ground level to a height [no] greater than the width of the street that the pedestrian is standing or moving along. The elements of a streetscape include but are not limited to building facades, landscaping, paving, street furnishings, and graphics. 
    Structural alterations: Any change in the supporting of a structure, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, and girders or in the dimensions or configuration of the roof or exterior walls. 
    Structure: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground, including but not limited to buildings, mobile homes, towers, walls, fences, billboards, poster panels, recreational facilities, and swimming pools. 
    Structure, temporary: A structure without any foundation or footings and which is removed when the designated time period, activity, or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased. 
    Subdivision: The division and the recording of such division in accordance with law of a parcel of land into two (2) or more lots or blocks for the purpose of transfer of ownership or development for sale, according with law. 
    Swimming pool: A portable pool or permanent structure that contains a body of water eighteen (18) inches or more in depth or two hundred fifty (250) square feet or more of water surface area and intended for recreational purposes, including a wading pool. Excluded is an ornamental reflecting pool, fish pond, or other type of pool regardless of size, unless located and designated so as to create a hazard or be used for swimming or wading. 
    Swinging sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Synthetic plants: Synthetic or artificial material in the form of trees, shrubs, ground covers, or vines. 
    Temporary labor office: An office which provides on a fee basis the services of generally unskilled or semi-skilled laborers on a daily or short-term basis. 
    Temporary use building: A building, consisting of one (1) or more modules not intended for residential use and not attached to a permanent or semi-permanent foundation. 
    Time and temperature sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Time share unit: A room or suite of rooms with or without kitchen or cooking facilities in which the right of use or occupancy circulated on an annual basis among various persons for specific periods of time in accordance with a fixed time schedule. 
    Townhouse: A single-family residential building attached to a series of other single family residential buildings by not more than two (2) party walls. 
    Townhouse complex: A group of townhouses connected by party walls. 
    Townhouse unit: A multi-story single-family residential dwelling unit sharing not more than two (2) common walls. 
    Tree: An erect standing wood plant having an average mature crown of greater then twenty (20) feet and having a trunk which can be maintained with at least six (6) feet of clear wood at maturity. 
    Use: The purpose or activity for which land or buildings is designed, arranged or intended, or for which land or buildings are occupied or maintained. 
    Use, temporary: A use established for a fixed period of time with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the designated time period. 
    Variance: A departure from the dimensional or numerical requirements of this Code when such variance will is not contrary to the public interest and where, owing the conditions peculiar to the property and not as a result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the Code would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
    Vee shaped: See "sign" definitions. 
    Vehicular service and maintenance establishment: An establishment for the retail sale and dispensing of motor fuels and related products, which has pumps, underground storage tanks, and other facilities for such activity and which may include the retail sale of minor automobile parts and accessories such as tires, batteries, spark plugs, fan belts, shock absorbers, mirrors, floor mats, cleaning and polishing materials, and similar items. Establishments of this nature may provide inspection, servicing, or minor repair of motor vehicles within enclosed service bays or stalls, excluding body repair and painting, frame straightening, or tire recapping or vulcanizing. 
    Vehicular sales and service: The retail or wholesale or rental of motor vehicles and related equipment, with incidental service and maintenance. 
    Vehicular sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Wall sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Wholesale trades and service: The display, storage, and sale of goods to other firms for resale, excluding outside storage, except as otherwise provided in this Code. 
    Window sign: See "sign" definitions. 
    Yard: That area which lies between the principal or accessory building or buildings and the nearest lot line. Such yard is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as may be specifically provided in this Code. 
    Yard, required: The minimum yard required by this Code. Any yard space supplied in excess of the minimum amount specified shall not be deemed to be a required yard except as provided elsewhere in this Code. 
    Zoning board of adjustment: That body created by the City Charter, Special Laws of Florida, 1965, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 99-7 , § 1, 6-22-99) 
Chapter 15 - MOBILE HOMES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; flood damage prevention requirements for mobile homes, §§ 10-51, 10-52; planning, Ch. 19; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22; subdivisions, Ch. 23; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 25; utilities, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference- Mobile home and recreational vehicle parks, F.S. Ch. 513. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Mobile home shall have the meaning provided in F.S. § 320.01 means a structure transportable in one (1) or more sections, which structure is eight (8) body feet (2.4 meters) or more in width and over thirty-five (35) feet in length, and which structure is built on an integral chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. 
    Mobile home park means a place set aside and offered by a person or public body, for either direct or indirect remuneration of the owner, lessor, or operator of such place, for the parking or accommodation of six (6) or more mobile homes utilized for sleeping or eating. 
    Recreational vehicle shall have the meaning provided in F.S. § 320.01, which includes the terms "travel trailer," "camping trailer," "truck camper," "motor home," "van conversion," and "park trailer." However, the terms "temporary living quarters" and "seasonal or temporary living quarters and seasonal or temporary living quarters" as used in F.S. § 320.01 shall, in reference to recreational vehicles placed in recreational vehicle parks, relate to the period of time the recreational vehicle is occupied as living quarters during each year and not in the period of time it is located in the recreational vehicle park During the time the recreational vehicle is not occupied as temporary or seasonal quarters, it may be stored and tied down on the recreational vehicle site. The affixing of a recreational vehicle to the ground by way of tie-downs or other removal fasteners, and the attachment of carports, porches, screen rooms, and other similar appurtenances by the way of removable attaching devices, shall not render the recreational vehicle a permanent part of the recreational vehicle site. 
    Recreational vehicle park means a place set aside and offered by a person or public body, for either direct or indirect remuneration of the owner, lessor or operator of such place, for the parking and accommodation of six (6) or more recreational vehicles or tents utilized for sleeping or eating. The term also includes buildings and sites set aside for group camping and similar recreational facilities. For the purposes of this chapter, the terms "campground," "camping resort," "RV resort," "travel resort," and "travel park," or any variations of these terms, shall be considered synonymous with the term "recreational vehicle park." 
    Subdivision for mobile homes shall mean any part or all of any platted subdivision in the city that is recognized by ordinance as being zoned for the parking and occupancy of mobile homes on individually owned lots, with one (1) such mobile home only being permitted for five thousand (5,000) square feet, and each lot containing not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet. No mobile home may be placed on any lot within twenty-five (25) feet from the front of the lot along the main street, ten (10) feet from each side of the lot, and fifteen (15) feet from the rear of the lot. Such phrase shall not mean "recreational vehicle park" as the term is commonly used to refer to accommodations for transient guests. 
    Unit means a section of ground in a recreational vehicle park of not less than twenty-five (25) feet by thirty-five (35) feet of unoccupied space in an area designated as the location for one (1) automobile and one (1) recreational vehicle. 
(Code 1984, § 24-1; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 2, 8-10-2010) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 15-2. - Parking mobile homes or recreational vehicles restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful, within the limits of the city, for any person to park any mobile home or recreational vehicle on any street, alley, or highway, or other public space, or in any tract of land owned by a person, occupied or unoccupied, within the city, except as follows: 
(1)  Recreational vehicle park. Parking in a duly licensed recreational vehicle park as provided in this article is permitted. No permit is necessary. 
(2)  Emergency. Emergency or temporary stopping or parking is permitted on any street, alley or highway for not longer than one (1) hour subject to any other and further prohibitions, regulations, or limitations imposed by the traffic and parking regulations or ordinances for that street, alley or highway. 
(3)  Accessory garage or yard. No person shall park or occupy any recreational vehicle on the premises of any occupied dwelling or on any lot which is not a part of the premises of any occupied dwelling, either of which is situated outside an approved recreational vehicle park, for more than five (5) days, except, the parking of only one (1) unoccupied recreational vehicle in an accessory private garage building or in a yard in any district is permitted, providing no living quarters shall be maintained or any business practiced in the recreational vehicle while such recreational vehicle is so parked or stored. Such vehicle may be allowed to obtain electric service but shall not connect to water or sewer service. 
(4)  Industrial zoning. The parking of only one (1) mobile home or recreational vehicle shall be allowed in the industrial areas of the city, that are so zoned, for the watchmen or office use, provided it is placed a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any building. 
Editor's note- For initial application fee, the user's attention is directed to § 15-4. 
(5)  Temporary offices, security. The parking of only one (1) mobile home or recreational vehicle is permitted on construction sites as temporary offices, or for security purposes during the period of construction and so long as the building permit at the site is valid, as provided under the building code. 
(6)  Medical necessity. The parking of only one (1) mobile home or recreational vehicle is permitted upon any other site within the city where the location thereof will not violate the setback requirements and it is not located in the front yard, and where it is medically necessary for the health, care and welfare of the trailer occupant to not live alone, and the close assistance of a family member is required for the health and care of the occupant as follows: 
a.  The occupant of the mobile home or recreational vehicle must be a close relative by blood or marriage, or a legal ward of the property owner then occupying the principal dwelling as their permanent residence. 
b.  Application for a permit pursuant to this subsection (6) shall be filed on a form provided by the city and certified by the building inspector that the property upon which it is proposed to locate the mobile home or recreational vehicle is not then in violation of any provision of this Code and the location thereof of such mobile home or recreational vehicle will not otherwise violate this Code. 
c.  The application shall have attached to it a current statement from a licensed physician in the state that the proposed mobile home or recreational vehicle occupant is, in the opinion of the doctor, unable to live alone and requires care and supervision from some family member and a statement of the medical condition of the patient existing on which the doctor bases his opinion. 
d.  When a permit is issued, the mobile home or recreational vehicle shall be located in the rear yard of the property back of the principal dwelling, fifteen (15) feet from the rear property line and at least five (5) feet total from the side lines of the parcel. 
e.  All mobile homes and recreational vehicles granted permits pursuant to this subsection (6) must be left with undercarriage and other equipment necessary for its removal and shall in no event be affixed in any permanent way to foundation. They shall, however, be tied down in accordance with the requirements of this Code in the regard for safety purposes. 
f.  The application shall contain the name of the manufacturer of the mobile home or recreational vehicle, year of manufacture, the model number, the dimensions of the mobile home or recreational vehicle and an actual color photograph of the exterior and any other information requested by the city. The permit, when issued, shall be issued for that particular vehicle, at a specific location only, and at all times they shall be maintained in an attractive manner and kept in compliance with all Code requirements for safety and health. A mobile home or recreational vehicle may be substituted for an existing mobile home or recreational vehicle by appropriate application and amended permit. 
g.  Renewal shall be upon annual application on a simplified form in which the applicant certifies that the original conditions of the application still exist. 
h.  No permit will be issued to any person, except an owner who occupies the principal dwelling at the site at all times as his home and residence. In the event of the death of the occupant of the mobile home or recreational vehicle, the mobile home or recreational vehicle occupant ceases to actually live and reside in the mobile home or recreational vehicle for a continuing period of thirty (30) days (except time spent in a hospital shall not count), or the medical condition required by this subsection (6) of the mobile home or recreational vehicle occupant ceases to exist, or the owner of the property ceases to make the principal dwelling on the site their permanent home; all permits issued pursuant to this subsection (6) shall be null and void. The owner shall remove such mobile home or recreational vehicle from the premises within sixty (60) days of such termination. 
i.  Reserved. 
j.  No such mobile home or recreational vehicle may be rented to any person and no personal shall pay the owner any rent or other form of compensation as rent for such use. 
(7)  Church property. The parking of only one (1) mobile home or recreation vehicle is permitted on church property (utilized for worship) for security purposes. 
(8)  Agricultural use. The parking of only one (1) mobile home or recreation vehicle is permitted as an accessory use to a principal bona fide agriculture use under the following conditions: 
a.  Bona fide agriculture shall apply to any plot of land where the principal use consists of the growing, cultivation and harvesting of crops; the raising of animals, inclusive of aviculture, aquaculture, horses and livestock; the production of animal products such as eggs, honey or dairy products; or the raising of plant material. The determination as to whether or not the use of land is considered bona fide agriculture shall be made pursuant of F.S. § 823.24, Florida Right to Farm Act. 
b.  The minimum lot size for the parking of one (1) mobile home or recreation vehicle as an accessory use shall be two and one-half (2.5) acres. 
c.  The mobile home may be substituted and sold together with the land consisting of the bona fide agricultural use. 
(Code 1984, § 24-2; Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 6-9-1992; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 2, 8-10-2010) 
Sec. 15-3. - Permits continued from August 10, 2010; conditions. 
    In addition to the permitted mobile home and recreational vehicles provided for in section 15-2, all lawfully issued mobile home or recreational vehicle permits which were issued and outstanding as of August 10, 2010 and whose permit holders maintained and continued their current use and status of such mobile home or recreational vehicle, were, and shall continue to be allowed to maintain and continue the same use and status of such mobile home or recreational vehicle which was in effect on August 10, 2010, provided that: 
(1)  The permit holder makes proper annual application for renewal on the form furnished by the city on or before September 1, 2010, for the permit year of October 1, 2010, to September 30, 2011, and thereafter made proper annual application for renewal. 
(2)  The permittee pays applicable application and permit fees. 
(3)  There has been no change in the location or the mobile home or recreational vehicle described in the permit has not been substituted with any other mobile home or recreational vehicle since August 10, 2010. 
(4)  The ownership of the real property upon which the mobile home or recreational vehicle is located has not changed since August 10, 2010. The transfer of the real property by any means, or any part thereof as described in the permit, the death of the owner of the permit, or the destruction or removal of the vehicle from the permit premises shall all constitute a termination of the permit issued pursuant to section 15-2. No permit issued pursuant to section 15-2 shall be transferable, nor any rights therein. All permits issued pursuant to section 15-2 shall have the words "Restricted Permit" imprinted, stamped, or written across, or on the face of the permit. 
(5)  The city may grant an exception to the disallowance of continued permitting of any mobile homes or recreational vehicles allowed under this section when the mobile home or recreational vehicle has been lawfully parked in an area that was designated as a "trailer park" or "recreational vehicle park" on August 10, 2010, but has been since rezoned or reclassified and no longer designated as a "trailer park." 
(Code 1984, § 24-3; Ord. No. 92-6, § 1, 10-13-1992; Ord. No. 93-1, § 1, 2-13-1993; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 2, 8-10-2010) 
Sec. 15-4. - Application and fees. 
    Any property owner requesting to situate a mobile home or recreational vehicle on their property for the first time shall file an application for a permit and all required documentation along with a nonrefundable application fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) on a form provided by the city. The annual permit fee shall be as set forth below payable when the permit is issued and the permit shall run from October 1 to the next succeeding September 13. A partial year's permit may be issued for any portion of a year's remaining from the date of approval of the permit prorated by month. Each partial month shall count as a full month for the purpose of computation of the fee. 
The following shall be submitted with new applications for location of a mobile home or recreational vehicle: 
(1)  The written consent of all owners of the lands within one hundred (100) feet of the exterior property line of the applicant's property where the mobile home or recreational vehicle is to be located, the description of which shall be determined by the parcel as described in the current tax roll. This shall not apply to mobile homes or recreational vehicles located on industrial property or construction sites. 
(2)  A certification by the building inspector that the property upon which it is proposed to locate the mobile home or recreational vehicle is not then in violation of any provision of this Code and the location thereof of such mobile home or recreational vehicle will not otherwise violate this Code. 
(3)  The application shall contain the name of the manufacturer of the mobile home or recreational vehicle, year of manufacture, the model number, the dimensions of the mobile home or recreational vehicle and an actual color photograph of the exterior, the proposed location of the mobile home or recreational vehicle on the site and any other information requested by the city. The permit, when issued shall be issued for that particular vehicle, at a specific location only, and at all times they shall be maintained in an attractive manner and kept in compliance with all Code requirements for safety and health. A mobile home or recreational vehicle may be substituted for an existing mobile home or recreational vehicle by appropriate application and amended permit. 
(4)  All renewal permits shall be required to provide subsections (2) and (3) of this section. 

Type Permit Annual Renewal Necessary? Renewal Fee Recreational Vehicle Park No No fee for industrial vehicles/homes. Accessory Garage/Yard Yes $75.00 Industrial Zoning/Watchman Office Yes $75.00 Medical Necessity Yes $75.00 Church Property/Worship Yes $75.00 Security Bona Fide Agricultural Yes* $75.00* Sec. 15-3 Permits Yes $75.00  
*Unless mobile home is taxed by the property appraiser as part of the real property, then no annual 
 renewal and no annual fee. 
(Code 1984, § 24-4; Ord. No. 2007-12, § 1, 8-28-2007; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 2, 8-10-2010) 
Secs. 15-5-15-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 15-26. - Zoning restrictions; exceptions. 
(a)  No recreational vehicle park shall be located in any district other than C-1, C-2, and I. 
(b)  The board of adjustments may in conformance with the zoning laws, recommend, and authorize to be issued, a license for the location of such a facility. 
(c)  No recreational vehicle park shall be located within the limits of the city unless adequate city water and sanitary sewerage disposal and fire protection facilities are made available. 
(d)  No occupied recreational vehicle or park cottage or cabin or other building shall be located within the city within the recognized setback line for the zoning district in which such recreational vehicle or cabin is located nor less than ten (10) feet from any other building or vehicle or the boundary line of the tract on which located. 
(Code 1984, § 24-17; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 2, 8-10-2010) 
Sec. 15-27. - General requirements. 
(a)  Every recreational vehicle park shall be located on a well-drained area, and the premises shall be properly graded so as to prevent the accumulation of stormwaters and other waters. 
(b)  Units and cabin plots shall be clearly designated and the park so arranged that all units and cabin plots shall face or about on a driveway not less than sixteen (16) feet in width, giving easy access from all units to a public street. Such driveway shall be paved and maintained in good condition, well lighted at night, and shall not be obstructed. 
(c)  No park cottage or cabin shall be less than two hundred eighty (280) square feet in area nor less than fourteen (14) feet wide at its narrowest point, and not less than eight (8) feet high from floor to ceiling and shall not have less than twenty-seven (27) square feet of ventilating openings, and all windows must be fully screened. 
(d)  The park shall be so laid out that no unit or cabin shall be located farther than two hundred (200) feet from the toilets and service buildings provided for in this article. 
(e)  Every unit shall be furnished with an electric service outlet. Such outlet shall be equipped with an externally operated switch or fuse of not less than thirty (30) amperes capacity and a heavy duty outlet receptacle. 
(Code 1984, § 24-18; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 2, 8-10-2010) 
Sec. 15-28. - Water supply. 
(a)  An adequate supply of pure water, furnished through a pipe distribution system connected directly with the city water main, with supply faucets located at each recreational vehicle or cabin, shall be required. 
(b)  No common drinking vessels shall be permitted, nor shall any drinking water faucets be placed in any toilet room or water closet compartment. 
(c)  An abundant supply of hot water shall be provided at all times for bathing, washing, and laundry facilities. 
(Code 1984, § 24-19; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 2, 8-10-2010) 
Cross reference- Water generally, § 26-26 et seq. 
Sec. 15-29. - Service building and facilities. 
(a)  Every recreational vehicle park shall have erected thereon, at a distance not greater than two hundred (200) feet from any unit or cabin it is designed to serve, a suitable building for housing, toilets, showers, and laundry facilities. Such building shall be known as the service building. 
(b)  There shall be provided separate toilet rooms for each sex. Flush toilets provided with and adequate water supply shall be enclosed in separate compartments having a minimum width of four (4) feet and shall be provided for each sex in the ratio of one (1) toilet for each eight (8) units or cabins or fraction thereof. Every male toilet room shall have one (1) urinal for each sixteen (16) units or cabins, but in no case shall any male toilet be without a urinal. Toilet rooms shall contain lavatories with hot and cold water in the ratio of one (1) lavatory to every two (2) or less water closets. 
(c)  Separate bathing facilities for each sex shall be provided with one (1) shower enclosed in a compartment at least four (4) feet square for each eight (8) units or cabins or fraction thereof. Each shower compartment shall be supplemented by an individual dressing compartment of at least twelve (12) square feet. 
(d)  Laundry facilities shall be provided in the ratio of one (1) double tray and one (1) ironing board for each ten (10) units or cabins. 
(e)  The above accommodations shall be based on the total park capacity according to accepted plans. 
(f)  Floors of toilets, showers, and the laundry shall be of concrete, tile, or similar material impervious to water and easily cleaned and pitched to a floor drain. 
(Code 1984, § 24-20; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 2, 8-10-2010) 
Cross reference- Sewers generally, § 26-91 et seq. 
Sec. 15-30. - Garbage and waste disposal. 
    All waste and garbage shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1984, § 24-21; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 2, 8-10-2010) 
Cross reference- Garbage and trash generally, Ch. 11. 
Sec. 15-31. - Limitation on occupants of trailers. 
    No recreational vehicle or cabin may be inhabited by a greater number of occupants than that for which it was designed. 
(Code 1984, § 24-22; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 2, 8-10-2010) 
Sec. 15-32. - Management of parks; compliance with laws. 
(a)  In every recreational vehicle park there shall be an office building in which shall be located the office of the person in charge of the park. A copy of the park license and of this article shall be posted therein, and the park register shall be at all times kept in the office. 
(b)  It is hereby made the duty of the attendant or person in charge, together with the licensee, to comply at all times with the city, county and state laws governing recreational vehicle parks. 
(Code 1984, § 24-23; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 2, 8-10-2010) 
Sec. 15-33. - Applicability of technical regulations. 
    All plumbing, electrical and other work on or at any park licensed under this article shall be in accordance with the provisions of the ordinances of the city regulating such work unless the provisions are specifically made inapplicable under the terms of this article. 
(Code 1984, § 24-24; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 2, 8-10-2010) 
Sec. 15-34. - Recreational vehicles in mobile home parks. 
(a)  Transient recreational vehicles shall not be allowed in mobile home parks. Transient recreational vehicles shall mean any recreational vehicle that does not have a written lease agreement for more than six (6) months. A month-to-month rental shall be considered transient. 
(b)  Non-transient recreational vehicles shall be allowed in mobile home parks provided the owner first obtains a permit from the city. Permits shall be granted by the city to recreational vehicle owners who desire to keep their recreational vehicles in a mobile home park which meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Payment of application fee; 
(2)  Completion of application; 
(3)  Supplies the city with a copy of their lease; 
(4)  The mobile home park has supplied the city with a copy of its plan to provide services to the recreational vehicle, including a description of water, sewer, electric, and all utility provisions; 
(5)  The mobile home park is in compliance with F.S. ch. 513, and has a current permit from the county health department for a mobile home park, that also rents to non-transient recreational vehicles; and 
(6)  The applicant for the permit agrees to comply with the mobile home parks' rules regarding approaching severe weather, and a copy of the rules must be on file with the city. 
(Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, 4-10-2012) 
Secs. 15-35-15-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Occupational licenses and business regulations, Ch. 16. 

Sec. 15-46. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate or maintain, or permit to be established, operated or maintained upon any property owned or controlled by him, a recreational vehicle park within the limits of the city without having first secured a license therefore, from the tax collector, granted and existing in compliance with the terms of this article. 
(Code 1984, § 24-4(a); Ord. No. 2010-10, § 2, 8-10-2010) 
Sec. 15-47. - Application. 
    The application for such license shall be filed with the tax collector. The application shall be made on printed forms furnished by the tax collector, and shall include the name and address of the owner in fee of the tract (if the fee is vested in some person other than the applicant, a duly verified statement by that person that the applicant is authorized by him to construct or maintain the recreational vehicle park and make the application), and a legal description of the premises. The application shall be accompanied by two (2) copies of the park plan showing the following, either existing or as proposed: 
(1)  The extent and area used for park purposes; 
(2)  Roadways and driveways; 
(3)  Location of sites or units for recreational vehicles or cabins; 
(4)  Location and number of sanitary conveniences, including toilets, washrooms, laundries and utility rooms, to be used by occupants of units or cabins (in cases where cabins do not have all such facilities in proper conformance with city building, plumbing and other codes); 
(5)  Method and plan of sewage disposal; 
(6)  Method and plan of garbage removal; 
(7)  Plan for water supply; 
(8)  Plan for electrical lighting of units and cabins. 
(Code 1984, § 24-4(b); Ord. No. 2010-10, § 2, 8-10-2010) 
Sec. 15-48. - Recommendation and inspection of premises by board of investigators. 
    Before a license may be issued pursuant to this article there must be a favorable recommendation by a majority of the board of investigators and the premises must be inspected and approved by each of the members of the board of investigators, or their duly authorized representative, as complying with all the provisions of this article and all other applicable provisions of the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1984, § 24-4(c); Ord. No. 2010-10, § 2, 8-10-2010) 
Sec. 15-49. - Interpretation of license relative to building, plumbing, electrical work. 
    Licenses issued pursuant to this article convey no right to erect any building, to do any plumbing work or to do any electrical work. 
(Code 1984, § 24-4(d); Ord. No. 2010-10, § 2, 8-10-2010) 
Sec. 15-50. - Revocation-Grounds. 
    The board of investigators is hereby authorized to revoke any license issued pursuant to the terms of this article if after due investigation it determines that the holder thereof has violated any of the provisions of this article or that any recreational vehicle or park is being maintained in an unsanitary or unsafe manner or is a nuisance. 
(Code 1984, § 24-25; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 2, 8-10-2010) 
Sec. 15-51. - Same-Hearings. 
    Any person aggrieved by an order of the board of investigators granting, denying, renewing, or revoking a license for a recreational park issued pursuant to this article, may file a written request for a hearing before the city commission within ten (10) days after issuance of such order. The board shall give notice of public hearing upon this request to be held in not less than five (5) days after service of the notice on the person requesting the hearing. The board may also give notice of the hearing to other persons directly interested in the order of the question. At such hearing, the board shall determine whether the granting, denial, renewal, or revocation of the license was in accordance with the provisions of this article and shall issue written findings of fact, conclusions of law, and order to carry out its findings and conclusions. These findings of fact, conclusions of law, and order shall be filed with the secretary of the board and served by the board upon all parties appearing or represented at the hearing. 
(Code 1984, § 24-26; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 2, 8-10-2010) 
Sec. 15-52. - Same-Review by city commission. 
    Any order granting, denying, renewing, or revoking any license issued pursuant to this article may be appealed to the city commission in the same manner as appeals from any order under the building or zoning ordinances of the city. Appeals from such orders must be taken within ten (10) days after the order is issued. Upon any such appeal the findings of fact of the board of investigators, if supported by substantial evidence, shall be conclusive. 
(Code 1984, § 24-27; Ord. No. 2010-10, § 2, 8-10-2010) 
Chapter 16 - OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; junkyards, § 13-51 et seq.; recreational vehicle parks, § 15-26 et seq.; license for recreational vehicle parks, § 15-46 et seq.; peddlers and solicitors for personal profit, § 21-26 et seq.; identification card and license for peddlers and solicitors, § 21-41 et seq.; transient or itinerant merchants or vendors, § 21-71 et seq.; license for transient or itinerant merchants or vendors, § 21-86 et seq.; permit for charitable solicitations, § 21-126 et seq.; taxation generally, Ch. 24. 
State Law reference- Local occupational license taxes, F.S. Ch. 205. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Occupational tax imposed; when payable; duration; half-year licenses. 
(a)  An occupational tax is hereby imposed upon each and every business, profession and occupation engaged in or carried on, either wholly or in part within the corporate limits of the city, in the respective amount as provided for by section 16-10 and each and every person engaged in or carrying on, managing or practicing any business, profession or occupation, either wholly or in part within the corporate limits of the city is hereby required to pay to the city an occupational tax in the amount provided for by section 16-10. 
(b)  Such occupational license tax shall be payable not later than the first day of October each year and shall cover the period from such date to and ending on the thirtieth day of September the same year. Upon payment of such tax the city tax collector shall issue to the person paying the same a receipt or license signed by the city tax collector and the receipt or license shall expire on the thirtieth day of September next succeeding its issuance, unless otherwise especially provided for, except that if a person shall not begin to engage in such business, profession or occupation until after the first day of April of any year, he shall be required to pay only one-half of the amount of the tax. No license shall be issued for more than one (1) year. 
(Code 1984, § 14-1) 
State Law reference- Levy by municipalities, F.S. § 205.042. 
Sec. 16-2. - Individual licenses required for certain professions and businesses. 
    The occupational license for such professions or businesses as architects, auctioneers, auditors or accountants, dentists, civil engineers, lawyers, osteopaths, chiropractors, chiropodists, phrenologists, physicians or surgeons, real estate brokers or other similar professions shall be construed to mean that each individual shall pay the tax provided for by this chapter, whether practicing by himself or in partnership or employed by others. 
(Code 1984, § 14-2) 
Sec. 16-3. - Occupations and businesses in more than one classification. 
    Unless otherwise specified, when any occupation, business, profession or privilege shall fall into more than one (1) of the classifications contained in this chapter, such occupations, businesses, professions or privileges shall be required to comply with the license requirements of each such classification or provision. 
(Code 1984, § 14-3) 
Sec. 16-4. - Determination of license fee based on stock in trade or number of rooms. 
(a)  Whenever the amount of the license applied for depends upon the amount of stock in trade carried by the applicant, the tax collector shall use as a basis for such amount the most current figures in the city tax assessment files for the inventory of such business. If no such information is available, then the applicant shall state such amount as part of his written application. 
(b)  Where such license fee is based on the number of rooms in a hotel or roominghouse the owner of the business shall state such number in his original application and thereafter he shall notify the tax collector of any changes, additions or reductions before the annual renewal thereof if any and such license shall show upon its face the number of such units so licensed. 
(Code 1984, § 14-4) 
Sec. 16-5. - Transfer of license. 
(a)  Licenses may be transferred from one (1) location to another location provided that the licenses are presented to the tax collector for the approval of such transfer, and provided further, that the licensee shall pay for such transfer a fee in the amount of three dollars ($3.00). 
(b)  Licenses may be transferred with the approval of the tax collector with the businesses for which they were taken out, except as otherwise provided by law, when there is a bona fide sale and transfer of the property used and employed in the business as stock in trade, subject however to the following conditions: 
(1)  The seller of the business shall present the license to the tax collector with an endorsement on the reverse side thereof, assigning all right, title and interest to the purchaser. 
(2)  The purchaser shall produce for examination only, a properly executed instrument showing the stock of goods and the lease to the property. 
(3)  Where the licenses have been exempted from payment of all or any part of the license tax therefor, any such license shall not be transferable under this section. 
(4)  The essential nature of the business shall not be changed and there shall be continuity in operation of that business by the transferee. This paragraph applies to transfers with or without a change in location. 
(Code 1984, § 14-5) 
State Law reference- Transfers, F.S. § 205.043(2), (3). 
Sec. 16-6. - License not to protect person from prosecution; false statements. 
    No license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall protect any person from prosecution for transacting any business, trade or profession not covered by such license, or shall protect any merchant doing business with a greater stock in trade than covered by such license, or any hotel keeper or roominghouse keeper having a greater number of rooms than is covered by such license. Any license issued upon any false statement shall not protect the holder thereof from prosecution for transacting business without a license. 
(Code 1984, § 14-6) 
Sec. 16-7. - Evidence of liability for license. 
    As soon as any person engages in any business, profession or occupation in the city, he shall be liable for an occupational license. Regardless of when such occupation, business or profession commences no reduction shall be made in the amount of license except as set forth in section 16-1. 
(Code 1984, § 14-7) 
Sec. 16-8. - Responsibility for compliance with chapter. 
    Where the principal, master or employer has complied with provisions of this chapter it shall be unnecessary for his agent, servant or employee to comply herewith, unless otherwise expressly provided for in this chapter; provided, however, that if such principal, master or employer has not complied with this chapter, each of his agents, servants or employees shall be subject to prosecution, and upon conviction, to punishment to the same extent as his principal, master or employer. 
(Code 1984, § 14-8) 
Sec. 16-9. - Suspension, revocation, cancellation of license. 
    Any license issued by the city may be temporarily suspended or absolutely revoked or cancelled by a majority vote of the city commission, when the commission has ascertained and determined, in the exercise of its sound discretion, that such action will promote the public peace, health, safety, welfare, harmony or good order of the neighborhood in which the licensee's place of business is located. In the case of the revocation and cancellation of such license, the city shall refund to such licensee the prorated unearned or unused portion of his license. No refund, however, shall be made where the license is temporarily suspended. 
(Code 1984, § 14-9) 
Sec. 16-10. - Tax schedule. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall repeal the occupational license taxes as set forth in "The Code of Ordinances of the City of Pahokee, Florida," adopted in 1965, in sections 15-13 through 15-20 and 15-22. 
(Code 1984, § 14-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 95-1, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 23, 1995, amended the occupational license fee schedule set out in Exhibits A and B of Ord. No. 84-5, and §§ 15-13, 15-13.1 and 15-17 of the 1965 Code as referenced in § 16-10. Inasmuch as such provisions are not set out at length in this Code, the user is referred to Exhibit A attached to Ord. No. 95-1 for the specific fee amounts. Such ordinance and the attached exhibits are on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 16-11. - Effect of section 16-10 on taxes not included. 
    The provisions of section 16-10 shall not repeal any special ordinance fixing a special license tax for occupations not covered by section 16-10. 
(Code 1984, § 14-14) 
Sec. 16-12. - Delinquent penalties. 
(a)  Those licenses not renewed by October first shall be considered delinquent and subject to a delinquency penalty of ten (10) percent for the month of October, plus an additional five (5) percent penalty for each month of delinquency thereafter until paid. However, the total delinquency penalty shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the occupational license fee for the delinquent establishment. 
(b)  Any person engaging in or managing any business, occupation or profession without first obtaining a local occupational license, if required by this chapter, shall be subject to a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the license determined to be due, in addition to any other penalty provided by law or ordinance. 
(Code 1984, § 14-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, F.S. § 205.053. 
Sec. 16-13. - Exemptions. 
    This chapter shall be subject to the exemptions provided by F.S. § 205.063 et seq. 
(Code 1984, § 14-11) 
Sec. 16-14. - Fire, closing out, auction, bankruptcy, sales. 
(a)  Before any person shall sell or be engaged in the business of selling in the city, goods, wares, merchandise or other personal property, such sales being advertised as bankruptcy, insolvent insurance, assignee, trustee, testator, executor, administrator, receiver, auction, syndicate, railroad or other wrecks, wholesale or manufacturer's or closing out sale, or as goods damaged by fire, smoke, water or otherwise, such person shall file an application with the tax collector of the city for a license, which application shall be accompanied by an affidavit stating all the facts relating to all the reasons for and the character of such sales so advertised and represented, and including the names of the persons from whom the goods, wares and merchandise or other personal property was obtained, the date of delivering to the person applying for such license and the place from which such goods, wares and merchandise or other personal property was last taken or bought, and all details necessary to exactly locate and fully identify the goods, wares and merchandise or other personal property, and shall further pay to the tax collector as a license for the privilege of selling such goods, wares, merchandise or other personal property the sum prescribed by the license schedule provided for by section 16-10 for each sale. 
(b)  Upon the filing of such application and affidavit and payment of such sum the tax collector shall issue a license to each applicant, but the provisions hereof shall not apply at bona fide sales of general assignees for the benefit of creditors or bona fide trustees selling under power of sale in any deed of trust or mortgage or lien, executors and administrators selling goods of their decedents or to any officer selling the property under legal process, or to regularly licensed auctioneers selling at public outcry in the usual course of their business, or bona fide merchants in selling or disposing of stocks or merchandise who were the original owners of such stocks of merchandise with a license having already been paid for by the merchant prior to the bankruptcy proceedings. 
(c)  Every person, including principals, and their agents, servants or employees who shall sell or engage in the business of selling goods, wares, merchandise or other personal property without having first complied with this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1984, § 14-12) 
Sec. 16-15. - Fee for building industry contractors who maintain offices outside the city. 
    The occupational license fee for all building industry contractors who maintain offices outside the city will be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. No. 99-8, 6-22-1999) 
Sec. 16-16. - Vehicles for hire. 
    Each owner of a business of operating vehicles for hire is required to obtain an occupational license. In order to obtain the occupational license the owner will be required to meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Provide proof of insurance covering workman's' compensation, automobile liability and general liability. 
(2)  Provide copy of a current county occupational license. 
(3)  Provide a list of vehicles to be used. 
(4)  Pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for the occupational license and an additional twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each vehicle over one (1). 
(Ord. No. 2001-6, 9-11-2001) 
Sec. 16-17. - Tire dealers. 
    Every business dealing in tires within the City of Pahokee is required to cover any tires stored in the open and not in an enclosed building. The cover must be sufficient to keep rain from collecting in the tires and to shield the tires from the sight of individuals passing by or visiting the site. 
(Ord. No. 2000-5, 4-25-2000) 
Secs. 16-18-16-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WRECKER AND TOWING REGULATIONS 

Secs. 16-21-16-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MEDICAL MARIJUANA[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-07 , §§ 1-4, adopted August 22, 2017, amended the Code by setting out provisions regarding medical marijuana, but did not designate a matter of inclusion, therefore, at the discretion of the editor, these provisions have been included herein. 

Sec. 16-41. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide the City of Pahokee, Florida, with the opportunity to review the impact of recent changes in law, Constitutional amendments, as well as the impact of cannabis dispensing in other jurisdictions, and determine if such dispensing should be permitted and regulated in the City of Pahokee. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07 , § 1, 8-22-2017) 
Sec. 16-42. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words or phrases when used in this article, shall have the means ascribed to them in this article: 
    Cannabis (marijuana) means all parts of any plant of the genus cannabis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plants or its seeds or resin. 
    Cannabis dispensing business or business shall mean a business location offering cannabis for retail sale pursuant to a license to dispense cannabis issued under applicable law, including medical marijuana treatment center dispensary facilities. 
    Chapter 2017-232 shall mean the 2017 Senate Bill 8-A, as signed by the Governor on June 23, 2017. 
    State shall mean the State of Florida. 
    City shall mean the municipal limits of the City of Pahokee, Florida. 
(b)  In addition to the definitions contained in subsection (a), other terms used in this article shall have the meaning ascribed to them in Chapter 2017-232, Florida Law, and are incorporated into this article by this reference. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07 , § 2, 8-22-2017) 
Sec. 16-43. - Moratorium. 
    Beginning on the effective date of this article, a ban is hereby imposed on cannabis dispensing businesses in the City of Pahokee 
(1)  It is unlawful and a violation of this article for any person or entity to open or cause to be opened any medical marijuana treatment center cannabis dispensing business within the City of Pahokee. 
(2)  The city shall not accept, process or approve any application for business tax receipts, licenses, building permits, land use permits, or any development permits concerning or related to a medical marijuana treatment center cannabis dispensing business. 
(3)  This article will be revisited each year. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07 , § 3, 8-22-2017) 
Sec. 16-44. - Penalties. 
    Any person or entity who violates any provision of this article or who fails to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation, per day, or be imprisoned for a period of time not to exceed sixty (60) days. 
(Ord. No. 2017-07 , § 4, 8-22-2017) 
Chapter 17 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Crimes, F.S. Ch. 775 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17-1. - Adoption of state law misdemeanors. 
    The commission in the city of any misdemeanor set forth in the general laws of the state or any amendment thereto is hereby declared to be a violation of the laws of this city and upon conviction may be punished as set forth for a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1984, § 15-1) 
State Law reference- See Florida Statutes general index under heading "Crimes" for listing of state law misdemeanors. 
Sec. 17-2. - Aid in commission of punishable offenses; accessory before the fact. 
    Whoever aids in commission of any offense punishable by the ordinances of the city or is accessory thereto before the fact, by counseling, hiring, or otherwise procuring such offense to be committed, shall be punished as is provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1984, § 15-2) 
State Law reference- Principals and accessories, F.S. Ch. 777. 
Sec. 17-3. - Reserved. 
Sec. 17-4. - Peeping toms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon the private property of another at night and spy or look into the doors or windows of any structure located on such private property or to otherwise sneak or snoop around such property in a suspicious manner without some lawful purpose or intent. 
(Code 1984, § 15-4) 
Sec. 17-5. - Loitering or prowling. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to loiter or prowl in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such alarm or immediate concern is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstance makes it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern, which would otherwise be warranted, by requesting him to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer did not comply with this procedure, or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person is true and, if believed by the officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(c)  Any law enforcement officer may arrest any suspected loiterer or prowler without a warrant in case delay in processing one will probably enable such suspected loiterer or prowler to escape arrest. 
(Code 1984, § 15-5) 
Sec. 17-6. - Reserved. 
Sec. 17-7. - Aggressive or obstructive panhandling prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. The following definitions apply in this section: 
    Aggressively beg means to beg with the intent to intimidate another person into giving money or goods. 
    Intimidate means to engage in conduct which would make a reasonable person fearful or feel compelled. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether the actor intends to intimidate another person into giving money or goods are that the actor: (a) touches the person solicited; (b) follows the person solicited and persists in begging after the person solicited has given a negative response; (c) directs profane or abusive language toward the person solicited; or (d) uses violent or threatening gestures or language toward the person solicited. 
    Beg means to ask or solicit for money or goods as a charity, whether by word, bodily gestures, signs, or other means. 
    Obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic means to walk, stand, sit, lie, or place an object in such a manner as to block passage by another person or a vehicle, or to require another person or a driver of a vehicle to take unreasonable evasive action to avoid physical contact. 
    Public place means an area generally visible to public view and includes alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, plazas, sidewalks, and streets open to the general public, including those that serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and the doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them. 
    Unreasonable evasive action means causing a vehicle to depart from the lane of traffic in which it is traveling to change lanes, to straddle lanes, or to enter onto a swale to obtain passage. It also means causing a pedestrian to leave the sidewalk on which she or he is traveling or to make contact with a wall or fence bordering the sidewalk. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. A person is guilty of pedestrian interference if, in a public place, he or she intentionally: 
(1)  Obstructs pedestrian or vehicular traffic; or 
(2)  Aggressively begs. 
(c)  Permitted activities. Acts authorized as an exercise of one's constitutional right to picket or to legally protest, and acts authorized by a permit duly issued by a lawful authority shall not constitute obstruction of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(d)  Penalties. The first violation of this provision shall be punishable by not more than a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and thirty (30) days' incarceration; second and subsequent violations shall be punishable by not more than a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) and sixty (60) days' incarceration. 
(e)  Alternative programs. Nothing herein shall limit the discretion of the police, court personnel, and judges from referring individuals suspected, charged, or convicted of a violation of this provision to treatment programs or facilities as an alternative to prosecution or incarceration, provided that the individual freely consents. 
(Ord. No. 95-8, § 1, 11-29-1995) 
Sec. 17-8. - Trotlines prohibited. 
(a)  Trotlines (defined as "unmanned fishing line(s) with multiple hooks") and similar devices shall be prohibited in Lake Okeechobee in the areas of the city's campground, picnic area and marina, the area to be defined as that water lying between marker 60 and marker 66 and extending from the shoreline to the outer edge of the Corps of Engineers channel. 
(b)  Any trotlines or similar devices found within said prohibited area may be confiscated and disposed of by the city, as the same constitutes a dangerous condition to persons utilizing Lake Okeechobee in the vicinity of said trotlines. 
(Ord. No. 93-4, §§ 1, 2, 4-27-1993) 
Sec. 17-9. - Malfunctioning fire and burglar alarm systems. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings given below unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Alarm shall mean any device or system of devices designed and used in a building or structure for the detection and alerting of others of unauthorized entry, or any other crime, which emits a sound, signal or message, when activated, including fire alarms. 
    Alarm business shall mean any person engaged in the sale, leasing, installation, maintenance or service of alarm systems or who, in any manner, causes the sale, leasing, installation, maintenance or service alarm systems in or on any building structure or facility. An alarm business shall possess a burglar/fire alarm installation certificate of competency from the county. An alarm business shall also possess an occupational license from the city. 
    Alarm user shall mean any person using an alarm. 
    False alarm shall mean the activation of an alarm through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, the negligence of an alarm user, or any other cause which results in a response by the police/fire when a situation requiring a response by the police/fire wherein it is determined that no criminal activity or attempted criminal activity or fire occurred at the location of the response. It shall be prima facie evidence that no criminal activity or attempted criminal activity or fire occurred if no report stating that the alarm was the result of criminal activity or attempted criminal activity or fire is filed by the police/fire officer who responded to the alarm. 
(b)  False alarms; penalty; review. 
(1)  It is hereby found and determined that false burglar and fire alarms requiring the fire to respond constitute a public nuisance. The alarm user shall be subject to a twenty-five-dollar ($25.00) service fee for each false alarm to which the police or fire respond in excess of two (2) false alarms in a fiscal year of the city. 
(2)  The failure to pay service fees assessed pursuant to this section within thirty (30) days of written notice from the city of the imposition of the fee shall result in an additional fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each false alarm for which a service charge has been assessed pursuant to this section. In the event it shall become necessary for the city to initiate litigation or incur any cost whatsoever in order to collect any delinquent fees pursuant to this section, the alarm user shall be liable for the payment of such cost, including the payment of attorney's fees. 
(3)  An alarm user may seek a review by the fire chief of the determination of the officer responding to the alarm that a false alarm has occurred. To obtain this review, a report written by the alarm user or the alarm business responsible for the maintenance of the alarm, setting forth facts and circumstances tending to show that the activation of the alarm was the result of criminal activity or attempted criminal activity or fire, shall be filed with the police or fire chief within five (5) business days of the date on which the alarm was activated. If the fire chief determines that the facts and circumstances set forth in the report are valid, he shall then excuse the occurrence, and the occurrence shall not constitute a false alarm for the purpose of this section. The fire chief shall issue his written determination within ten (10) working days of receipt of the report from the alarm user or the alarm business. Until such time as the fire chief has made his determination, the occurrence upon which the report is based shall be considered genuine and will not be considered a false alarm. 
(4)  If an alarm user is dissatisfied with the determination made by the fire chief regarding the activation of the alarm, the permit holder may seek a review by the city manager filing a written request with the city within fifteen (15) business days of the date of the determination by the fire chief. The city manager shall determine whether the false alarm occurred. 
(c)  Prohibited alarms. 
(1)  Audible alarms which do not deactivate within fifteen (15) minutes after activation are prohibited. 
(2)  Alarms which automatically dial the police department over lines exclusively used by the public or request emergency service and information are prohibited. 
(3)  Alarms which do not have an auxiliary power supply which activate in the event of a power failure or electrical outage are prohibited. 
(d)  Neither the city manager nor the city or any of its officers and agents shall be under any obligation or duty to an alarm user or to any other person hereunder by reason of this article. The city specifically disclaims liability for any damages which may be caused by failure to respond to an alarm. 
(Ord. No. 93-9, §§ 1-4, 10-26-1999) 
Secs. 17-10-17-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE AND NUISANCE CONTROL CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 17-31. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the City of Pahokee Property Maintenance Code hereinafter referred to as "maintenance code." 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 2, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-32. - Scope. 
    The purpose of this code is to protect the public health, safety and welfare by establishing minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures, equipment, and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for the safe and sanitary maintenance; fixing the responsibility of owners, operators and occupants; regulating the occupancy of structures and premises, and providing for administration, enforcement and penalties. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 2, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-33. - Intent. 
    This code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to ensure public health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued occupancy and/or maintenance of structures and premises. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 2, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-34. - Applicability to existing buildings and structures. 
    The provisions of these maintenance codes apply to every building or structure irrespective of when said building was constructed, altered or repaired. Additionally: 
(1)  If, within any period of twelve (12) months, alterations or repairs costing in excess of fifty (50) percent of the then value of the building are made to an existing building, such building shall be made to conform to the requirements of the City of Pahokee Building Code for new buildings. 
(2)  If an existing building is damaged by fire or otherwise in excess of fifty (50) percent of its then physical value before such damage is repaired, it shall be made to conform to the requirements of the City of Pahokee Building Code for new buildings. 
(3)  If the cost of such alterations or repairs within any twelve-month period or the amount of such damage as referred to in paragraph (2) is more than twenty-five (25) percent but not more than fifty (50) percent of then physical value of the building, the portions to be altered or repaired shall be made to conform to the requirements of the Building Code of the City of Pahokee for new buildings to such extent as the city may determine. 
(4)  Repairs and alterations, not covered by the preceding paragraphs of this article, restoring a building to its condition previous to damage or deterioration, or altering it in conformity with the provisions of the City of Pahokee Building Code or in which manner will not extend or increase an existing conformity or hazard, may be made with the same kind of materials as those of which the building is constructed. 
(5)  For the purpose of these codes the physical value of a building or structure, as hereinafter defined shall be determined by the assessed value of the structure as recorded on the most recent certified tax roll. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 2, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-35. - Existing remedies. 
    The provisions in this code shall not be construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure that is dangerous, unsafe and unsanitary. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 2, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-36. - Workmanship. 
    All repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations that are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 2, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-37. - Application of other codes. 
    Any repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of all laws, rules and regulations in the City of Pahokee. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 2, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-38. - Maintenance. 
    All structures, buildings, equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by this code or another existing or previous statute or code for the structure or premises when erected or altered shall be maintained in good working order. The requirements of this code are not intended to provide basis for the removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and devices in existing structures. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 2, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-39. - Duties and powers of code official. 
(a)  Generally: The code official shall be responsible for the enforcement of all the provisions of this code. 
(b)  Notices and orders: The code official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this code. 
(c)  Right of entry: The code official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect subject to constitutional restrictions. If entry is refused or not obtained, the code official is authorized to pursue recourse as provided by law. 
(d)  Access by owner or operator: Every occupant of a structure or premises shall give the owner or operator thereof, or agent or employee, access to any part of the structure or its premises at reasonable times for the purpose of making such inspection, maintenance, repairs or alterations as are necessary to comply with the provisions of this code. 
(e)  Restriction of employees: An official or employee connected with the enforcement of this code, shall not be engaged in, or directly or indirectly connected with, the furnishing of labor, materials, or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance to a building, or the preparation of construction documents thereof, unless that person is the owner of the building; nor shall such officer or employee engage in any work that conflicts with official duties or with the interests of the department. 
(f)  Relief from personal responsibility: The code official, officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for this jurisdiction, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against an officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by the city attorney until final termination of the proceedings. The code official or any subordinate shall not be liable for costs in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code, and any officer of the department of building inspection or code enforcement, acting in good faith and without malice, shall be free from all liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of official duties in connection herewith. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 2, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-40. - Violations. 
(a)  Unlawful acts: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to maintain, fail to maintain, provide, fail to provide, occupy, let to another or occupy or permit another person to occupy any premises, property, structure or equipment regulated by this code, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code, or to fail to obey a lawful order of the code official, or to remove or deface a placard or notice posted under the provisions of this code. 
(b)  Enforcement: The provisions of this code shall be enforced by (1) the City of Pahokee Code Enforcement Board and/or special master pursuant to the authority granted by F.S. § 162.01 et seq., as may be amended, (2) the City of Pahokee Commission through its authority to enjoin and restrain any person violating the code. The code enforcement official may pursue these or any other enforcement remedies available to and applicable to the City of Pahokee. 
(c)  Compliance with other ordinances: No certification of compliance with these codes shall constitute a defense against any violations of any other ordinances of the City of Pahokee otherwise applicable to any structure or premises, nor shall any provision of the property maintenance codes relieve any owner or operator from complying with other applicable city ordinances or any official of the City of Pahokee from enforcing such ordinances. 
(d)  Transfer of ownership: It shall be a violation of this code for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has received a notice of violation of this code to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling or structure to another until the provision of the compliance order or notice of violation has been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the code official. In addition, the owner shall furnish to the code official a signed notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs required by the notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 2, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-41. - Definitions generally. 
(a)  General: Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have meanings shown in this division. 
(b)  Interchangeability: Words stated in the present tense include the future; words stated in the masculine gender include feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular. 
(c)  Terms defined in other codes: Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the building, electrical, plumbing or mechanical codes, or the Land Development Code adopted by the City of Pahokee, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes. 
(d)  Terms not defined: Where terms are not defined, through the methods authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinary accepted meanings such as the context implies. 
(e)  Parts: Whenever the words "dwelling unit," "dwelling," "premises," "building," "rooming house," "rooming unit" or "story" are stated in this code, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 2, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-42. - Definitions of specific terms. 
    Alteration means any change or modification in construction or occupancy. 
    Approved means approved by the code enforcement official. 
    Basement means that portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade. 
    Bathroom means a room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower. 
    Boardinghouse means a dwelling, or part thereof, in which lodging is provided by the owner or operator to two (2) or more boarders. 
    Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind. The term "building" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or part there of." 
    Building code means the Florida Building Code. 
    Code official means the code enforcement officer or any duly authorized representative. 
    Condemn means to adjudge unfit for occupancy. 
    Construction documents means all the written, graphic and pictorial documents prepared or assembled for describing the design, location and physical characteristics of the elements of the project necessary for obtaining a building permit. The construction drawings shall be drawn to an appropriate scale. 
    Exterior property means the open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of the owners or operators of such premises. 
    Extermination means the control and elimination of insects, rats or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that serve as their food; by poison spraying, fumigating, and trapping or by any other approved pest elimination methods. 
    Family means either a single person occupying a dwelling unit and maintaining a household, including not more than one (1) boarder, roomer, or lodger as herein described; or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption occupying a dwelling, living together and maintaining a common household, including not more than one (1) such boarder, roomer, or lodger; or not more than four (4) unrelated persons occupying a dwelling, living together and maintaining a nonprofit housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding or lodging house, hotel, club or similar dwelling for group use. A common household shall be deemed to exist if all members thereof have access to all parts of the dwelling. 
    Floor area means the total gross area of all habitable space in a building or structure measured to the outside of exterior walls. 
    Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
    Habitable space means space in a residential structure or unit for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces. 
    Infestation means the presence, within or contiguous to, a structure, building or premises of insects, rats, vermin or other pests. 
    Inoperable vehicle means one which cannot be driven upon the public streets for reasons including but not limited to being unlicensed, wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or in a state of being incapable of being moved under it's own power. 
    Let for occupancy or let means to permit, provide or offer possession or occupancy of a dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premise or structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land. 
    Occupancy means the purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized or occupied. 
    Occupant means any person living or sleeping in a building; or having possession of a space within a building, including employees. 
    Openable area means that part of a window or door which is available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors. 
    Operator means any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy. 
    Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and any person, group or persons, company, association or corporations in whose name tax bills on the property are submitted. It shall also mean any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others: 
(1)  Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
(2)  Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner, executor, executrix, administrator, trustee, guardian of the estate of the owner, mortgagee or vendee in possessions, assignee of rents, lessee, or other person, firm or corporation in control of a building; or their duly authorized agents. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provision of this ordinance, and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner. It is his responsibility to notify the actual owner of the reported infractions of these regulations pertaining to the property which shall apply to the owner. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as a unit. 
    Plumbing means the practice, materials and fixtures utilized in the installation, maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping, fixtures, appliances and appurtenances in connection with any of the following means sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities, the venting system and public or private water supply systems, within or adjacent to any building, structure, or conveyance; also the practice and materials used in the installation, maintenance, extension or alteration of the storm water, liquid waste, or sewage, and water supply systems of any premises to their connection with any point of public disposal. 
    Plumbing fixture means a receptacle or device which is either permanently or temporarily connected to the water distribution system of the premises, and demands a supply of water there from; or discharges waste water, liquid-borne waste materials, or sewage either directly or indirectly to the drainage system of the premises; or which requires both a water supply connection and a discharge to the drainage system of the premises. 
    Premises means a lot, plot or parcel of land including any structures thereon. 
    Registered design professional means an architect or engineer, registered or licensed to practice professional architecture or engineering, as defined by the statutory requirements of the professional registration laws in the State of Florida. 
    Repair means the reconstruction or renewal of any part of any existing building for purpose of its maintenance. 
    Rubbish means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage, including; paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass crockery, trash and debris and other similar materials and shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials. 
    Structure means that which is built or constructed or a portion thereof, including the term building. 
    Tenant means a person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit. 
    Toilet room means a room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or shower. 
    Ventilation means the natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space. 
    Workmanlike means executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work. 
    Yard means an open space on the same lot with a structure. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 3, 11-23-2004) 
Secs. 17-43-17-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 17-71. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this division shall govern the minimum conditions and the responsibilities of persons for maintenance of structures, equipment and exterior property. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 4, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-72. - Responsibility. 
    The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures and exterior property in compliance with these requirements, except as provided for a person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which do not comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 4, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-73. - Vacant structures and land. 
(a)  All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a deteriorating problem or adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare. 
(b)  The exterior of all vacant structures shall be maintained in a manner required of occupied structures as provided in this code. Window areas shall be maintained free of broken glass, exterior doors shall be water- and weather-tight, walls and roof areas shall be maintained in a clean, safe and intact condition, and water- and weather-tight. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 4, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-74. - Exterior property areas. 
(a)  Sanitation: All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(b)  Sidewalks and driveways: All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking lots, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions. 
(c)  Weeds: All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of twelve (12) inches. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. This term shall include cultivated flowers and gardens, or native vegetation. 
(d)  Accessory structures: All accessory structures, including detached garages, carports, fences, walls, and swimming pools shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair. 
(e)  Water clarity in swimming pools: Water clarity shall be maintained. When standing at the pool's edge at the deep end, the deepest portion of the swimming pool floor shall be visible. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 4, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-75. - Exterior of structure or building. 
(a)  General: The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(b)  Exterior painting: All wood and metal surfaces including but not limited to, window frames, doors, door frames, cornices, porches and trim shall be maintained in good condition. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. 
(c)  Street numbers: One (1) address sign shall be required for each principal building or use on premises showing only the numerical address designation on the premises which they are maintained or multi-unit buildings, which utilize a roadside marquee/signboard, the full building address shall be posted on such marquee/signboard. The address shall be posted in a color contrasting that of the marquee/signboard or building a minimum six (6) inches for residential and eight (8) inches for commercial structure, and of sufficient size to be plainly visible and legible from the roadway. When the building utilizes multiple addresses, such multiple occupant mercantile buildings, the address range shall be posted as indicated above. Signs shall be plainly visible from the street or right-of-way providing access to the lot. This requirement shall apply to all new and existing structures. 
(d)  Structural members: All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration, and shall be capable of supporting the imposed dead and live loads. 
(e)  Foundation walls: All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent entry of rats. 
(1)  Skirting: Existing skirting shall be maintained free from broken or missing sections, pieces or cross members. Skirting shall be securely attached and sized from the ground to the lower outside perimeter of the structure. 
(2)  Replacement skirting: Replacement or new skirting shall be constructed or materials intended for exterior use and properly sized and mounted to prevent free access to the crawl space of the structure. 
(f)  Exterior walls: All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, loose or rotting materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated where required to prevent deterioration. 
(g)  Roofs and drainage: The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and down spouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates an adjacent public nuisance. 
(h)  Decorative features: All cornices, belt courses, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition. 
(i)  Overhang extensions: All canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, stand pipes, exhaust ducts and similar overhang extensions shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. 
(j)  Stairways, decks, porches and balconies: Every exterior stairway, deck, porch, balcony, railings and all other appurtenances attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads. 
(k)  Chimneys and towers: All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in good repair. 
(l)  Handrails and guards: Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition. 
(m)  Windows and doorframes: Every window, door and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather-tight. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be easily openable and capable of being held in position by window hardware. 
(n)  Doors: All exterior doors and hardware shall be maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units, rooming units and guestrooms shall tightly secure the door. Every dwelling unit shall have a safe, unobstructed means of egress with a minimum height of seven (7) feet. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 4, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-76. - Interior of structure or building. 
(a)  General: The interior of a structure and equipment herein shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition. Every occupant shall keep that part of the structure which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a structure containing a rooming house, a hotel, a dormitory, two (2) or more dwelling units or two (2) or more nonresidential occupancies, shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of the structure and exterior property. 
(b)  Structural members: All structural members shall be maintained structurally sound, and capable of supporting imposed loads. 
(c)  Interior surfaces: All interior surfaces, including windows and doors, shall be maintained in a good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling paint, cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood, and other defective surface conditions shall be corrected. 
(d)  Lead based paint: Interior and exterior painted surfaces of dwellings and child and day care facilities, including fences and outbuildings, which contain lead levels equal to or greater than one (1.0) milligram per square centimeter or in excess of one-half (0.50) percent lead by weight shall be maintained in a condition free from peeling, chipping and flaking paint or removed or covered in an approved manner. Any surface to be covered shall first be identified by approval warnings as to the lead content of such surface. 
(e)  Stairs and railings: All interior stairs and railings shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair. 
(f)  Stairs and walking surfaces: Every stair, ramp, balcony, porch, deck or other walking surface shall be maintained structurally sound and be capable of supporting the imposed loads. 
(g)  Handrails and guards: Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 4, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-77. - Extermination. 
(a)  Infestation: All structures shall be kept free from insect and rat infestation. All structures in which insects or rats are found shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation. 
(b)  Owner: The owner of any structure shall be responsible for extermination within the structure prior to renting or leasing the structure, except where such responsibility is identified elsewhere in a written lease or rental agreement. 
(c)  Single occupant: The occupant of a single-family dwelling or of a single tenant nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination on the premises. 
(d)  Multiple occupancy: The owner of a structure containing two (2) or more dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, a rooming house or a nonresidential structure shall be responsible for the extermination in the public or shared areas of the structure and exterior property. If infestation is caused by failure of an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area occupied, the occupants shall be responsible for extermination. 
(e)  Occupant: The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the continued pest-free condition of the structure, or as provided for by a written lease or rental agreement. Exception: Where rat or insect infestations are caused by defects in the structure, the owner shall be responsible for extermination. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 4, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-78. - Multi-family rental units and commercial buildings. 
(a)  Multi-family rental units (MFRU) shall mean any property that has more than three (3) rental units. A commercial building (CB) is any structure used for a commercial or industrial use under the Zoning Code. 
(b)  All multi-family rental units (MFRU) and commercial buildings (CB) exteriors shall be kept free of mold and mildew and chipped paint. 
(c)  All multi-family rental units (MFRU) and commercial buildings (CB) shall be pressure-washed, primed, and completely painted every five (5) years. Within one (1) year of the date of this ordinance, all MFRU or CB shall be pressure-washed, primed and completely painted unless the owner requests an inspection from the code enforcement department and they determine the buildings are not in need of painting until a later date, which will be set by code enforcement, based upon the condition of the existing paint. In no event shall the time for painting be postponed beyond five (5) years from the date of adoption of this ordinance (10-25-2016) and every five (5) years thereafter. 
(d)  (1)  All multi-family residential units (MFRU) or commercial buildings (CB) shall have the required number of parking spaces under the Land Development Code. All grandfathered MFRU shall have, at a minimum, one and one-half (11/2) spaces per unit. All CB shall have at least the minimum required for the approved use. All spaces shall meet the requirements for paved parking, striping and drainage, have the required base foundation, and be asphalt or concrete. All MFRU's and CB's shall be required to obtain the proper permits and complete parking in compliance with this Code within six (6) months of the adoption of this Code. (10-25-2016) 
(2)  Variance. MFRU's or CB's may apply for a variance from the requirements of this section, provided that they meet the variance requirements of the ULDC and can show specific off-site parking which the MFRU or CB is legally entitled to use. 
(e)  All MFRU's and CB's shall have on file with the City information regarding contact information for the owner and for the landscape and maintenance crew responsible for the upkeep of the grounds. 
(f)  MFRU and CB landscaping. All MFRU's and CB's shall replace all landscaping that is missing from the original approvals within six (6) months of the date of adoption of this section. All MFRU's or CB's that do not have an approved landscape plan on file with the city shall, within one (1) year, apply for, obtain, and implement a landscape plan that meets the city Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-06 , § 2, 6-28-2016; Ord. No. 2016-12 , § 2, 10-25-2016) 
Secs. 17-79-17-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESIDENTIAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 17-101. - Generally. 
(a)  Scope: In addition to the general requirements, the provisions of this article shall apply to all structures used for residential uses. 
(b)  Responsibility: The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain light, ventilation and space conditions in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant, or permit another person to occupy, any premise that does not comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 5, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-102. - Light. 
(a)  Habitable spaces: Every habitable space shall have at least one (1) window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every habitable space shall be eight (8) percent of the floor area of such room, except in kitchens and bathrooms where artificial light is provided in accordance with the provisions of the Building Code. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any room and such obstructions are located less than three (3) feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area for the room. 
(b)  Other spaces: All other spaces shall be provided with natural or artificial light sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions, and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the appliances, equipment and fixtures. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 5, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-103. - Ventilation. 
(a)  Habitable spaces: Every habitable space shall have at least one (1) openable window that can be easily opened. The total openable area of the window in every room shall be equal to at least forty-five (45) percent of the minimum glazed area. 
(b)  Screens: Every door, window and other outside opening utilized or intended for ventilation purposes serving any structure containing habitable rooms, shall have approved, tightly fitting screens of not less than sixteen (16) mesh per inch. 
(c)  Bathrooms and toilet rooms: 
(1)  Every bathroom and toilet room shall comply with the ventilation requirements for habitable spaces. Except that a window shall not be required in spaces equipped with a mechanical ventilation system that complies with the following: 
(2)  Air exhausted by a mechanical ventilation system from a bathroom shall be exhausted to the exterior and shall not be recirculated to any space, including the space from which such air is withdrawn. 
(d)  Cooking facilities: Unless approved through a certificate of occupancy, cooking shall not be permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory unit, and a cooking facility or appliance shall not be permitted to be present in a rooming unit or dormitory unit. 
(e)  Clothes dryer exhaust: Clothes dryer venting systems shall be independent of all other systems and shall be vented in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and/or code. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 5, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-104. - Occupancy limitations. 
(a)  Privacy: Dwelling units, hotel units, rooming units and dormitory units shall be arranged to provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining spaces. 
(b)  Access from sleeping rooms: Sleeping rooms shall not constitute the only means of access to other sleeping rooms or habitable spaces. Exception: Dwelling units that contain fewer than two (2) bedrooms. 
(c)  Area for sleeping purposes: Every habitable room used for sleeping purposes by one (1) occupant shall contain at least seventy (70) square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one (1) person shall contain at least fifty (50) square feet of floor area for each occupant thereof. Exceptions: Shelters, hospitals and similar uses shall be exempt. 
(d)  Water closet accessibility: Every bedroom shall have access to at least one (1) water closet and one (1) lavatory without passing through another bedroom. 
(e)  Prohibited occupancy: Kitchens, nonhabitable spaces and interior public areas shall not be used for sleeping purposes. 
(f)  Minimum ceiling heights: 
(1)  In residential units habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms, nonhabitable basement areas shall have a clear ceiling height of not less than seven (7) feet. 
(2)  Exceptions: 
a.  In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced not less than four (4) feet on center projecting not more than six (6) inches below required ceiling height. 
b.  Basement rooms in one- and two-family dwellings occupied exclusively for laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a ceiling height of not less than six (6) feet eight (8) inches with not less than six (6) feet four (4) inches of clearance under beams, girders, ducts and similar obstructions. 
c.  Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar purposes and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a clear ceiling height of at least seven (7) feet over not less than one-third of required minimum floor area. In calculating floor area of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area with a clear ceiling height of five (5) feet or more shall be included. 
(g)  Minimum room widths: A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall not be less than seven (7) feet in any dimension. Kitchens shall have a clear passageway of not less than three (3) feet between counter fronts and appliances, counter fronts and walls. 
(h)  Food preparation: All spaces to be occupied for food preparation purposes shall contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for temporary storage. 
(i)  Smoke detector systems: Every dwelling unit shall be provided with an approved listed smoke detector installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations and listing. When activated, the detector shall provide an audible alarm. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 5, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-105. - Plumbing facilities and fixture requirements. 
(a)  Dwelling units: Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub or shower, lavatory, water closet and kitchen sink which shall be maintained in a sanitary, safe working condition. The lavatory shall be placed in the same room as the water closet or located in close proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which such water closet is located. 
(b)  Roominghouses: At least one (1) water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower shall be supplied for each four (4) rooming units. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 5, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-106. - Toilet rooms. 
(a)  Privacy: Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall not constitute the only passageway to a hall or other space, or to the exterior. 
(b)  Location: Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, rooming units or dormitory units, shall have access by traversing not more than one (1) flight of stairs and shall have access from a common hall or passageway. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 5, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-107. - Plumbing fixtures. 
(a)  General: All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and maintained in working order, and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and be capable of performing the function for which such plumbing fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and functional condition. 
(b)  Fixture clearances: Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearances for usage and cleaning. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 5, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-108. - Water system. 
(a)  General: Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking foundation, water closet or other plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot and cold running water. 
(b)  Contamination: The water supply shall be maintained free from contamination, and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above flood level rim of the fixture. Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sink faucets, and other hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are attached and left in place, shall be protected by an approved atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an approved permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker. 
(c)  Supply: The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable the fixtures to function properly, safely, and free from defects and leaks. Water supply to a residential structure shall not be obtained from another residential unit. 
(d)  Water heating facilities: Water heating facilities shall be properly installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a temperature of not less than one hundred ten (110) degrees F. (forty-three (43) degrees C.). A gas-burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room, bedroom or other occupied room normally kept closed, unless adequate combustion air is provided. An approved combination temperature and pressure relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on water heaters. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 5, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-109. - Sanitary drainage system. 
(a)  General: All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system. 
(b)  Maintenance: Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 5, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-110. - Storm drainage. 
    Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts, and other open areas on the premises shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 5, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-111. - Heating facilities. 
(a)  Facilities required: Heating facilities shall be provided to structures as required by this section. 
(b)  Residential buildings: Every dwelling shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of sixty-five (65) degrees F. (eighteen (18) degrees C.) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. 
(c)  Room temperature measurement: The required room temperatures shall be measured at a point three (3) feet above the floor and three (3) feet from exterior walls. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 5, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-112. - Mechanical equipment. 
(a)  Mechanical equipment: All mechanical equipment, fireplaces and solid fuel burning appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended function. 
(b)  Cooking and heating equipment: All cooking and heating equipment, components and accessories in every heating, cooking and water-heating device shall be maintained in good repair, free from leaks and obstructions. 
(c)  Fuel: All fuel-burning equipment and appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney or vent. Exception: Fuel-burning equipment and appliances which are labeled for unvented operation. 
(d)  Clearances: All required clearances to combustible materials shall be maintained. 
(e)  Safety controls: All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall be maintained in effective operation. 
(f)  Combustion air: A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and for ventilation of the space shall be provided for the fuel-burning equipment. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 5, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-113. - Electrical facilities. 
(a)  Facilities required: Every occupied building and work area shall be provided with an electrical system in compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Service: The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with the codes applicable in the City of Pahokee. 
(c)  Electrical system hazards: Where it is found that the electrical system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 5, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-114. - Electrical equipment. 
(a)  Installation: All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner. 
(b)  Receptacles: Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at least two (2) separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall contain at least one (1) grounded type receptacle. Every bathroom shall contain at least one (1) receptacle. 
(c)  Lighting fixtures: Every public hall, interior stairway, water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace room and the like, shall contain at least one (1) electric lighting fixture. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 5, 11-23-2004) 
Secs. 17-115-17-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - NONRESIDENTIAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 17-141. - Scope. 
    In addition to the general requirements in division 2 of this article, the provisions of this article shall apply to all structures except for residential one- or two-family dwellings. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 6, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-142. - Common areas. 
(a)  Common halls and stairways: Every common hall and stairway shall be lighted at all times with at least a sixty-watt standard incandescent light bulb or equivalent for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor area, provided that the spacing between lights shall not be greater than thirty (30) feet. Every exterior stairway shall be illuminated with a minimum of one (1) footcandle at floors, landings and treads. 
(b)  Other spaces: All other spaces shall be provided with natural or artificial light sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions, and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the appliances, equipment and fixtures. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 6, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-143. - Ventilation. 
    Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious fumes, gases, dusts or mists are generated, a local exhaust ventilation system shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent at the source. Air shall be exhausted to the exterior and not be recirculated to any space. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 6, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-144. - Plumbing facilities and fixture requirements. 
(a)  Employee's facilities: A minimum of one (1) water closet, one (1) lavatory and one (1) drinking facility shall be available to employees. 
(b)  Drinking facilities: Drinking facilities shall be a drinking fountain, water cooler, bottled water cooler, or disposable cups next to a sink or water dispenser. Drinking facilities shall not be located in toilet room or bathrooms. 
(c)  Hotels: Where private water closets, lavatories, and baths are not provided, one (1) water closet, one (1) lavatory and one (1) bathtub or shower having access from a public hallway shall be provided for each ten (10) occupants. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 6, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-145. - Toilet rooms. 
(a)  Privacy: Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall not constitute the only passageway to a hall or other space, or to the exterior. 
(b)  Location: Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, rooming units or dormitory units, shall have access by traversing not more than one (1) flight of stairs and shall have access from a common hall or passageway. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 6, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-146. - Plumbing fixtures. 
(a)  General: All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and maintained in working order, and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and be capable of performing the function for which such plumbing fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and functional condition. 
(b)  Fixture clearances: Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearances for usage and cleaning. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 6, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-147. - Water system. 
(a)  General: Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot and cold running water. Exception: Nonresidential structures may only provide cold running water, unless required by another code or ordinance. 
(b)  Contamination: The water supply shall be maintained free from contamination, and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the flood level rim of the fixture. Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sink faucets, and other hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are attached and left in place, shall be protected by an approved atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an approved permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker. 
(c)  Supply: The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable the fixtures to function properly, safely, and free from defects and leaks. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 6, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-148. - Sanitary drainage system. 
(a)  General: All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system. 
(b)  Maintenance: Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 6, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-149. - Mechanical and electrical requirements. 
(a)  Mechanical equipment: All mechanical equipment, fireplaces and solid fuel-burning appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended function. 
(b)  Cooking and heating equipment: All cooking and heating equipment, components and accessories in every heating, cooking and water heating device shall be maintained in good repair, free from leaks and obstructions. 
(c)  Fuel: All fuel-burning equipment and appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney or vent. Exception: Fuel-burning equipment and appliances which are labeled for unvented operation. 
(d)  Clearances: All required clearances to combustible materials shall be maintained. 
(e)  Safety controls: All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall be maintained in effective operation. 
(f)  Combustion air: A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and for ventilation of the space shall be provided for the fuel-burning equipment. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 6, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-150. - Electrical facilities. 
(a)  Facilities required: Every occupied building shall be provided with an electrical system in compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Service: The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with adopted guidelines of the City of Pahokee. 
(c)  Electrical system hazards: Where it is found that the electrical system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the code official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 6, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-151. - Electrical equipment. 
(a)  Installation: All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner. 
(b)  Lighting fixtures: Every public hall, interior stairway, water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace room and the like, shall contain at least one (1) electric fixture. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 6, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-152. - Elevators, escalators and dumbwaiters. 
(a)  General: Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained to sustain safely all imposed loads, to operate properly, and to be free from physical and fire hazards. 
(b)  Elevators: In buildings equipped with passenger elevators, at least one (1) elevator shall be maintained in operation at all times when the building is occupied. Exception: Buildings equipped with only one (1) elevator shall be permitted to have the elevator temporarily out of service for testing, servicing, or repair. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 6, 11-23-2004) 
Secs. 17-153-17-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - NUISANCES 

Sec. 17-181. - "Nuisance" declared. 
    "Nuisance" is defined as the action of any person or the use of or the activity upon or within any public or private parcel, lot, tract of land or premises within the city for a period of time which exceeds seven (7) days and which, after a review and investigation by appropriate city officials or other governmental agency, is determined to be in any way offensive or noxious by reason of any or all of the following: 
(1)  The casting, throwing, sweeping, placing, depositing, or burial of any litter, garbage, refuse, rubbish, chattel, or trash in any manner other than placing the same in a proper disposal facility or place, commercial container, authorized private receptacle, garbage can, trash container; 
(2)  The emission or discharge of any odor, gas, dust, smoke, vibration, or noise; 
(3)  The condition of ill-repair or lack of maintenance of any real property such that such condition is deemed to be unsafe or creates a health, sanitation, or safety hazard; 
(4)  The uncontrolled growth of vegetation or any growth of weeds, grass, or other similar ground cover that exceeds twelve (12) inches in height, or rank vegetable growths which exhale unpleasant or noxious odors, or any vegetation or plant materials growth which is conducive to harboring vermin, insects, reptiles, or other wild animal life; 
(5)  The growth of any vegetation, plant material, or tree which might in time of hurricanes or storms cause damage to life or property within the immediate area of such growth; 
(6)  The keeping of animals or fowl in any manner which causes a disturbance, creates an unhealthy or unsanitary condition, or is unsafe for the animals or fowl or to the general public; 
(7)  The presence, accumulation, open storage, or other wise keeping of any abandoned, discarded, or unused chattel; 
(8)  a.  No person in charge or control of any property, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, or otherwise, shall leave any partially dismantled, non-operating, wrecked, or junked boat, trailer, or parts thereof upon any public right-of-way or private property. 
b.  Subsection (8)a does not apply to: 
1.  A boat trailer, or parts thereof, in an enclosed building; 
2.  A boat, trailer, or parts thereof, under a roofed structure; or 
3.  A boat, trailer, or parts thereof, enclosed by a legally constructed fence that shields said vehicle from view of adjoining property owners or right-of-way; or 
4.  A boat, trailer, or parts thereof, on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; or 
5.  When a boat, trailer, or parts thereof, is in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner. 
(9)  a.  No person in charge or control of any property within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked, or discarded vehicle, with no current license plate, no motor vehicle insurance, to remain on such property longer than forty-eight (48) hours; and no person shall leave any such vehicle on any property within the city for longer time than forty-eight (48) hours; 
b.  Subsection (9)a shall not apply to: 
1.  A vehicle in an enclosed building; or 
2.  A vehicle under a roofed structure; 
3.  A vehicle enclosed by a legally constructed fence that shields said property from view of adjoining property owners or right-of-way; 
4.  A vehicle on the premises of a lawful place and manner when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; or 
5.  When a vehicle is in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner. 
c.  No person shall abandon any vehicle within the city and no person shall leave any vehicle at any place within the city for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned. 
d.  No person shall leave any partially dismantled, non-operating, wrecked, or junked vehicle on any street, highway or right-of-way within the city. 
(10)  The keeping of any building or structure in an unclean or unsanitary condition; or 
(11)  The presence, accumulation, storage, or keeping of any debris, building material or materials of any kind on the ground, leaning against any building or structure, or upon the roof or top of any building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 7, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-182. - Overgrown grass, sod, weeds, brush; rubbish-Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Brush shall mean any volunteer growth of bushes or trees growing out of place and shall include cuttings from trees and shrubs and any rank growth which may conceal filthy deposits or constitute a fire hazard when dry. 
    Overgrown grass or sod shall mean a mostly herbaceous plant, plant rather than of volunteer growth, the general top level of which is twelve (12) inches or more above the ground. 
    Overgrown weeds shall mean annual or perennial herbaceous plants of volunteer growth not cultivated or useful for human food or enjoyment, which when in blossom exhale an unpleasant or noxious odor or give off pollen irritating to human tissues, and the average or general top level of which is twelve (12) inches or more above the ground. 
    Rubbish shall mean any unsightly material, waste product, refuse, trash or waste lumber left, piled or scattered that may become a breeding place for flies, mosquitoes or vermin or that may give off unpleasant odors or create a health or fire hazard where located. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 7, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-183. - Same-Declaration of nuisance. 
    Weeds, brush and rubbish as defined in this section are hereby declared to be nuisances and dangerous to the public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 7, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-184. - Same-Notice for removal. 
(a)  Notice shall be given by the enforcement officer to the last known owner, of any lot, lots or tract of land occupied or vacant within the city which is in violation, that all overgrown grass, sod or weeds must be cut and that all dry brush or rubbish must be removed. Such owner or occupant shall be given ten (10) days from the mailing and/or hand delivery of such notice to abate the nuisance or the nuisance will be abated by the city. The entire cost thereof, plus ten (10) percent or fifteen dollars ($15.00) whichever is the greater amount for notice, inspection and incidentals, will be assessed against the property. 
(b)  On expiration of the ten (10) days the city may cause all such overgrown grass, old or weeds, brush and rubble or rubbish not cut or removed to be cut or removed, and shall file with the finance department a statement showing the charges to be assessed against such lot, or tract of land, vacant or occupied for payment of work including ten (10) percent or fifteen dollars ($15.00) whichever is the greater amount to cover cost of notice, inspection and incidentals. 
(c)  In addition to the notice prescribed herein, the city shall cause to be posted in a conspicuous place on the lot, lots or tract of land vacant or occupied a notice as herein prescribed. The posting of notice shall be done not less than ten (10) days prior to the removal, cutting of such weeds, brush, grass and rubbish by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 7, 11-23-2004) 
Sec. 17-185. - Same-Cost. 
(a)  The cost incurred or expended by the city for cutting and removing high grass and weeds and rubbish shall be levied and imposed against lots and parcels on which such cuttings and removal is done by the city. 
(b)  The sum shall include labor, equipment utilized and administrative costs for each cutting. 
(c)  The city manager will then submit an invoice to the property owner for work completed. If payment of the invoice is not paid within forty-five (45) days of receiving such invoice, a lien will be placed on the property. The lien will accrue interest at a rate not to exceed the amount allowable by law in the State of Florida. 
(Ord. No. 2004-06, § 7, 11-23-2004) 
Secs. 17-186-17-205. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE CONTROL REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2005-05, which created this article, numbered the sections 17-40 through 17-52. For clarity and to avoid renumbering the chapter, the sections herein are numbered 17-206 through 17-219, at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 17-206. - Purpose. 
    This article is enacted to protect, preserve, and promote the health, safety, welfare, peace and quiet of the citizens of the city through the reduction, control, and prevention of loud and unnecessary noise, or any noise which unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivity. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, § 1(17-40), 11-8-2005) 
Sec. 17-207. - Findings. 
(a)  Loud and unnecessary noise degrades the environment of the city to a degree that: 
(1)  Is harmful to the health, welfare, and safety of its inhabitants and visitors; 
(2)  Interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property; 
(3)  Interferes with the well being, tranquility, and privacy of the home; and 
(4)  Both causes and aggravates health problems. 
(b)  Both the effective control and the elimination of loud and unnecessary noise are essential to the health and welfare of the city's inhabitants and visitors, and to the conduct of the normal pursuits of life, including recreation, work, and communication. 
(c)  The use of sound amplification equipment creates loud and unnecessary noise that may, in particular manner and at a particular time and place, substantially and unreasonably invade the privacy, peace, and freedom of inhabitants of and visitors to, the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, § 2(17-41), 11-8-2005) 
Sec. 17-208. - Scope. 
    This article applies to the control of all sound originating within the jurisdictional limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, § 3(17-42), 11-8-2005) 
Sec. 17-209. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, whenever any of the following words, terms and phrases, are used herein they shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Amplified sound means a sound augmented by any electronic or other means that increases the sound level or volume. 
    Authorized emergency vehicle means vehicles of the fire department, police department vehicles and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal departments, public service corporations operated by private corporations, and the department of transportation as are designated or authorized by the department or the chief of police of an incorporated city or any sheriff of any of the various counties. 
    Code enforcement officer means an authorized employee or agent of the city whose duty is to ensure code compliance, including but not limited to inspectors or the city's code enforcement department and police officers. 
    Complainant means any owner, lessee, manager or person with a legal interest in a receiving property who reports being disturbed by sound heard inside of a residence or place of business upon the receiving property and not originating therefrom. 
    Emergency work means work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a natural disaster or public calamity; or work required to protect persons or property from imminent danger caused by hurricanes; tornados, floods or other natural disasters or public calamity; or work by private or public utilities when installing or restoring utility service. 
    Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled. 
    Noise sensitive zone means any area within the city, designated by the city as such, for the purpose of ensuring quiet. 
    Plainly audible means the sound can be clearly heard by a person of normal sensibilities using only unaided auditory senses. Plainly audible shall refer to a sound heard at a volume level above that of normal conversation and shall not include sounds which are just barely audible. With respect to music, the detection of a rhythmic base reverberating type sound, beat or cadence shall be deemed plainly audible. 
    Property line means an imaginary line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by a person from that owned by another person, but not including intrabuilding real property divisions. 
    Receiving property means any residence or place of business into which sound, not originating therefrom, is traveling. 
    Residence means any occupied room or rooms connected together containing sleeping facilities, including single- and multiple-family homes, townhomes, apartments, condominium units, and hotel and motel rooms. 
    Sound means a temporal and special oscillation in pressure, or other physical quantity in a medium with internal forces causing compression and rarefaction of that medium, and propagating at finite speed to distant points. 
    Sound source means the place from which sound emanates, including without limitation a speaker, loudspeaker, or other sound-producing instrument, motor vehicle, person, animal or bird. 
    Special master means a hearing officer appointed pursuant to chapter 2 of this Code. 
    Uninvited noise means noise not originating on the receiving property. 
    Unreasonably loud means noise that is plainly audible inside of a receiving property across a property line. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, § 4(17-43), 11-8-2005) 
Sec. 17-210. - Unreasonably loud noise prohibited. 
    At all times, it shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit to originate from the real property he/she controls any sound that crosses a real property line at a volume that is unreasonably loud. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, § 5(17-44), 11-8-2005) 
Sec. 17-211. - Responsibility for compliance. 
    For purposes of sections 17-210 through 17-213, any person owning or having responsibility for management of any business premises, however temporarily, any performer or disc jockey producing sound upon any business premises, any person playing music, any person having control of volume knobs or levels, and the business as named on the occupational license shall be jointly and severally liable for compliance with this article and shall be responsible for any violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, § 6(17-45), 11-8-2005) 
Sec. 17-212. - Noise level in specific area. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow for areas of the city where the ambience contributes to the enjoyment by residents and visitors of uses that feature the serving of food and beverages accompanied by outdoor live and prerecorded musical entertainment. 
(b)  Boundaries. The area for which this section applies shall be located as follows: The area shall be referred to as the downtown area. 
(c)  Limitation on noise volume. 
(1)  For purposes of enforcement of this article, the following definition of "unreasonably loud" shall apply for all noises originating within the area as described in subsection (b) of this section: Uninvited noise shall be deemed unreasonably loud if it is plainly audible at a distance greater than 100 feet away from the property line of the sound source. The 100 feet away from the property line of the sound source shall be measured in a straight line from any point on the property line of the sound source as shown in the accompanying illustration. 
(2)  All procedures for enforcement of violations of the noise limitations in subsection (c)(1) of this section and for appeals of notices of violations issued by code enforcement officers shall be as set forth in this article. 
(d)  No variances granted. No variances shall be granted from the permissible volume limitations set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  Applicability of zoning provisions. The regulations set forth in this section shall supplementary to all other provisions, and the zoning regulations set forth in chapter 94 shall continue to apply within the area. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, § 7(17-46), 11-8-2005) 
Sec. 17-213. - Additional sound limitations for public property. 
    No person shall, on any public street or sidewalk, or park, use, operate or play any radio, phonograph, stereo set, tape or CD player, television, sound amplifier, or other electronic audio device that produces or reproduces amplified sound, at a level that is plainly audible at a distance of more than ten feet from the sound source. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, § 8(17-47), 11-8-2005) 
Sec. 17-214. - Temporary permits. 
(a)  The mayor, or his designee, is authorized to issue a temporary permit to allow noise prohibited by sections 17-210 and 17-211 when produced by a temporary use or activity that does not significantly endanger the health, safety or welfare of the neighborhood. The mayor, or his designee, may prescribe any reasonable conditions necessary to minimize any adverse effect upon the community. A permit granted under this article shall contain all conditions upon which the permit has been granted including the period of time for which the permit has been granted. Such relief may be granted in the following situations: 
(1)  Code compliance in progress. When an applicant is utilizing best efforts to comply with the noise restrictions in this article, but additional time is required for the applicant to modify his activity to comply and no reasonable alternative is available to the applicant. Such permits may be granted for a period of time not to exceed ten (10) days. 
(2)  Construction. When construction activities pursuant to a valid building permit cannot be carried out in a manner which would comply with sections 17-210 and 17-211, provided that all equipment shall be operated in accordance with manufacturers specifications, shall be in good repair and shall utilize all noise baffling methods as specified by the manufacturer, and further provided that such activities shall occur only as follows: 
a.  Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday through Friday; between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Saturday and Sunday. 
b.  Notwithstanding the provisions set forth in subsections (a)(2)a of this section, the city commission may authorize emergency construction activity when necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(3)  Special events. When the applicant seeks to hold an activity or special event and has met all of the city's requirements, and the activity or special event cannot be performed or held in a manner that would comply with sections 17-210 and 17-211. This section shall also apply to private entities holding leases for use of city owned property within the city. 
(b)  Failure to comply with any condition of a temporary permit issued pursuant to this section shall constitute a violation and shall result in enforcement procedures and penalties as set forth in sections 17-215 and 17-216. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, § 9(17-48), 11-8-2005; Ord. No. 2011-02, § 2, 6-14-2011) 
Sec. 17-215. - Exemptions. 
    The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the requirements of sections 17-210 and 17-211 and from the enforcement procedures in this article: 
(1)  Cries for emergency assistance and warning calls, including any animal or bird giving a sound of danger or warning under particular circumstances reasonably requiring the need for warning. 
(2)  Radios, sirens, horns and bells and other sounds created by police, fire and other emergency response vehicles. 
(3)  Parades, fireworks displays, special events and other activities for which a permit has been obtained from the city, within such hours and in accordance with such restrictions as may be imposed as conditions for the issuance of the permit. 
(4)  Activities on or in municipal and school athletic facilities and on or in publicly owned property and facilities, including public plazas within community development districts, ("CDD Plazas") when such activities have been authorized by the public authority owning properties other than CDD plazas are under private operation pursuant to a lease or concession agreement. 
(5)  Fire alarms and burglar alarms, bells and chimes of churches or other religious institutions however, false burglary alarms shall be subject to the enforcement procedures and penalties as set forth in section 17-9. 
(6)  Locomotives and other railroad equipment and aircraft, to the extent that city regulation is preempted by federal law. 
(7)  Noises resulting from emergency work. 
(8)  Any noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration permitted pursuant to section 17-214. 
(9)  Noise generated by motor vehicles as defined in F.S. § 320.01 when operated and equipped in accordance with requirements set forth in state statutes. 
(10)  Noise resulting from the operation of vessels when operated in compliance with the decibel limitations in F.S. § 327.65. However, noise exceeding the limitations set forth in F.S. § 327.65 shall be subject to enforcement and penalties as set forth in F.S. ch. 327. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, § 10(17-49), 11-8-2005) 
Sec. 17-216. - Enforcement by code enforcement officers: notice of violation. 
(a)  If a code enforcement officer receives a complaint from a complainant regarding a violation of this article, he/she shall investigate the complaint and determine whether the violation exists. If the code enforcement officer then observes a violation of this article, the inspector shall inform the violator that he must immediately cease the violation and will be subject to additional penalties if the violation continues and issue a notice of violation to the violator as provided in this chapter of the Code. The Notice shall inform the violator of the: 
(1)  Name of the violator; 
(2)  Date and time of the violation; 
(3)  Nature of the violation; 
(4)  Amount of fine which the violator may be liable; 
(5)  Instructions and due date for paying the fine. 
(6)  Notice that the violation may be appealed by requesting an administrative hearing within ten (10) days after service of the notice of violation, that failure to do so shall constitute an admission of the violation and waiver of the right to a hearing, and that unpaid fines will result in the imposition of line, which may be foreclosed by the city. 
(b)  The notice shall also inform the violator that repeat violations of this article will result in the imposition of larger fines and may also result in revocation of occupational license and/or certificate of use and/or injunctive proceedings as provided by law. 
(c)  Enforcement by law enforcement officers. A law enforcement officer, authorized to enforce the laws of the state within the city limits of Pahokee, may enforce the provisions of sections 17-206 to 17-216. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, § 12(17-50), 11-8-2005; Ord. No. 2016-01 , § 1, 2-23-2016) 
Sec. 17-217. - Civil fines for violation; supplemental court proceedings; appeals. 
(a)  The following civil fines shall be imposed for violations of this chapter: 
(1)  First offense, $100.00 fine. 
(2)  Second offense and each offense thereafter (within one year of the first offense), $500.00 fine. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the term "offense" means a notice of violation that has not been contested timely or a finding of violation by a special master. A person may receive a separate notice of violation once every hour if a violation has occurred at any time within that period. Each notice of violation shall constitute a separate offense for which a separate fine may be imposed. 
(c)  A violator who has been served with a notice of violation shall elect either to: 
(1)  Pay the civil fine in the manner indicated on the notice; or 
(2)  Request an administrative hearing before a special master to appeal the decision of the code inspector that has resulted in the issuance of the notice of violation. 
(d)  The named violator shall request an administrative hearing before the special master by filing a written request for hearing with the special master's office within ten days of the date of the notice of violation. A courtesy notice shall be provided to the complainant of any hearing regarding the notice of violation, and the complainant may testify at such hearings. Failure to give such notice shall not be a cause for continuance or cancellation of any scheduled hearing of the matter. 
(e)  If the named violator, after notice, fails to pay the civil fine or fails to timely request an administrative hearing before a special master, the special master shall be informed of such failure by report from the code enforcement officer. Failure of the named violator to appeal the notice of violation within the prescribed time period shall constitute a waiver of the violator's right to administrative hearing before the special master. A waiver of the right to an administrative hearing shall be treated as an admission of the violation and penalties may be assessed accordingly. 
(f)  Any party aggrieved by the decision of a special master may appeal that decision to a court of competent jurisdiction as provided in F.S. § 162.11. 
(g)  The city may institute proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel payment of civil fines. A certified copy of an order imposing a civil fine may be recorded in the public records and thereafter shall constitute a lien upon any other real or personal property owned by the violator, and it may be enforced in the same manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of this state, including levy against the personal property, but shall not be deemed to be a court judgment except for enforcement purposes. After three (3) months from the filing of any such lien that remains unpaid, the city may foreclose or otherwise execute on the lien. 
(h)  As an alternative or additional means of enforcement, the city may institute proceedings to revoke or suspend an occupational license and/or certificate of use or seek injunctive relief. In cases of recurring violations, the code enforcement officer may issue a citation for prosecution before the special master as provided in this chapter wherein, upon a finding of violation by the special master, a per diem fine may be imposed. A violation shall be considered recurring when a person or entity has received three (3) notices of violation within a period of one (1) month. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, § 13(17-51), 11-8-2005) 
Sec. 17-218. - Motor vehicle alarms. 
(a)  Definition. The following term shall have the following meaning for purpose of this section: 
(a)  Alarm system means a motor vehicle siren or home alarm system contain in or appurtenant to a motor vehicle, designed to activate and sound in the event of a break-in or attempted break-in of the vehicle. 
(b)  Violation generally. It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle equipped with an alarm system to activate and emit a siren or home noise, audible at a distance of one hundred (100) feet intermittently or continuously within a period of excess of thirty (30) minutes. Any person who has custody of any such offending motor vehicle shall be deemed in violation of this section. 
(c)  Violation deemed public nuisance. A violation of this section on the public streets or areas within the city is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated by the removal of such vehicle upon authorization of a law enforcement officer. Prior to removing such vehicle, the law enforcement officer shall afford the owner or custodian of such vehicle the opportunity to disconnect or deactivate the alarm system at the scene. Otherwise, the vehicle shall be removed to an authorized facility. The law enforcement agency shall ascertain the name and address of the registered owner of such vehicles and provide written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, within twenty-four (24) hours of such removal the reason for the removal, and the place where such vehicle has been removed. The fees assessed for the removal of the vehicle may be appealed by filing a complaint in the county court and posting with the court a cash or surety bond or security equal to the amount for the removal and/or storage of the vehicle to ensure the payment of such in the event the owner or custodian of the vehicle does not prevail. 
(d)  Penalty. A violation of this section on private property shall cause the person who owns or has custody of the offending vehicle to be fined fifty dollars ($50.00). Any duly designated law enforcement officer and/or code enforcement officer is authorized and empowered to enter without force upon private property in order to detect and issue a citation or notice of violation to and upon the owner or custodian of the offending motor vehicle. The citation or notice of violation may be appealed in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(e)  Exception. It shall not be a violation of this section if it is determined by the law enforcement officer and/or code enforcement officer that the siren or horn noise has been triggered by the unauthorized opening of the hood, trunk or door of the vehicle, by the breaking or attempted breaking of a window or by lightning, thunderstorms, or severe weather conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, § 14(17-52), 11-8-2005) 
Sec. 17-219. - Nuisance. 
    Any violation of this article shall constitute a nuisance. The city attorney may bring suit on behalf of the city, or any affected citizen may bring suit in his/her name, against the person or persons causing or maintaining the violation, and against the owner/agent of the building or property on which the violation exists. Relief may be granted according to the terms and conditions of F.S. ch. 60, relating to abatement of nuisances, or pursuant to section 17-217. In any such action, the city or affected citizen, if the prevailing party, shall be awarded costs, including reasonable attorney fees. 
(Ord. No. 2005-05, § 15(17-53), 11-8-2005) 
Secs. 17-220-17-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NUISANCE ABATEMENT 

Sec. 17-241. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Board means the nuisance abatement board of the city. 
    City attorney means the city attorney or such other attorney as may from time to time be designated. 
    Controlled substance means as provided for in F.S. ch. 893, pursuant to F.S. § 893.138, and includes any substance sold in lieu of a controlled substance in violation of F.S. § 817.563, or any imitation controlled substance defined in F.S. § 817.564. 
    Criminal street gang means a formal or informal ongoing organization, association, or group that has as one of its primary activities the commission of criminal or delinquent acts, and that consists of three (3) or more persons who have a common name or common identifying signs, colors, or symbols and have two (2) or more members who individually or collectively, engage in or have engaged a pattern of criminal street gang activity. 
    Criminal street gang member means a person who is a member of a criminal street gang, as defined in this section, and who meets two (2) or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Admits to criminal street gang membership. 
(2)  Is identified as a criminal street gang member by a parent or guardian. 
(3)  Is identified as a criminal street gang member by a documented reliable informant. 
(4)  Resides in or frequents a particular street gang's area and adopts their style of dress, their use of hand signs, or their tattoos, and associates with known criminal street gang members. 
(5)  Is identified as a criminal street gang member by an informant of previously untested reliability and such identification is corroborated by independent information. 
(6)  Has been arrested more than once in the company of identified criminal street gang members for offenses which are consistent with usual criminal street gang activity. 
(7)  Is identified as a criminal street gang member by physical evidence such as photographs or other documentation. 
(8)  Has been stopped in the company of known criminal street gang members four (4) or more times. 
    Manufacture means the same as defined in F.S. § 893.02(13)(a). 
    Operator means the tenant, lessee, occupant or person having control or possession of a premises. 
    Pattern of criminal street gang activity means the commission or attempted commission of, or solicitation or conspiracy to commit, two (2) or more felony or three (3) or more misdemeanor offenses, or one (1) felony and two (2) misdemeanor offenses, or the comparable number of delinquent acts or violations of law which would be felonies or misdemeanors if committed by an adult, on separate occasions within a three-year period. 
    Public nuisance means any place or premises within the city that has been used: 
(1)  On more than two (2) occasions, within a six-month period, as the site of a violation of F.S. § 796.07; 
(2)  On more than two (2) occasions, within a six-month period, as the site of unlawful sale, delivery, manufacture, or cultivation of any controlled substance; 
(3)  On one (1) occasion as the site of the unlawful possession of a controlled substance, as defined in this section, where such possession constitutes a felony and that has been previously used on more than one (1) occasion as the site of the unlawful sale, delivery, manufacture, or cultivation of any controlled substance as defined in this section; 
(4)  By a criminal street gang for the purpose of conducting a pattern of criminal street gang activity as defined by F.S. § 874.03; or 
(5)  One more than two (2) occasions, within a six-month period, as the site of a violation of F.S. § 812.019, relating to dealing in stolen property. 
    Sale and delivery means an actual, constructive or attempted transfer or possession. 
    Secretary means a person appointed by the mayor to perform the clerical duties necessary to carry out the activities of the board. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 4-13-2010; Ord. No. 2010-09, § 1, 8-10-2010) 
State Law reference- Street terrorism enforcement and prevention, definitions, F.S. § 874.03; local administrative action to abate drug related public nuisances and youth and street gang activity, F.S. § 893.138; prohibitions of prostitution, penalty, etc., F.S. § 796.07. 
Sec. 17-242. - Creation of nuisance abatement board; membership. 
    There is hereby created and established the city nuisance abatement board consisting of five members, appointed by the commission, who shall reside or maintain a business in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 2, 4-13-2010; Ord. No. 2010-09, § 2, 8-10-2010) 
Sec. 17-243. - Term of members. 
    Terms of membership of the city nuisance abatement board shall be for two (2) years except that two of the initially appointed members shall serve initial terms of one (1) year. Any member may be reappointed by the commission for not more than three (3) complete consecutive terms. Appointments to fill a vacancy shall be for the remainder of the unexpired term. Any member who fails to attend two (2) or three (3) successive meetings without prior approval of the chair shall automatically forfeit his appointment, and the mayor shall promptly fill such vacancy for the remainder of the term. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 3, 4-13-2010; Ord. No. 2010-09, § 3, 8-10-2010) 
Sec. 17-244. - Quorum; compensation. 
    The presence of three (3) or more members of the nuisance abatement board shall constitute a quorum. Members of the nuisance abatement board shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 4, 4-13-2010; Ord. No. 2010-09, § 4, 8-10-2010) 
Sec. 17-245. - General procedures. 
(a)  Any employee, officer or resident of the county or of the city may bring a complaint before the board by requesting prosecution by the city regarding the existence of any premises located in the city of a public nuisance as defined in section 17-241. 
(b)  When a request for prosecution has been received, the city attorney shall prepare a complaint and shall promptly request a hearing on such complaint before the board. 
(c)  The secretary to the board shall schedule the complaint for hearing upon no less than three (3) days' written notice of the hearing on such complaint to the owner of the place or premises at his last known address. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 5, 4-13-2010; Ord. No. 2010-09, § 5, 8-10-2010) 
Sec. 17-246. - Conduct of hearings; orders. 
(a)  The board shall adopt rules for the conduct of its hearings. 
(b)  The city shall provide clerical and administrative personnel to the board as may be reasonably required for the proper performance of the board's duties. Minutes of hearings shall be promptly recorded and all hearings shall be open to the public. 
(c)  The city attorney or his designee shall present complaint to the board. The board may consider any evidence including evidence of the general reputation of the place or premises. The owner of the place or premises shall have an opportunity to present evidence in his defense. 
(d)  If the board declares the premises, place or building to be a public nuisance, it may enter an order requiring the owner of such premises, place or building to adopt such procedure as may be appropriate under the circumstances to abate such nuisance, or it may enter an order immediately prohibiting: 
(1)  The maintenance of the nuisance; 
(2)  The operating or maintaining of the place or premises, including the closure of the place or premises or any part thereof; or 
(3)  Discontinuance of the conduct, operation or maintenance of any business or activity on the premises which is conducive to such nuisance. 
(e)  An order entered under subsection (d) of this section shall expire after one year or at an earlier time as stated in the order. 
(f)  An order entered under subsection (d) of this section may be enforced pursuant to the procedures contained in F.S. § 120.69. This subsection does not subject the city or the board created by the city to any other provisions of F.S. ch. 120. 
(g)  The board may bring a complaint under F.S. § 60.05 seeking temporary and permanent injunctive relief against any public nuisance described in section 1. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 6, 4-13-2010; Ord. No. 2010-09, § 6, 8-10-2010) 
Sec. 17-247. - Appeals. 
    An aggrieved party, including the city attorney, may appeal a final administrative order of the board to the circuit court of the Fifteenth Judicial Circuit. Such appeal shall not be a hearing de novo but shall be limited to appellate review of the record created before the board. An appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the date of the written order appealed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 7, 4-13-2010; Ord. No. 2010-09, § 7, 8-10-2010) 
Sec. 17-248. - Enjoining of nuisances, additional remedy. 
(a)  When any nuisance as defined in F.S. ch. 823 exists on any premises within the city, the city attorney or any citizen of the city may sue the owner or the operator to enjoin a public nuisance. 
(b)  This article constitutes an additional remedy for use by the city and is not to be construed to eliminate or alter or serve as a prerequisite for the city to pursue any other remedy that is legally available. All other remedies at law or in equity are hereby authorized for use by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 8, 4-13-2010; Ord. No. 2010-09, § 8, 8-10-2010) 
Sec. 17-249. - Rights preserved. 
    This article does not restrict the right of any person to proceed under F.S. § 60.05 against any public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 9, 4-13-2010; Ord. No. 2010-09, § 9, 8-10-2010) 
Sec. 17-250. - Penalties. 
(a)  In addition to the remedies provided under section 17-246(d), the board may enter an order providing penalties on any place or premises that has been or is declared to be a public nuisance, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Providing for a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars $250.00 per day. 
(2)  Providing for a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars $500.00 per day for recurring public nuisances. 
(3)  Providing for the payment of reasonable costs, including reasonable attorney fees associated with the investigation of and hearings on public nuisance. 
(4)  Provide for continuing jurisdiction over such place or premises for a period of one (1) year. 
(b)  Any order on public nuisance entered by the board shall be recorded in the public records of the county so that notice will be given to subsequent purchasers, successors in interest, or assigns of the real property that is the subject of the order. 
(c)  A recorded order on public nuisance shall constitute a lien against the real property that is the subject of the order. 
(d)  Where the city seeks to bring an administrative action, based on a stolen property nuisance, against a property owner operating an establishment where multiple tenants, on one site, conduct their own retain business, the property owner shall not be subject to a lien against his property or the prohibition of operation provision, if the property owner evicts the business declared to be a nuisance within ninety (90) days after notification by registered mail to the property owner of a second stolen property conviction of the tenant. 
(e)  The total fine imposed pursuant to the authority of this section shall not exceed fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 10, 4-13-2010; Ord. No. 2010-09, § 10, 8-10-2010) 
Sec. 17-251. - Authority to foreclose liens. 
(a)  The city attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute foreclosure proceedings to foreclose any and all liens imposed pursuant to section 17-250(c). 
(b)  The city shall be entitled to recover all costs, including reasonable attorney fees, associated with the recording of order and foreclosure of liens. 
(c)  No lien created pursuant to the provisions of this section may be foreclosed on real property which is a homestead under section 4, article X of the state constitution. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 11, 4-13-2010; Ord. No. 2010-09, § 11, 8-10-2010) 
Secs. 17-252-17-275. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - REGISTRATION OF REAL PROPERTY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2010-07, which created this article, numbered the sections 17-186 through 17-196. For clarity and to avoid renumbering the chapter, the sections herein are numbered 17-276 through 17-286, at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 17-276. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose and intent of this article to establish a process to limit and reduce the amount of deteriorating property located within the city, which property about which a public notice of default has been filed, is in foreclosure, or where ownership has been transferred to lender or mortgagee by any legal method. It is further intended to establish a registration program as a mechanism to protect neighborhoods from becoming blighted through the lack of inadequate maintenance of abandoned and vacated properties subject to a mortgage or properties subject to mortgages that are in default. 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, § 2(17-186), 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 17-277. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Where the context will permit and no definitions are provided herein, the definitions provided in the Florida Building Code shall apply. 
    Abandoned real property means any real property that is vacant and/or is under a public notice of default, notice of mortgagee's sale, pending tax assessor's lien sale and/or properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where title is retained by the mortgagee, and any properties transferred under a deed-in-lieu of foreclosure sale, a short sale or any other legal means. 
    Default means that the mortgagee files a foreclosure action or public notice of default on the mortgage. A mortgage shall be considered in default at such time as the mortgagee declares said mortgage to be in default either in writing, by recording a lis pendens, or by its actions, or commences foreclosure proceedings. 
    Evidence of vacancy means any condition that on its own, or combined with other conditions present would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions may include, but not be limited to, overgrown and/or dead vegetation, electricity, water or other utilities turned off, stagnant swimming pool, statements by neighbors, passers-by, delivery agents or government agents, among other evidence. 
    Foreclosure means the judicial process by which a property, placed as security for a mortgage loan, after a judicial process, is to be sold at an auction to satisfy a debt upon which the borrower has defaulted. 
    Enforcement officer means any fulltime law enforcement officer, building official, fire inspector or code enforcement officer employed by the city. 
    Vacant means any building or structure that is not lawfully occupied or inhabited by human beings. 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, § 2(17-187), 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 17-278. - Applicability. 
    This article relates to abandoned and vacant property and to property subject to a mortgage that has been determined by the mortgagee to be in default. 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, § 2(17-188), 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 17-279. - Penalties. 
    Violations of this article shall be subject to enforcement by the code enforcement procedures of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, § 2(17-189), 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 17-280. - Registration of real property mortgagee holding mortgages in default. 
(a)  Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within the city shall perform an inspection of the property upon default by the mortgagor or prior to the issuance of a notice of default. If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, it shall be deemed vacant or abandoned and the mortgagee shall, within two (2) days of the inspection, register the property with the code enforcement office on forms provided by the office or its designee. 
(b)  If the property is occupied but remains in default, it should be inspected monthly by the mortgagee or mortgagee's designee. 
(c)  Within ten (10) days of the date the mortgagee declares its mortgage to be in default, the mortgagee must register the property with the code enforcement office electronically via the internet at kholley@cityofpahokee.com, and also list the property at http://www.samplecity.com/vacant_registry and shall designate in writing the local property manager to inspect, maintain and secure the real property subject to the mortgage in default. 
(d)  Registration. Registration pursuant to this section shall contain at a minimum the name of the mortgagee, the mailing address of the mortgagee, e-mail address, and telephone number and name of the local property manager and said person's address, e-mail address, and telephone number. The local property manager shall be responsible to inspect, secure and maintain the property. The property manager named in the registration shall be located within twenty (20) miles of the city and available to be contacted by the city, Monday through Friday between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., holidays and lunch hours accepted. The city shall charge a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for any registration or a modification of registration. 
(e)  This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where title is transferred to the mortgagee as well as any properties transferred to the mortgagee under a deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(f)  Properties subject to this section shall remain under the annual registration requirement, inspection, security, and maintenance standards of this section as long as they remain vacant or declared to be in default. 
(g)  Any person or other legal entity that has registered a property under this article must report any change of information contained in the registration within ten (10) days of the change. 
(h)  Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly register or to revise from time to time the registration to reflect a change of circumstances as required by this article is a violation of the codes of the city and may result in a citation by the code compliance division. Pursuant to a finding and determination by the special magistrate that any property is in violation of city's ordinances, the city may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with its ordinances and place a lien on the property for the cost of the work performed to benefit the property and to bring it into compliance, which lien may be assigned to either the entity that performs the work or arranges to have the work performed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, § 2(17-190), 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 17-281. - Maintenance requirements. 
    In addition to the other requirements of the city's laws and ordinances: 
(1)  Properties subject to this article shall be kept free of weeds, overgrown brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices, except those required by federal, state, or local law, discarded personal items including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned or not being properly maintained. Weeds, overgrown brush or dead vegetation over twelve (12) inches tall are prohibited. 
(2)  The property shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior structure. Yards shall be landscaped and maintained pursuant to the standards set forth in the code. Landscaping shall include, but not be limited to, grass, ground cover, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential, commercial or industrial installation, as applicable. Landscaping shall not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt or similar material. 
(3)  Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, watering, irrigation, cutting and mowing of required landscape and removal of all trimmings and weeds. 
(4)  Pools and spas shall be kept in working order so that pool and spa water remains free and clear of pollutants and debris. Pools and spas shall comply with the enclosure requirements of the city's codes and the state building code. 
(5)  Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly maintain the property is a violation of this Code and may result in the issuance of a citation by the code compliance division. Pursuant to a finding and determination by the special magistrate, the city may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with its ordinances and place a lien on the property and assign it as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, § 2(17-191), 7-13-2010; Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 2, 6-28-2016) 
Sec. 17-282. - Security requirements. 
(a)  Properties subject to this article shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. 
(b)  A "secure manner" shall include, but not be limited to, the closure and locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that may allow a child or adult to access the interior of the property and/or structure. Broken windows shall be secured by reglazing or boarding. 
(c)  If a mortgage on the property is in default on the property and has become vacant or abandoned, a local property manager shall be designated by the mortgagee to perform the work necessary to bring the property into compliance with this Code and the local property manager must perform weekly inspections to verify compliance with the requirements of this section, and any other applicable laws or ordinances of the city. 
(d)  When the property becomes vacant or abandoned, it shall be posted with the name and twenty four (24) hour contact telephone number of the local property manager. The posting shall be no less than eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches, and shall be of a font that is legible from a distance of forty-five (45) feet. The posting shall contain the following language: 
    THIS PROPERTY IS MANAGED BY ____________ . 
(e)  The posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the street to the front of the property so that it is visible from the street, or secured to the exterior of the building/structure facing the street to the front of the property so that it is visible from the street or if no such area exists, on a stake of sufficient size to support the posing in a location that is at all times visual from the street to the front of the property but not readily accessible to vandals. Exterior posting shall be constructed of and printed with weather-resistant materials. 
(f)  Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly inspect and secure the property, and post and maintain the signage noted in this section, is a violation of this article and shall result in the issuance of a notice of violation by a code compliance officer. Pursuant to a finding and determination by the special magistrate, the city may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with this section, and place a lien on the property and assign it as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, § 2(17-192), 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 17-283. - Opposing, obstructing enforcement officer; penalty. 
    Whoever opposes, obstructs or resists any enforcement officer, or any person authorized by the city, in the discharge of duties as provided in this article, upon conviction may be sanctioned as provided in the Code of Ordinances of the city, or F.S. ch. 162. 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, § 2(17-193), 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 17-284. - Immunity of enforcement officer. 
    Any enforcement officer, or any person authorized by the city to enforce this article, shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith entry or trespass upon real property while in the discharge of duties imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, § 2(17-194), 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 17-285. - Additional authority. 
    The code enforcement administrator shall have authority to require the mortgagee and/or owner of record of any property affected by this article to require an on-site security guard. Failure to comply with the terms of this article shall constitute a continuing public nuisance. The city shall have the authority to promptly abate the public nuisance, in whole or in part, at the expense of the mortgagee or other responsible party. 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, § 2(17-195), 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 17-286. - Supplemental provisions. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the city from enforcing its codes by any other means, including, but not limited to, injunction, abatement or as otherwise provided by code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-07, § 2(17-196), 7-13-2010) 
Chapter 18 - PAHOKEE HARBOR[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Dumping garbage and trash in waterways prohibited, § 11-12; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22. 
State Law reference- Florida boat registration and safety law, F.S. Ch. 327; local regulations qualified, F.S. § 327.60. 

Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Boat means any craft, whether propelled by mechanical means or otherwise, used in, on or about the water, as a means of locomotion. 
    Pahokee Harbor means the area as defined in that certain permit from the Trustees of the Internal Improvement Fund of the State of Florida to the city, as recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court, Palm Beach County, Florida, Clerk's File No. 3192, filed November 30, 1956. 
(Code 1984, § 16-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-2. - Prohibited acts. 
    No person shall: 
(1)  Swim within Pahokee Harbor, except for the rescue of another person or repair or salvage of a boat; 
(2)  Water ski or jet ski within Pahokee Harbor; 
(3)  Operate any boat within Pahokee Harbor at a rate of speed in excess of four (4) miles per hour; 
(4)  Operate any boat within Pahokee Harbor within fifty (50) feet of any existing structure of the harbor, except when engaged in docking; 
(5)  Have possession of any glass beverage container on the breakwater of Pahokee Harbor; 
(6)  Operate any bicycle or motor vehicle upon the existing dock or breakwater of Pahokee Harbor except when engaged in authorized servicing, maintenance, or the loading or unloading of any boat. 
(Code 1984, § 16-2) 
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles generally, Ch. 25. 
Sec. 18-3. - Special permits. 
    The city commission may issue special temporary permits from time to time for the holding of water shows, boat races or other public exhibitions allowing the following which shall not be deemed a violation of this chapter when performed pursuant thereto: 
(1)  Swimming within Pahokee Harbor; 
(2)  Waterskiing or jet skiing within Pahokee Harbor; 
(3)  Operation of a boat in excess of four (4) miles per hour. 
(Code 1984, § 16-3) 
Sec. 18-4. - Storage or abandonment of boats and boat trailers in Hoover Levee right-of-way. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to store, abandon or allow to remain out of the water in an area consisting of the United States Hoover Levee right-of-way between the existing westerly fence line of the Pahokee State Park recreation area and easterly of a line located parallel to and twenty (20) feet easterly of the point where the easterly line of the existing wooden T Dock joints the land area, any boat, or boat trailer, for a period of longer than forty-eight (48) hours. 
(b)  Any police officer of this city is hereby authorized to provide for the removal of any such boat, or boat trailer found to be in violation of this section to the nearest garage, or other place of safety, cost of such removal to be a lien against the property. 
(Code 1984, § 16-4) 
Chapter 19 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; planning and zoning division, § 2-104; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; land development code, Ch. 14; mobile homes and recreational vehicles, Ch. 15; public improvements, Ch. 20; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22; subdivisions, Ch. 23; utilities, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference- State comprehensive planning, F.S. § 23.011 et seq.; local government comprehensive planning and land development regulation act, F.S. § 163.3161 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 19-1. - Adoption of comprehensive plan. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act, F.S. § 163.3161 et seq., the city commission hereby adopts the comprehensive plan of the city consisting of a future land use element, traffic circulation element, housing element, sanitary sewer, solid waste, drainage, potable water and natural groundwater aquifer recharge element, coastal management element, conservation element, recreation and open space element, intergovernmental coordination element, and a capital improvements element. A copy of each of the elements is attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived, and each element is adopted by reference and made a part of this section the same as if set out at length herein. 
(Code 1984, § 17-2; Ord. No. 89-12, § 1, 9-11-1989) 
Secs. 19-2-19-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ZONING/ADJUSTMENT/ PLANNING BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 98-7, adopted August 25, 1998, has been treated by the editor as amending the Code by repealing former Art. II, §§ 19-26-19-32, and adding a new Art. II, § 19-26. Former Art. II pertained to the city planning board, and derived from the Code of 1984, §§ 17-16-17-22. 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions generally, § 2-126 et seq.; review of preliminary plan of subdivision by planning board, § 23-6. 

Sec. 19-26. - Created; composition. 
    The board of adjustment and the planning and zoning board are combined to form the zoning/adjustment/planning board. The zoning/adjustment/planning board will assume the functions of both boards as previously set forth. 
    The terms of the board members shall be staggered and set forth in the following manner: One (1) member shall be appointed for a term of (1) year; two (2) members shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years; and two (2) members shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years. In addition two (2) alternates shall be appointed for a period of three (3) years each. After the initial appointments, successive appoints shall be for a period of three (3) years, except where an appointment is made to fill a vacancy, in which case such appointment shall be for the balance of the term of the member in which the vacancy occurred. 
    The main duties of the board will be to address zoning issues, site plans, and variances. The detailed outline of duties is found in the land development regulations and includes the duties designated for both boards. 
(Ord. No. 98-7, 8-25-1998) 
Chapter 20 - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Ordinances relating to local improvements and assessments therefor saved from repeal, § 1-7(10); administration, Ch. 2; planning, Ch. 19; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22; subdivisions, Ch. 23; utilities, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference- Municipal bond authority, F.S. § 166.101 et seq.; supplemental and alternative method of making local improvements, F.S. Ch. 170; municipal public works, F.S. Ch. 180. 

Sec. 20-1. - "Municipal improvements" defined. 
    As used in this chapter, the term "municipal improvement" shall be construed to mean the opening, widening, laying out, paving, grading, extending, digging, construction, alteration or discontinuation of any park, street, highway, building or repairing a sidewalk, foot pavement, alley or other way, ditch, drain or gutter, or the laying, construction, repairing, changing, vacating, enlarging, diminishing or improving of any sewer within the city. 
(Code 1984, § 18-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 20-2. - Authority of city. 
(a)  Improvements designated; cost; condemnation; rights and duties of property owners; assessments; contracts; protests; suits in equity; liens. The city shall have power to open, establish, abolish, alter, extend, widen, grade, regrade, pave, repave, or otherwise improve, clean and keep in repair or rebuild streets, thoroughfares and construct, erect and keep in repair and rebuild bridges, bulkheads, seawalls, jetties, culverts, gutters, curbs, sewers and drains; to regulate and provide for the construction, preservation and repair of streets, avenues, alleys, sidewalks, foot pavements and other public ways and thoroughfares and paving and repairing the same; to provide for the protection and preservation of any street, road or boulevard, built or constructed for use of the general public along the shore of Lake Okeechobee from erosion of the waters of Lake Okeechobee, by the construction and maintenance of seawalls, bulkheads and jetties along such boulevard; to provide for the construction of sewers, septic tanks, complete sanitary sewerage disposal plants or works and drains and for keeping the same in repair; to acquire by purchase or gift within or without the city limits, land for the erection of a garbage disposal plant, and to provide for the cost of the same, either out of the regular funds of the city or by issuance of bonds; to provide for a uniform character of sidewalks which shall be built upon a grade established by the city; to take and appropriate private grounds, in the manner and form provided by law for condemnation for widening streets or parts thereof, or for extending the same, or for laying out new streets, avenues, alleys, parks and promenades; to grant the right-of-way through the streets, alleys, avenues and public grounds of the city for the use of public conveyances or railways, but the owner of property abutting thereon shall not thereby be deprived of any right he may have to claim any damage that he may receive by reason of such right-of-way; to require owners of property or their agents to keep their lots, tracts, or parcels of land free and clean of weeds, brush, undergrowth, trash, filth, garbage or other refuse or in case of their failure to do so, the city may remove or cause the removal of such weeds, brush, undergrowth, trash, filth, garbage or other refuse, and may charge and assess the expense thereof against the property so cleaned and improved; to provide for the care and protection of trees, shrubs and flowers in the public streets, parks and grounds; to impose penalties on the owner or occupant of or agent for the owner of any sidewalk, house or other structure, place or thing which may be dangerous or detrimental to the inhabitants of the city or dangerous or detrimental to their property, unless after due notice the same is removed or remedied in accordance with the requirements of the city. Whenever the city commission shall decide to open, establish, abolish, alter, extend, widen, grade, fill in, clear, clean, pave, construct, reconstruct, repair or otherwise improve any street, avenue, alley, or other way or thoroughfare or to build, construct, reconstruct, repair or improve any sewer, septic tank, sanitary disposal plants or works, drainage ditch within the city, and defray the whole or any part of the expense thereof by special assessment, the city commission shall so declare by resolution stating the nature of the proposed improvement, designating the streets to be so improved, what part or portion of the expense thereof is to be paid by special assessment, the manner in which the assessment shall be made, when the assessments are to be paid, what part, if any, shall be apportioned to be paid from the general improvement fund of the municipality, and the resolution shall also designate the lands upon which the special assessment shall be levied; and in describing the lands it shall be sufficient to describe the lots and lands, deemed to be specially benefited abutting upon and contiguous to the contemplated improvement, as: "All lots and lands adjoining and contiguous or bounding and abutting upon such improvement." Such resolution shall also state the total estimated cost of the improvement. Notice of the adoption of the resolution shall be given by causing to be published a copy of the resolution one (1) time in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city, and if there is no newspaper published in the city then in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county in which the city is located. The city commission shall cause the work and improvements to be done by contract or otherwise, and the city commission may, in its discretion, enter into separate contracts for any grading, filling, clearing, cleaning, curbing or paving or for any portion of either; or the city commission may, in its discretion, perform all or any portion of any public work under its own supervision under a foreman or other agency, employing such labor as may seem necessary, and not let the work under contract, as may in its opinion best serve the interest of the public. When such work has been completed, the city commission may pay the expense of the work out of any funds belonging to the city available for such purpose, and the city commission may assess the cost of such work or such portion thereof as it may determine, upon the property benefited by the improvement, or upon the abutting property in proportion to frontage. Any lot, or parcel of land on a corner may be assessed for its proportionate share of the improvement in the crossing or street adjacent to the corner. After the completion of any work provided for in this section, the commission shall adopt a resolution assessing the cost of the work or such portion thereof as it may determine, against the property benefited thereby, or against the abutting property in proportion to the frontage, or as above stated at a corner or a crossing; and thereupon the commission shall cause to be published two (2) times successively, once each week, in a newspaper of general circulation, published in the city, and if there is no newspaper published in the city then in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county, a notice of the completion of the work, which notice shall contain a description of each tract of land assessed, the amount of the assessment against such tract, the dates when the assessment will be due, which shall not exceed ten (10) years, and the rate of interest which the assessments bear. In such notice, the name of the owners or such other persons or corporations interested in any lands need not appear, but only a sufficient description of the lot, parcel or tract of land to make it capable of identification shall be necessary. Such notice shall fix not less than thirty (30) days from the posting of the notice when the commission will hear complaints of the owners or other persons or corporations interested in such lands against the amount or justice of the assessment. The notice may be in substantially the following form and when substantially in such form shall be sufficient, to wit: 
    Notice is hereby given that the City of Pahokee, Florida, has completed (here state the general nature of the work, such as the paving or repairing of a street within certain limits or a very brief, concise description of the improvement) and has assessed (here state proportion assessed) the expense of the improvement against the abutting property (or the property benefited, as the case may be). The following are the assessments made by the City Commission of the City of Pahokee against such tract of land; (one-third, all, or one-fourth as the case may be) (stating the time when due) of each of the assessments will be due on ____________ (insert here maturity date of first payment); ____________ of each assessment will be due on ____________ ; and ____________ of each assessment will be due on ____________ . Such assessments will bear interest at the rate of ____________ percent per annum from the ____________ day of ____________ , payable annually. The City Commission will meet at the City Hall at ____________ o'clock ____________ M. on the ____________ to hear complaints against the justice or amount of such assessments. 
The notice may be signed by the city clerk or by the presiding officer of the city commission. All protests or complaints against any of such assessments shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk prior to such meeting, and shall specifically state the grounds of the complaint or protest. The owner or any person or corporation interested in any land against which such assessment is made may appear before the commission at the meeting and urge before the commission the grounds of the protest or complaint stated in the written protest or complaint above provided for, and after hearing and considering the same the commission may if it deems it just or right, decrease the amount of any such assessment, but no assessment shall be increased against any land after the assessment has been once made. Any person or corporation owning or interested in any land against which any such assessment had been made, who shall fail to file the written protest or complaint within the time, as provided for in this section, shall be deemed and held to have consented to the assessment; and any such person owning or interested in any land against which any such assessment is made, who shall present his written complaint or protest as above provided and who is dissatisfied with the action of the city commission at the meeting may, within sixty (60) days after the meeting, file a suit in equity to enjoin the collection or enforcement of the assessment; and unless the suit is filed within such time the person shall not thereafter be held in any proceeding in any court either at law or in equity as plaintiff or defendant to question or contest the legality of any such assessment. Such assessment shall constitute and be a lien against the land against which the assessment is made from the date of the meeting of the city commission held to hear complaints against the assessment, which lien shall be prior and superior in dignity to all other liens thereon, except liens for taxes; and the amount of such assessment shall bear interest from the date of the making of such assessment, at a rate to be fixed by the city commission, which shall not exceed eight (8) percent per annum. 
(b)  City improvement lien book. The city commission shall cause to be prepared and kept by the city clerk a city improvement lien book, in which shall be entered the date of the making of each assessment, the amount of the assessment against each lot, parcel or other tract of land, the general purpose for which the assessment was made, and such other information as may be deemed advisable by the city commission. The entry in the city improvement lien book shall be and constitute notice to the public of the lien against such lands, and no other record or notice thereof shall be necessary to any person. 
(c)  Payment of assessments and liens. The owner or any other person interested in any land against which such assessment is made may pay the lien and have it satisfied by the tax collector at any time prior to suit thereon by paying the amount of such assessment and the interest thereon to the date of such payment. In case of the failure of any person owning such lands to pay the assessments for improvements as provided in this section during the time the tax books are open for the payment of the same, the city clerk shall place on the books the whole amount of the assessment, and the same shall become immediately due and payable, and no city taxes or other liens on the property shall be paid until the full amount of such assessment is paid to the tax collector. 
(d)  Certificates of indebtedness. The city commission may at any time after such assessments are made, issue and dispose of certificates of indebtedness upon the assessments under the provisions of F.S. Ch. 170. 
(e)  Installment paying. The assessments may be made due and payable in such installments and at such times as the city commission may by resolution prescribe. 
(f)  Enforcement of lien. Any lien provided for in this section may be enforced and collected by suit at law or in equity, upon failure to promptly pay the lien and assessment, or any installment thereof, or the city may maintain a personal action against the owner to recover the same, or it may enforce its lien and maintain its personal action at the same time, until actually paid the amount due; and in any suit by the city, either at law or in equity, for the collection of the amount of such lien, the city shall be entitled to recover a reasonable attorney's fee, together with the costs of the proceedings, which attorney's fees and costs shall also become a lien upon such lands. 
(g)  Landfill; drainage. If at any time the city commission shall deem it necessary or expedient for the preservation of the public health, or for any other reason, that any lot, parcel or tract of vacant land then lying and being within the city, which may be lower than any street, avenue or public way adjoining the same or the grade established therefor, or which may be subject to overflow or to the accumulation of water thereon, should be filled in or ditched or drained, the commission shall have the power to direct and require the owner of the lot, parcel or piece of vacant land to fill in the same to such grade or ditch or drain the lot, parcel or tract of vacant land, in such manner as the commission shall direct. Such notice shall be given by a resolution of the commission, a copy of which shall be served in like manner as specified in this section. If the owner of the lots or tracts of land shall not within such time as such resolution shall prescribe, fill in, ditch or drain the lot, parcel or tract of vacant land as therein directed, it shall be lawful for the commission to cause the same to be done, and to pay therefor and to charge, assess and collect the expense thereof against the lot, parcel or tract of land and against the owner thereof. All of the provisions mentioned in this section relative to the making of the assessment and proceedings subsequent thereto, decreasing the amount of the assessment, contesting the legality of the assessment, acquisition by the city of a lien and the effect thereof, rate of interest, entry in the city improvement lien book, effect of such entry, payment of lien, issuance of certificates of indebtedness, the enforcement and collection of the lien and attorney's fees, shall be applicable to and shall be followed in making and enforcing the assessments authorized by this subsection. 
(h)  Abutting owners may be required to make designated improvements. The commission may adopt a resolution directing and requiring the owner of any lot, parcel or tract of land fronting or abutting on any street, avenue, alley or other public way to construct, build or repair a sidewalk, foot pavement, curb, or gutter or either one (1) or more of such improvements thereon, to be built in front of such abutting property or in front of the lot a corner of which lies between two (2) streets, and upon a grade, and of such materials, width, and other dimensions and in such manner, as the commission shall direct. The resolution shall fix the time within which the work shall be done. If the owners of the lots or tracts of land shall not, within the time fixed in the resolution, build, construct, or repair such sidewalk or foot pavement, curb or gutter, or either one (1) or more of the improvements, in the manner and as directed in the resolution, the commission may cause the same to be done, and pay therefor, and charge, assess and collect the expense thereof against such lot, parcel or tract of land, and against the owner thereof. All the provisions in this section relating to the making of the assessment and proceedings subsequent thereto, notice to hear complaints and action thereon, and the effect thereof, decreasing the amount of the assessment, contesting the legality of the assessment, acquisition by the city of a lien and the effect thereof, rate of interest, entry in the city improvement lien book, effect of such entry, payment of lien, issuance of certificates of indebtedness, the enforcement and collection of the lien and attorney's fees, shall be applicable to and shall be followed in making and enforcing the assessment authorized by this subsection. 
(i)  Removal of brush, weeds, garbage, trash, etc. If at any time the commission shall deem it necessary or expedient for the preservation of public health or safety, or for the general welfare of the city or for any good reason, that any owner of land or riparian rights within the city should remove therefrom all brush, weeds, palmetto, dead or dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growth or thing of any kind, filth, garbage, trash, debris, decayed or decaying buildings or structures, ruins of any kind, buildings, docks, wharves or other structures in a falling or dangerous condition, the commission shall have the power to direct and require the owner of such land or riparian right to remove it. Such notice shall be given by a resolution of the commission, a copy of which shall be served in like manner as specified in this section. If the owner of the land or riparian rights shall not, within such time as such resolution shall prescribe, which shall not be less than thirty (30) days, remove from such land or riparian rights the thing directed and required to be removed, it shall be lawful for the commission to cause it to be removed, and to pay therefor, and to charge, assess and collect the expense thereof, as a lien against the land or riparian rights or as a claim against the owner thereof. All the provisions in this section relative to the making of the assessment and proceedings subsequent thereto, notices to hear complaints and action thereon and the effect thereof, decreasing the amount of the assessment, contesting the legality of the assessment, acquisition by the city of a lien and the effect thereof, rate of interest, entry in the city improvement lien book, effect of such entry, payment of the lien, issuance of certificates of indebtedness, the enforcement and collection of the lien and attorney's fees, shall be applicable to and may be followed in making and enforcing the assessments authorized by the foregoing subsection. 
(j)  Alternate procedure for notice. As an alternative procedure for notice to owners as provided in this section the city commission may give notice by mailing a copy of the resolution by registered mail to such owner as shown by the last tax assessment roll at his last known address and in like manner a copy of the notice of completion of the work. 
(Code 1984, § 18-2) 
Sec. 20-3. - Contracts for construction of municipal improvements. 
    The city is authorized to enter into and agree upon the terms of contracts with private parties for the installation, accomplishment or construction of municipal improvements. In such cases such private parties may do all of the work in accordance with specifications prescribed by the city, or in the alternative, may contract to do certain specified parts of the work to be done in conjunction with the city itself. 
(Code 1984, § 18-3) 
Sec. 20-4. - Financing municipal improvements. 
    In consideration of municipal improvements to be done by such private parties the city may sell or agree to sell to such private contracting parties any or all of the municipal improvement liens assessed by the city against abutting property for benefits to such property resulting from the municipal improvements so constructed. Such liens shall be evidenced by special assessment lien certificates and shall be assigned by the city without recourse against the city in the event of failure of payment. Such liens may be enforced by the party to whom assigned or anyone holding under him as any other liens are enforced in equity, or the city may agree to enforce such liens for and in behalf of the holder thereof. 
(Code 1984, § 18-4) 
Sec. 20-5. - Petition for improvements; costs. 
    The city commission shall, upon petition signed by a majority of the residents of any block on a street requesting the paving, repaving, grading or oiling of same, grant such request within a reasonable time, charging therefor the cost of such work two-thirds to the property on each side of the street at the same rate per foot and one-third to be borne out of the general fund. This same rule shall apply as to lighting, other than that regularly provided. 
(Code 1984, § 18-5) 
Chapter 21 - SOLICITORS, PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT VENDORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 21-1-21-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Occupational licenses and business regulations generally, Ch. 16. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 21-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Peddler means any person, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car, or other vehicle or conveyance. Anyone who solicits orders and, as a separate transaction, makes deliveries to purchasers as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this article shall be deemed a peddler, including: 
(1)  Stationary peddler. The term "stationary peddler" means someone who uses the location for sale of goods that extend beyond the type of personal goods sold at yard sales. 
(2)  Solicitor. The term "solicitor" means any individual, whether resident of the city or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, taking or attempting to take orders for sales of goods, wares, and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or not. Such definition shall include any person who, for himself or for another person hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodginghouse, apartment, shop, or any other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. 
(3)  Transient peddler. The term "transient peddler" means any person, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise within the city, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building; structure; motor vehicle; tent; railroad boxcar, boat; public room in a hotel, lodginghouse, apartment, shop; or any street, alley, or other place within the city, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at a public auction. 
(Code 1984, § 19-16; Ord. No. 2000-2, 4-11-2000; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 2, 5-24-2011) 
Sec. 21-27. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The license required under this article shall be provided to any law enforcement or code enforcement officer with jurisdiction in the city upon request. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall be enforceable by any law enforcement or code enforcement officer with jurisdiction in the city. 
(Code 1984, § 19-26; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 2, 5-24-2011) 
Sec. 21-28. - Use of public streets by peddlers. 
(a)  No peddler shall have exclusive right to any location in the public right-of-way. 
(b)  No peddler shall he be permitted a stationary location, on any public property. 
(c)  No peddler shall be permitted to operate in any congested area where his operations might impede traffic. 
(d)  A peddler in a stationary location may not operate more than two (2) days a week. 
(e)  A peddler in a stationary location must have written permission from the location's property owner. 
(f)  Stationary peddlers shall only operate on locations zoned for commercial activity and are restricted to daylight hours (sunrise to sunset). 
(Code 1984, §§ 19-27, 19-34(3); Ord. No. 2011-01, § 2, 5-24-2011) 
Sec. 21-29. - Use of loud noises and sound amplifying devices by peddlers. 
    No peddler shall shout, make any outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound device, including any sound amplifying system upon any of the streets, alleys, parks, or other places of the city or upon any private premises in the city where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other public places. 
(Code 1984, § 19-34(2); Ord. No. 2011-01, § 2, 5-24-2011) 
Secs. 21-30-21-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - IDENTIFICATION CARD AND LICENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Occupational licenses and business regulations generally, Ch. 16. 

Sec. 21-41. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a peddler within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining an identification card and license therefor as provided in this division. 
(Code 1984, § 19-17; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 2, 5-24-2011) 
Sec. 21-42. - Penalty. 
    Any person conducting business as a peddler without an identification card and license, or operating in violation of any provision of this Division, shall be punished upon conviction by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment in County Jail for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment for each violation. 
(Code 1984, § 19-17; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 2, 5-24-2011) 
Sec. 21-43. - Garage/yard sale exception. 
(a)  Garage/yard sales may only occur on Saturdays, between the hours of 8 a.m. and 4 p.m. Only garage/yard sales conducted by the owner or occupant of a residential unit on the owner's or occupant's residential property are permitted. The operator of the garage/yard sales shall not allow any signs or goods to remain outside on the yard or on the property during the hours the garage/yard sale is not operating. All property must be left in a clean and presentable manner with no evidence that a garage/yard sale operated at that location. 
(b)  A permit must be obtained from City Hall prior to each sale. 
(c)  Only one (1) sign will be permitted on the premises of a garage/yard sale. 
(Code 1984, § 19-17; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 2, 5-24-2011) 
Sec. 21-44. - Application. 
(a)  Applicants for identification cards and licenses required by this division must file with the city clerk a sworn written application in duplicate, on forms to be furnished by the city clerk, which give the following information: 
(1)  Name and description of the applicant; 
(2)  Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant; 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and goods to be sold; 
(4)  If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials signed by the employer recognizing the employment; 
(5)  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired; 
(6)  If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the vehicle, together with the license number or other means of identification; 
(7)  The place the goods or services proposed to be sold, or any ordered for future delivery are manufactured or produced, and the proposed method of delivery; 
(8)  Two (2) photographs) of the applicant, taken within sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date of filing of the application, which picture shall be not larger than two (2) inches by two (2) inches and not smaller than one (1) inch by one (1) inch, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner; 
(9)  A criminal records review provided by the Sheriff of Palm Beach, current within the last thirty (30) days. 
(b)  At the time of filing the application a fee in the amount of $150.00 per year shall be paid to the city clerk to cover the cost of investigation of the facts required by this section. If a peddler obtained a license from the city within the twelve (12) months prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived, the license fee shall be waived for the first renewal after the adoption of this division. 
(Code 1984, § 19-18; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 2, 5-24-2011) 
Sec. 21-45. - Investigation of character of applicant. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application for the identification card and the license required by this division. The clerk shall review the application to determine the applicant's qualifications under this division. 
(b)  All individuals issued an identification card and license must be of good moral character. Good moral character shall be construed to mean the propensity on the part of the applicant to serve the public in a fair and honest manner. 
(c)  A judgment of guilt in a criminal prosecution or a judgment in a civil action shall not be used, in and of itself, as proof of a person's lack of good moral character. It may be used as evidence in the determination, and when so used the person shall be notified and shall be permitted to rebut the evidence by showing that at the current time he has the ability to and is likely to serve the public in a fair, honest and open manner, that he is rehabilitated, or that the substance of the former offense is not reasonably related to the occupation or profession for which he seeks to be licensed. 
(d)  The following criminal records shall not be used, examined or requested by the city in a determination of moral character: 
(1)  Records of an arrest not followed by a conviction; 
(2)  Records of a conviction which has been reversed or vacated, including the arrest records relevant to that conviction; 
(3)  Records of an arrest or conviction for a misdemeanor or a felony unrelated to the person's likelihood to serve the public in a fair, honest, and open manner; 
(e)  When a person is found to be unqualified for a license because of a lack of good moral character, or similar criteria, the person shall be furnished by the clerk a statement denying the license. The statement shall contain a record of the evidence upon which the determination was based. The person shall be entitled to appeal the decision to the city commission. 
(Code 1984, § 19-19; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 2, 5-24-2011) 
Sec. 21-46. - Issuance. 
    If, as a result of the investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant for the identification card and the license required by this division are found to be satisfactory, the clerk shall approve the identification card and license upon payment of fees established by the city commission. 
(Code 1984, § 19-20; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 2, 5-24-2011) 
Sec. 21-47. - Content of identification card; clerk's record of licenses. 
    The identification card issued pursuant to this division shall contain the signatures of the applicant and shall show the name, address, a photograph, a general description and the fingerprint of the right index finger of the applicant. The clerk shall keep a permanent record of all licenses issued pursuant to this division. 
(Code 1984, § 19-21; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 2, 5-24-2011) 
Sec. 21-48. - Exhibition. 
    Solicitors and peddlers are required to have in their possession their licenses and identification cards. 
(Code 1984, § 19-22; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 2, 5-24-2011) 
Sec. 21-49. - Expiration. 
    Annual licenses and identification cards issued pursuant to this division shall expire on January 1 of the year in which issued. Licenses and identification cards issued for shorter periods shall expire on the date specified in the license. 
(Code 1984, § 19-23; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 2, 5-24-2011) 
Sec. 21-50. - Revocation-Grounds. 
    Identification cards and licenses issued pursuant to this division may be revoked by code enforcement special magistrate, after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for a license; 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on his business as solicitor or peddler; 
(3)  Any violation of this article; 
(4)  Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
(5)  Conducting the business of soliciting or peddling in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(Code 1984, § 19-28; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 2, 5-24-2011) 
Sec. 21-51. - Same-Notice of hearing. 
    Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license or identification card required by this division shall be given in writing by the city clerk setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed postage prepaid, to the licensee at his last known address at least five (5) days prior to the date for the hearing. 
(Code 1984, § 19-29; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 2, 5-24-2011) 
Sec. 21-52. - Appeal following denial or revocation; entitlement. 
    Any peddler aggrieved by the action of the special magistrate revoking an identification card or license as provided in section 21-50 may file a petition for a writ of certiorari in the circuit court for the fifteenth judicial district within 30 days of the decision. 
(Code 1984, § 19-30; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 2, 5-24-2011) 
Sec. 21-53. - Unauthorized use of identification card. 
    No identification card issued pursuant to this division shall be used at any time by any person other than the one to whom it was issued. 
(Code 1984, § 19-24; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 2, 5-24-2011) 
Secs. 21-54-21-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - (RESERVED) 

Secs. 21-71-21-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Occupational licenses and business regulations generally, Ch. 16. 
State Law reference- Solicitation of funds, F.S. Ch. 496; more stringent local provisions not preempted, F.S. § 496.34. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 21-116-21-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Occupational licenses and business regulations generally, Ch. 16. 

Sec. 21-126. - Purpose of division. 
    The purpose of this division is to protect the inhabitants of the city from being imposed upon by persons posing as representatives of recognized charitable institutions, posing as representatives of fictitious or nonexisting charitable organizations, or soliciting funds under the guise of soliciting for charity when the persons are not lawfully employed by such charitable organizations. Nothing in this division is intended in any way to interfere with the work of recognized charitable or benevolent institutions, but to protect them and the persons wishing to donate to such organizations from being taken advantage of by unauthorized representatives of spurious organizations, by representatives of fictitious and nonexisting charitable or benevolent organizations, or by representatives of newly created organizations, the purpose of such newly created organizations being to benefit the solicitors rather than the public. 
(Code 1984, § 19-76) 
Sec. 21-127. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit funds or donations of money or of property of any kind for charitable or benevolent purposes without first obtaining a permit from the mayor for such purpose. In the absence of the mayor, a permit may be issued or denied by the city clerk. 
(Code 1984, § 19-77) 
Sec. 21-128. - Applicant to supply certain information. 
    Each and every person desiring to solicit funds for himself or for others shall before engaging in such soliciting in the city procure from the mayor a permit, which permit shall be open to inspection by the chief of police or any police officer or any citizen of the city. Before the permit is issued, the applicant shall be required to supply in writing for the permanent records of the city his name, age, nationality and race, and how long the person has been employed for the charity that he purports to represent. In addition, the person must supply written evidence from the charitable or benevolent corporation he is said to represent, which evidence shows that the person is at the present time employed by the charitable or benevolent organization. Should a charitable or benevolent organization that is unknown or of new origin apply for a permit to collect funds or donations of any kind, it shall also supply in writing a statement of where such organization was organized, where its chief office is located, and for what purpose it solicits funds, and also whether or not any federal, state, city or town has supervision of its expenditures, or whether the public is fully apprised of the manner in which the donations are to be distributed. Should the applicant be soliciting funds on his own behalf, he shall submit satisfactory proof that he is a permanent cripple and cannot obtain entrance into a charitable institution, or that he is a veteran holding an honorable discharge from some branch of the United States Army or Navy, and that his physical condition will not permit him to do any more strenuous work than soliciting funds. 
(Code 1984, § 19-78) 
Sec. 21-129. - Appeal to city commission following denial. 
    Should any applicant for the permit required by this division be aggrieved at the ruling of the mayor or city clerk as to the issuance of a permit, they may apply to the city commission, and the city commission's ruling, either approving or disapproving the issuance of the permit, shall be final. 
(Code 1984, § 19-79) 
Chapter 22 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Ordinances dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, etc., any street or public way in the city saved from repeal, § 1-7(5); ordinances relating to municipal street maintenance agreements saved from repeal, § 1-7(6); ordinances establishing or prescribing grades for streets saved from repeal, § 1-7(7); public services department, § 2-106; placing handbills on public property prohibited, § 3-29; consumption of alcoholic beverages upon public property, § 4-6; sale, provision or consumption of alcoholic beverages within public parks, § 4-7; possession, consumption at public school athletic events, in athletic arenas, § 4-8; dumping garbage and trash in streets, alleys and parks prohibited, § 11-12; report of transportation of garbage over streets required, § 11-12; expectorating on public sidewalks and floors of public buildings, § 12-1; junk and abandoned property, Ch. 13; mobile homes and recreational vehicles, Ch. 15; Pahokee Harbor, Ch. 18; planning, Ch. 19; public improvements, Ch. 20; use of public streets by peddlers, § 21-29; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 25; utilities, Ch. 26. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Obstructing, tearing up, repairing streets and sidewalks-Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to do the following without first obtaining a written permit from the building inspector: 
(1)  Drive any truck over any curb, gutter or sidewalk in the city; 
(2)  Do any construction or repair work involving the tearing up and relaying of any street, alley, curb, gutter or sidewalk, or part of any street, alley, curb, gutter or sidewalk; 
(3)  Obstruct, dig into or in any way disturb any street, alley, curb, gutter, sidewalk, or part thereof; 
(4)  Remove any earth or muck from ditches in the city. 
(b)  The permit required by this section shall be issued under the terms of this chapter and under such conditions as may be further prescribed by the building inspector and shall accurately describe the portion of the street, alley, curb, gutter, sidewalk or culvert, if it is to be replaced in the same condition as when disturbed and shall state a definite time within which the permit shall be operative. 
(Code 1984, § 20-1) 
Sec. 22-2. - Same-Barricades and warning devices. 
(a)  Any person carrying on or doing any construction, excavation or repair work in any street, alley, sidewalk or ditch or part thereof in the city pursuant to a permit as required by section 22-1 shall erect and maintain proper, safe and sufficient barricades. During that period of time between one-half hour before sunset and one-half hour after sunrise such person shall maintain sufficient lights or flares around such barricades, work or excavations to warn persons of the presence of such excavations and work and to prevent injury to persons and property. Any excavations made by the agents or employees of the city for the purpose of uncovering a Y or other connections of the water system, or of opening or uncovering manholes or sanitary or storm sewers hereafter installed on or in excavations made to allow contractors to make connection with thereto shall be protected by barricades and lights by the plumbing contractor for whom the Y or other connection of the water or other systems of the city are uncovered. 
(b)  No person shall, without due authority, remove any light or flare placed in or near an excavation in a street, alley, or ditch while repairs or work is going on in such street, alley or ditch. 
(Code 1984, § 20-2) 
Sec. 22-3. - Same-Liability insurance required. 
    Before granting a permit to any person to do any construction, excavation or repair in any street, alley or sidewalk of the city, the building inspector shall require of the person to whom such permit is issued the following: 
(1)  A policy of liability insurance with some casualty company or insurance company duly authorized and qualified to transact business in the state with liability limits of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injuries to one (1) person and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for injuries to more than one (1) person which are received in the same accident; and 
(2)  Property damage limits of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), which policies shall insure the permit holder against liability for personal injuries and damage to property by reason of the negligence or misconduct of the holder of the permit, his employees and agents in the performance of any construction, excavation or repair work in any of the streets, alleys, and sidewalks or parts thereof in the city; 
(3)  Such certificate of insurance shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Code 1984, § 20-3) 
Sec. 22-4. - Same-Replacing street, sidewalk. 
    Upon the expiration of any permit granted under the terms of this chapter, or before, if the work is completed before the expiration date of the permit, the permit holder shall replace that portion or part of any street, alley or sidewalk upon which construction, excavation or repair work has been performed in the same condition as such portion or part of any street, alley or sidewalk existed prior to the construction, excavation or repair work. 
(Code 1984, § 20-4) 
Sec. 22-5. - Grades for curbs, sidewalks, culverts, streets-Authority of city to establish. 
    The city is authorized from time to time to establish grades for curbs, sidewalks, culverts and street grades. 
(Code 1984, § 20-5) 
Sec. 22-6. - Same-Owners to obtain grades before commencing work. 
    Any owner of land or his agents or contractors who build sidewalks or culverts or who build new streets in land subdivided or to be subdivided must, in addition to the other requirements or other ordinances pertaining to such matters, obtain the curb grade, culvert grade and street grade before entering into such work. 
(Code 1984, § 20-6) 
Sec. 22-7. - Same-Builders on business lots to obtain grade. 
    All persons building on business lots before erecting a building on a business lot must obtain the curb and culvert grade. 
(Code 1984, § 20-7) 
Sec. 22-8. - Same-Penalty for violation of sections 22-5 through 22-7. 
    Any person who violates any part or portion of sections 22-5 through 22-7 shall be punished as provided in section 1-11, and the city commission shall have the right, in addition, to revoke any building permit for failure to comply herewith. 
(Code 1984, § 20-8) 
Sec. 22-9. - Culverts in city ditches. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to install any culvert in any ditches of the city without first having received a permit from the building inspector in charge of streets, which permit shall specify size culvert to be installed. 
(b)  All culverts used shall be of culvert iron pipe treated against rust or its equivalent. 
(c)  All culvert pipe installed by anyone other than the city or its employees shall not be covered up until inspected. 
(d)  Lights or flares shall be placed around culverts being constructed between sunset and sunrise. 
(Code 1984, § 20-9) 
Sec. 22-10. - Sidewalk specifications. 
(a)  All sidewalks built on public rights-of-way shall be not less than four (4) feet in width, excluding the curb, and four (4) inches thick except at driveway entrances where sidewalks shall be six (6) inches thick. Expansion plates shall be placed at least every ten (10) feet. They shall be installed so as to slope or drain towards the public street away from the private property line at the rate of fall of one-fourth inch per foot. The concrete shall consist of a five-bag mix reinforced by six (6) by six (6) by ten/ten wire mesh, unless otherwise authorized by the city commission. All sidewalks shall be constructed along the outside edge of the public right-of-way, along the private property line. 
(b)  In zones R-5 and R-6, as defined in the zoning code of the city, sidewalks may be constructed as specified in subsection (a) of this section on one-inch type I or II asphaltic concrete on a four-inch thick compacted base of locally approved limerock or shell. The base shall extend six (6) inches from each side of the surface. 
(Code 1984, § 20-17) 
Sec. 22-11. - Encroachments and obstructions generally on streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  No person shall build, plant or erect on any street or alley of the city any fence, building, wall, hedge, or tree nor shall any person put or place any of his personal property on any sidewalk or alley or street so as to cause an encroachment on the same. 
(b)  No person shall erect, construct, place or maintain any obstructions or encroachments whatever on the streets, sidewalks, or alleys of the city. 
(c)  No person shall suffer or permit any structure or building of any kind which encroaches from his property to continue to encroach onto any city street, alley or sidewalk. 
(d)  If any encroachment exists contrary to this section and the owner fails or refuses or neglects to remove or tear down the same within five (5) days after being notified so to do by the city inspector, the city inspector shall, under the direction of the city, tear down and remove such fence, wall, hedge, tree or building. 
(e)  The garden club or any citizen may plant trees on places reserved for trees by the city, with written permission from the city commission. 
(Code 1984, § 20-12) 
Sec. 22-12. - Obstruction of streets and sidewalks during building construction. 
(a)  Permit required to place building materials on streets or sidewalks. It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the construction or repair of any building to place or deposit or cause or allow to be placed or deposited on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place within the limits of the city any building material whatsoever, or any articles or things which may obstruct or hinder traffic thereon, without a written permit from the city inspector, which permit shall state clearly what space will be allowed on which the same may be placed or deposited, the length of time the permit shall remain in force and the terms and conditions upon which such material or other articles or things may be placed thereon. 
(b)  Sheds over sidewalks. When, in the discretion of the city inspector, it becomes necessary for the protection of pedestrians, the person erecting or repairing any building shall cause a shed to be erected over the sidewalk adjoining the property upon which the building is being constructed or repaired, the construction of which shed shall be in accordance with plans approved by the city inspector and the shed shall be maintained thereafter during the construction or repair of the building but under no condition shall the sidewalk be so obstructed as not to allow pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1984, § 20-16) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations generally, Ch. 6. 
Sec. 22-13. - Wire, cord, rope suspended across streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to hang or suspend in any manner or means, any rope, cord or wire or other means of connection across any street or alley of the city for any purpose. Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from displaying banners or electric colored lights at holiday seasons when they are erected by the employees of the city with permission from the city commission. 
(Code 1984, § 20-13) 
Sec. 22-14. - Hauling logs, steel girders, other material through streets. 
    No person shall haul any logs, pilings, steel girders, pipes or other materials on the streets or alleys of the city in motor or other vehicles unless such logs, pilings, steel girders, pipes or other materials be securely fastened on such vehicle with chains, cables or ropes of sufficient fastening or strength to prevent the aforesaid articles from falling or rolling from such vehicle onto a street, alley or thoroughfare of the city. 
(Code 1984, § 20-14) 
Sec. 22-15. - Painting on streets, sidewalks, signs, poles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to draw, place or print or paint on any sidewalk, street or alley or on any street signpost, signal tower, traffic signpost or electric light standard in the city any character, letter, syllable, clause or sentence, whether in the form of any advertisement, declaration or otherwise; however, nothing in this section shall prevent duly constituted officers of the city from painting upon streets, sidewalks, curbs, poles, traffic posts, such traffic or directional signs as may be required. 
(Code 1984, § 20-11) 
Sec. 22-16. - Destroying and removing street signs, lamps, ornamental trees. 
    No person shall, without due authority, break, injure, deface, destroy, mutilate, take up, remove or carry away any street post or sign, streetlamp, lantern or flare, shade or ornamental tree located on the streets or public ways of the city. 
(Code 1984, § 20-10) 
Sec. 22-17. - Electric light poles on sidewalks. 
    Electric light poles shall be set on the sidewalk but as far as possible from the property line and as close to the curb or part of the sidewalk bordering the traveled way of the street as possible, and so set on cross streets as not to come in the center of any sidewalk on either street. 
(Code 1984, § 20-18) 
Sec. 22-18. - Planting trees on streets. 
    On streets covered by section 22-10(a), trees may be planted on the parkette nine (9) feet from the property line, and on streets covered by section 22-10(b) trees may not be planted. 
(Code 1984, § 20-19) 
Sec. 22-19. - Abatement of poles and trees violating chapter. 
    Poles erected or trees planted in violation of this chapter shall be deemed nuisances and may be abated as such. 
(Code 1984, § 20-20) 
Sec. 22-20. - Liability to city of person damaging streets. 
    Whoever damages any street or alley by trespassing thereon or using same unlawfully, shall, in addition to the penalties prescribed in section 1-11, be civilly liable to the city for the amount of such damages, which amount may be recovered in a suit by the city in the courts of the state having jurisdiction thereof. 
(Code 1984, § 20-15) 
Secs. 22-21-22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREET AND ROAD ABANDONMENT 

Sec. 22-31. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as "the city street and road abandonment article." 
(Ord. No. 94-2, § 1, 10-25-1994) 
Sec. 22-32. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish a uniform procedure for the vacation and abandonment of city streets, alleys, roads, highways, or other places used for travel. 
(Ord. No. 94-2, § 2, 10-25-1994) 
Sec. 22-33. - Closing and abandonment of roads; authority. 
(a)  The city commissioners, with respect to property under their control may in their own discretion, and of their own motion, or upon the request of any agency of the county, state or federal government, or upon petition of any person or persons, are hereby authorized and empowered to: 
(1)  Vacate, abandon, discontinue and close any existing public or private street, alleyway, road, highway, or other place used for travel, or any portion thereof, other than a county, state or federal highway, and to renounce and disclaim any right of the city and the public in and to any land in connection therewith; 
(2)  Renounce and disclaim any right of the city and the public in and to any land, or interest therein, acquired by purchase, gift, devise, dedication or prescription for street, alleyway, road or highway purposes, other than lands acquired for county, state and federal highway; and 
(3)  Renounce and disclaim any right of the city and the public in and to land, other than land constituting, or acquired for, a county, state, or federal highway, delineated on any recorded map or plat as a street, alleyway, road or highway. 
(b)  The commissioners, upon such motion, request, or petition, may adopt a resolution declaring that a definite time and place a public hearing will be held to consider the advisability of exercising the authority granted in this section. 
(Ord. No. 94-2, § 3, 10-25-1994) 
Sec. 22-34. - Closing and abandonment of roads; publication of notice. 
    Before any such road shall be closed and vacated, or before any right or interest of the city or public in any land delineated on any recorded map or plat as a road shall be renounced and disclaimed, the commissioners shall hold a public hearing, and shall publish notice thereof, one time, in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least two (2) weeks prior to the date stated therein for such hearing. After such public hearing, any action of the commissioners, as herein authorized, shall be evidenced by a resolution duly adopted and entered upon the minutes of the city commission. The request of any agency of the county, state or of the United States, or of any person, to the commissioners to take such action shall be in writing and shall be spread upon the minutes of the commissioners; provided, however, that the commissioners of their own motion and discretion, may take action for the purposes hereof. Notice of the adoption of such a resolution by the commissioners shall be published one (1) time, within thirty (30) days following its adoption, in one (1) issue of a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The proof of publication of notice of public hearing, the resolution as adopted, and the proof of publication of the notice of the adoption of such resolution shall be recorded in the official records of Palm Beach County. 
(Ord. No. 94-2, § 4, 10-25-1994) 
Sec. 22-35. - Closing and abandonment of roads; ratification of prior actions. 
    The actions by the commissioners, heretofore taken, closing, vacating or abandoning any road as herein described, and appearing in the minutes of such commissioners, are hereby ratified, approved and confirmed in all respects, and such roads are declared closed, vacated and abandoned, consistent with the provisions of the resolution or other action of such commissioners, as shown by their minutes. 
(Ord. No. 94-2, § 5, 10-25-1994) 
Sec. 22-36. - Closing and abandonment of roads; termination of easement; conveyance of fee. 
    The act of any commissioners in closing or abandoning any such road, or in renouncing or disclaiming any rights in any land delineated on any recorded map as a road, shall abrogate the easement theretofore owned, held, claimed or used by or on behalf of the public and the title of fee owners shall be freed and released therefrom; and if the fee of road space has been vested in the city, same will be thereby surrendered and will vest in the abutting fee owners to the extent and in the same manner as in case of termination of an easement for road purposes. 
(Ord. No. 94-2, § 6, 10-25-1994) 
Secs. 22-37-22-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKS AND RECREATION 

Sec. 22-51. - Adoption of Palm Beach County parks and recreation ordinances. 
    The city commission hereby finds that it is in the best interest of the city to adopt certain existing Palm Beach County ordinances. There is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference the following Palm Beach County ordinances, except as otherwise noted below. These laws shall be in full force and effect in the city as if fully set forth in this section: 
21-18. Definitions. 
21-19. Regulation of vehicles within parks. 
21-20. Buildings and other property. 
21-21. Fire. 
21-22. Plant and wildlife protection and preserva- 
      tion. 
21-23. Control of nuisance animals. 
21-24. Swimming and wading. 
21-25. Boating. (Not adopted) 
21-26. Water skiing. 
21-27. Fishing. (Not adopted) 
21-28. Firearms. 
21-30. Camping. 
21-31. Horseback riding. (Not adopted) 
21-32. Animals. 
21-33. Alcoholic beverages. 
21-34. Fireworks and explosive. 
21-35. Park usage. 
21-36. Commercial activities. 
21-37. Reserved park/facility areas. 
21-38. Permits. 
21-39. Noise. 
21-41. Pollution of waters. 
21-42. Refuse, trash and litter. 
21-43. Public utilities. (Not adopted) 
21-44. Park hours. 
21-45. Enforcement. 
21-46. Penalties. 
Adoption of these ordinances shall not prohibit the city from adopting future city ordinances related to parks and recreation. To the extent that any existing city ordinance conflicts with these county ordinances, the city ordinance shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1(22-51), 5-8-2007) 
Sec. 22-52. - Park hours. 
    The city shall retain the authority to set park hours of operation within the city, should it be determined to be in the best interests of the city to do so. Park hours may be changed upon resolution by the city commission, or this responsibility may be delegated to the city manager, or the city's director of parks and recreation. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1(22-52), 5-8-2007) 
Sec. 22-53. - Permits. 
    Any permits required by these ordinances shall be applied through and administered by the city. Permit fees shall be payable and paid to the city. The city may adopt the permitting system used by the county for the use of park facilities or adopt its own system. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1(22-53), 5-8-2007) 
Sec. 22-54. - Enforcement. 
    Law enforcement shall have the authority to enforce these provisions within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1(22-54), 5-8-2007) 
Secs. 22-55-22-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TRESPASSING IN CITY PARKS 

Sec. 22-70. - Title; applicability. 
(a)  This article shall be known as the "City of Pahokee Parks Trespass Ordinance." 
(b)  All provisions of this article shall be applicable to city parks. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08 , §§ 1-3, 6-28-2016) 
Sec. 22-71. - Definitions. 
(a)  Applicable local law shall include the following: 
(1)  Intentionally damaging or destroying city property, real or personal, including but not limited to any building; bridge; table; bench; fireplace; railing; paving; water line or other public utility or parts of appurtenances thereof; posted sign, notice or placard whether temporary or permanent; monument; stake, post or other boundary marker; or other structure, equipment, facility or appurtenance whatsoever; or 
(2)  Removing a live plant, plant part or plant material from city property; or 
(3)  Molesting, harming, frightening, killing, trapping, hunting, chasing, shooting, throwing objects at, harassing, feeding, or otherwise inhibiting the natural movements and habits of any invertebrate, mammal, amphibian, reptile, fish or bird within the city. This paragraph shall not preclude fishing in a designated fishing area or removal of any nuisance wildlife or animal as authorized by the city. 
(4)  Removing or attempting to remove any wild animal, or the eggs or nests of any amphibian, reptile, fish, bird or invertebrate from city property. This paragraph shall not preclude fishing in a designated fishing area or removal of any nuisance wildlife or animal as authorized by the city. 
(5)  Using, discharging or possessing fireworks (other than a firework display permitted by the city) explosives, or substances that could be combined into an explosive mixture within city property; or 
(6)  Building or attempting to build any fire within city property except in such areas where fireplaces or grills are provided or as specifically authorized by a regulation or permit issued by the city or dropping, showing or otherwise depositing lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars or other flammable material within city property; or 
(7)  Having been found to have violated any provision of the city parks and recreation ordinance three or more times; or 
(8)  Violating a notice contained on a posted sign on city property. 
(b)  Applicable state law shall include Chapter 316 (State Uniform Traffic Control), Chapter 782 (Homicide), Chapter 784 (Assault; Battery; Culpable Negligence), Chapter 787 (Kidnapping; False Imprisonment; Luring or Enticing a Child; Custody Offenses), Chapter 790 (Weapons and Firearms), Chapter 794 (Sexual Battery), Chapter 796 (Prostitution), Chapter 800 (Lewdness; Indecent Exposure), Chapter 806 (Arson and Criminal Mischief), Chapter 810 (Burglary and Trespass), Chapter 812 (Theft, Robbery, and Related Crimes), Chapter 823, (Public Nuisances); Chapter 825, (Abuse, Neglect, and Exploitation of Elderly Persons and Disabled Adults), Chapter 827 (Abuse of Children), Chapter 828 (Animals: Cruelty, Sales, Animal Enterprise Protection), Chapter 843 (Obstructing Justice), Chapter 847 (Obscenity), Chapter 856 (Drunkenness; Open House Parties; Loitering; Prowling; Desertion), Chapter 859 (Poisons; Adulterated Drugs), and Section 877.03 (Breach of the Peace; Disorderly Conduct), Chapter 893 (Drug Abuse Prevention and Control). 
(c)  County property shall mean any facility, building or outdoor area that is part of a park or owned and/or operated by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08 , §§ 1-3, 6-28-2016) 
Sec. 22-72. - Trespass notice; authorization to issue; appeal. 
(a)  Any county sheriff's deputy or law enforcement officer acting within his/her jurisdiction is authorized to issue a trespass notice to any individual who violates any applicable local law or applicable state law while on city property. 
(b)  Any person issued a trespass notice shall be prohibited from returning to the city property specified in the trespass notice as follows: 
(1)  For the first trespass notice, for a period of six (6) months. 
(2)  For the second trespass notice, for a period of one (1) year. 
(3)  For the third or subsequent trespass notice, for a period of two (2) years. 
(c)  A copy of the trespass notice shall be provided by mail or hand delivery to the trespass notice recipient with a copy provided to the employee or official having control over the city property. The trespass notice shall include the name and address of the trespass notice recipient, the date, the provision of law the trespass notice recipient has violated, a brief description of the offending conduct, the location of the offense, the name of the person issuing the trespass notice and a description of the city property to which the trespass notice recipient shall not return during the trespass notice period described in subsection (3)(b) of this section. The written trespass notice shall advise of the right to appeal and the location and telephone number for filing the appeal. The trespass notice shall include a warning that any person found on city property in violation of a trespass notice may be arrested for trespassing. 
(d)  Appeal of trespass notice. The trespass notice recipient shall have the right to appeal as follows: 
(1)  An appeal of a trespass notice must be filed, in writing, at the address listed on the trespass notice within ten (10) days of the issuance of the trespass notice. The appeal shall include the trespass notice recipient's (appellant) name, address, telephone number, electronic mail address and facsimile number, if any, a copy of the trespass notice, and a statement of the basis for the appeal. Failure to file a written appeal within ten (10) days of issuance of the trespass notice shall be deemed a waiver of the right to appeal. 
(2)  A filing fee in the amount of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall accompany the appeal of the trespass notice. 
(3)  Appeals shall be heard by a special magistrate with jurisdiction and authority to hear and decide alleged violations of the codes and ordinances enacted by the city. 
(4)  Within forty (40) days following the filing of the appeal, a hearing shall be held in front of a special magistrate. Notice of the hearing shall be provided to the appellant by U.S. mail, electronic mail, facsimile, certified mail or hand delivery. If the issuance of a trespass notice was predicated of a violation of applicable state law and the criminal case is pending before the county or circuit court, the appeal hearing shall be stayed until the resolution of that case. 
(5)  The hearing shall be open to the public and shall be recorded. 
(6)  At the hearing the burden of proof shall be on the city to demonstrate by clear and convincing evidence that a violation of an applicable local law or applicable state law on city property has occurred. However, proof that the appellant has entered a plea of guilty, regardless of adjudication, to the underlying offense shall be admissible at the hearing as an admission against interest. 
(7)  If the appellant fails to attend the appeal hearing, the appeal shall be dismissed with prejudice. 
(8)  All testimony shall be under oath and shall be recorded. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern the proceedings. Upon determination of the special magistrate, irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded, but all other evidence of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs shall be admissible, whether or not such evidence would be admissible in a trial in the courts of the State of Florida. 
(9)  The special magistrate may inquire of or question any witness present at the hearing. The appellant or his/her attorney and an employee or attorney representing the city shall be permitted to inquire of or question any witness present at the hearing. The special magistrate may consider testimony presented by any witness at the hearing. 
(10)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the special magistrate shall orally render his or her decision (order) upholding or overruling the trespass notice based on evidence entered into the record. If the special magistrate upholds the trespass notice, appellant shall be enjoined from returning to the city property specified in the trespass notice for a period provided in subsection (3)(b) above. The decision shall then be transmitted to the appellant in the form of a written order including findings of fact and conclusions of law consistent with the record. The order shall be transmitted by mail to the appellant within ten (10) days after the hearing and a copy shall be sent to the law enforcement agency whose officer issued the trespass notice. 
(11)  Any aggrieved party may appeal an order of the special magistrate to the circuit court of Palm Beach County. Such appeal shall not be a hearing de novo but shall be limited to appellate review of the record created before the special magistrate. Any appeal filed pursuant to this article shall be considered timely if filed within thirty (30) days of the execution of the order to be appealed. The city may assess a reasonable charge for the preparation of the record to be paid by the appellant in accordance with F.S. § 119.07. 
(12)  The trespass notice shall remain in effect during any appeal process, unless a stay pending review is entered by the special magistrate. 
(13)  A special magistrate shall have the power to: 
a.  Subpoena alleged violators and witnesses to its hearings. Subpoenas may be served by a sheriff or other authorized persons consistent with Rule 1.410(d), Florida Rules or Civil Procedure, upon request by the special magistrate. 
b.  Subpoena records and other documentary evidence. 
c.  Take testimony under oath. 
d.  Issue orders having full force and effect of law. 
(e)  The city manager or his/her designee may authorize an individual who has received a trespass notice to enter a specific city property included within a trespass notice to exercise his or her First Amendment rights if there is no other reasonable alternative location to exercise such rights. Such authorization must be in writing, shall specify the duration of the authorization and any conditions thereof, and shall not be unreasonably denied. Any individual issued such authorization shall have a copy of the authorization in his/her possession upon entry and throughout the duration of his/her presence upon the specific city property. In addition, a copy of such authorization shall be sent by the city manager or his/her designee to the law enforcement agency that issued the trespass notice prior to the scheduled entry onto the specific city property. 
(f)  Any person found on city property in violation of this article may be arrested for trespassing. 
(g)  This article shall not be construed to limit the authority of any law enforcement officer or code enforcement officer to take any other enforcement action authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08 , §§ 1-3, 6-28-2016) 
Chapter 24 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; tax on property insurance premiums, § 2-226; occupational licenses and business regulations, Ch. 16. 
State Law reference- Municipal finance and taxation, F.S. § 166.201 et seq.; taxation and finance generally, F.S. Ch. 192 et. seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 24-1-24-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC SERVICE TAXES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Public service tax, F.S. § 166.231. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 24-26. - Tax levied; amount; seller designated collection medium; penalty for violation. 
(a)  Pursuant to F.S. § 166.231, there is hereby levied and imposed by the city on each and every purchase of electricity, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied, petroleum gas or manufactured), telegraph service, water service, and telephone service in the corporate limits of the city a straight percentage tax in an amount of ten (10) percent of the payments received by the seller of such utility service from the purchaser for the purchase of such utility service. 
(b)  Each seller of such utility service in the city is hereby designated as the tax collection medium or agency for the city to collect from the purchaser for the use of the city the tax hereby imposed and levied, such tax to be collected from the purchaser of such utility service by the seller of such utility service each time the purchaser of such utility service pays to the seller of such utility service charges imposed by the seller of that utility service, with each collection medium or agency paying over into the city all such taxes imposed, levied and collected in accordance with the accounting and other provisions set forth in this article and in other provisions of this Code applicable thereto. 
(c)  Any purchaser of such utility service who wilfully fails or refuses to pay to the collection medium or agency the tax hereby imposed, and any collection medium or agency who wilfully violates the provisions hereof or any officer, agent or employee of any such collection medium or agency who willfully violates the provisions hereof shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1984, § 22-16) 
Sec. 24-27. - Taxes not to be applied against fuel adjustment charges. 
    Taxes imposed by section 24-26 shall not be applied against any fuel adjustment charges, and such charge shall be separately stated on each bill. Fuel adjustment charge shall mean all increases in the costs of utility services to the ultimate consumer resulting from the increase in the cost of fuel to the utility subsequent to October 1, 1973. 
(Code 1984, § 22-17) 
Sec. 24-28. - Duties of seller to collect taxes; uncollected bills. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every seller of electricity, water, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied, petroleum or manufactured gas), telegraph service or local telephone service, to collect from the purchaser, for the use of the city, the tax hereby levied, at the time of collecting the selling price charged for each transaction, and to report and pay over, on or before the twentieth day of each calendar month, unto the city all such taxes levied and collected during the preceding calendar month. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any seller to collect the price of any purchase of electricity, water, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied, petroleum or manufactured gas), telegraph service or telephone service, without at the same time collecting the tax hereby levied in respect to such purchase, unless such seller shall elect to assume and pay such tax without collecting the same from the purchaser. Any seller failing to collect such tax at the time of collecting the price of any sale, where the seller has not elected to assume and pay such tax, shall be liable to the city for the amount of such tax in like manner as if the tax had been actually paid to the seller, and the city shall cause to be brought all suits and actions and to take all proceedings in the name of the city as may be necessary for the recovery of such tax; provided, however, that the seller shall not be liable for the payment of such tax upon uncollected bills. 
(c)  If any purchaser shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay to the seller the seller's charge and the tax hereby imposed and as hereby required on the account of the purchase for which such charge is made or either, the seller shall have and is hereby vested with the right, power and authority to discontinue immediately further service to such purchaser until the tax and the seller's bill shall have been paid in full. 
(Code 1984, § 22-18) 
Sec. 24-29. - Records of sales. 
    Each and every seller of electricity, water, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied, petroleum or manufactured gas), telegraph service and local telephone service shall keep complete records showing all sales in the city of such commodities or service, which records shall show the price charged upon each sale, the date thereof, and the date of payment therefor, and the records shall be kept open for inspection by the duly authorized agents of the city during business hours on all business days, and the duly authorized agents of the city shall have the right, power and authority to make such transcripts thereof during such times as they may desire. 
(Code 1984, § 22-19) 
Sec. 24-30. - Computation of tax. 
    In all cases where the seller of electricity, water, metered or bottled gas (natural, liquefied, petroleum or manufactured gas), telegraph service or local telephone service collects the price thereof at monthly periods, the tax hereby levied may be computed on the aggregate amount of purchases during such period, provided that the amount of tax to be collected shall be the nearest whole cent to the amount computed. 
(Code 1984, § 22-20) 
Sec. 24-31. - Applicability to telephone service. 
    The tax levied by this article on the sale of telephone service shall apply to all charges made for local telephone service except local messages which are paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones. The total amount of the guaranteed charge on each bill rendered for semipublic coinbox telephone service shall be subject to such tax. 
(Code 1984, § 22-21) 
Sec. 24-32. - Exemptions. 
    The United States of America, the State of Florida and all political subdivisions thereof, as defined in F.S. § 1.01 and any recognized church in this state for use exclusively for church purposes are hereby exempted from payment of the taxes levied by section 24-26. 
(Code 1984, § 22-22) 
Sec. 24-33. - Violation of chapter. 
    All purchasers of such utility service who wilfully fail or refuse to pay the tax hereby imposed, where the seller has not elected to assume and pay such tax, and any seller who violates the provisions of this chapter, or any officer, agent, or employee of any seller who violates the provisions of this chapter, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1984, § 22-23) 
Secs. 24-34-24-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES PUBLIC SERVICE TAX 

Sec. 24-41. - Short title. 
    This division shall be known as the city telecommunication services public service tax ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 92-4, § 1, 7-14-1992) 
Sec. 24-42. - Definitions. 
    Purchase. Every act or transaction whereby possession of, utilization of, control over telecommunications services, and the duty and obligation to pay therefore, become vested in the purchaser within the city but such term shall not pertain to nor include any such act or transaction when undertaken or performed by an agency or instrumentality of the United States government, the state, the county, or a municipality. 
    Purchase within city. A purchase within the city is the amount charged for any telecommunications service provided within the city or if the location of the telecommunications service provided cannot be determined, the total amount billed for such telecommunications service to a telephone or telephone number, a telecommunications number or device, or a customer's billing address located within the city. 
    Purchaser. Every person legally liable for the payment of telecommunications services rendered to him, by a seller, unless such person is an agency or instrumentality of the United States government, the state, the county, a municipality, or a house of public worship, which qualified for exemption from the state sales tax under F.S. § 212.08. 
    Seller. Every person rendering telecommunication services to any purchaser thereof. 
    Taxable telecommunication services. Purchases within the city of telecommunication services which originate and terminate in this state as defined in Florida Statutes. Tax on the above telecommunication services may not be imposed unless a tax is levied on all competitive services on a comparable base at the same rates. 
(Ord. No. 92-4, § 1, 7-14-1992) 
Sec. 24-43. - Tax levied. 
    There is hereby levied and imposed by the city upon every purchase in the city of telecommunication services, and competitive services known as "taxable services" included in or reflected by any bill rendered by the seller to the purchaser a public service tax which shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  The tax shall be levied only upon purchases within the city in the amount of seven (7) percent of the payments received by the seller of the taxable item from the purchaser for the purpose of such service. Services competitive with those enumerated above shall be taxed on a comparable base at the same rate. 
(2)  When the seller in accordance with its rules and regulations renders a bill to the purchaser to cover purchases made during the period of time to which the bill is applicable, the amount of public services tax shall be exclusive of governmental charges and taxes, shown on any such bill due and payable on account of such purchases, for the total amount. 
(3)  Purchases of taxable services shall be considered and treated as constituting and being distinct and unrelated classes of purchases, and in the event that more than one such class shall be shown upon the same bill, the amount of public utility tax payable pursuant hereto shall be determined and computed for each such class separately. 
(4)  The seller is required and it shall be his duty to render to each purchaser bills covering all such purchases made, and the amount of such public utility tax shall be entered and shown by the seller as a separate item on each such bill and shall become due and payable to the city whenever such bill becomes due and payable under the rules and regulations or the seller. 
(5)  The purchaser is required and it shall be his duty to pay such public utility tax to the seller, as agent for the city, at the time of the payment of each such bill, and in the event that the purchaser shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay such public utility tax to the seller when such bill becomes due and payable the seller is hereby empowered to discontinue forthwith to make any further sales or to render any further service to the purchaser until the total amount, including such public utility tax, shown upon such bill has been paid in full. The seller is hereby authorized and required and it shall be his duty to collect such public utility tax from such purchaser at the time of the payments of each such bill and to remit the same to the finance department in accordance with the provisions hereinafter stated. 
(6)  This section shall be applicable to all bills for taxable services. 
(Ord. No. 92-4, § 2, 7-14-1992) 
Sec. 24-44. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Exempt from taxation are purchases of the taxable items by the United State government, the state, and any other public body, as defined in F.S. § 1.01, and purchases by any recognized church in this state for use exclusively for church purposes. 
(b)  Purchases of local telephone service or other telecommunication services for use in the conduct of a telecommunication service for hire or otherwise for resale are exempt from the tax imposed. 
(c)  All exemptions from taxation of telecommunication services provided for under terms described above shall be specifically approved by the finance director on a tax exemption certificate which shall be initiated and completed by the purchaser and, upon approval by the finance director, shall be provided to the seller indicating authorization of the exemption. 
(Ord. No. 92-4, § 3, 7-14-1992) 
Sec. 24-45. - Seller compensation. 
    For the purpose of compensating the seller, the seller shall be allowed one (1) percent of the amount of the tax collected and due to the city in the form of a deduction from the amount collected for remittance. The deduction is allowed as compensation for keeping of records and collection of tax and remitting the same. 
(Ord. No. 92-4, § 3, 7-14-1992) 
Sec. 24-46. - Remittance of tax to the city by seller. 
    Every seller is hereby required to execute and file not later than the twentieth day of each month at the office of the finance department a statement on a form prescribed by such department, setting forth the amount of such public utility tax to which the city became entitled under the provisions hereof on account of bills paid by purchasers during the preceding fiscal month, and contemporaneously with the filling of such statements, shall pay the amount of such public utility tax to the finance department. 
(Ord. No. 92-4, § 3, 7-14-1992) 
Sec. 24-47. - Records to be kept. 
    Every seller is hereby required to establish and maintain appropriate accounts and records showing in reasonable detail the amount of such public utility tax payable to the city under the provisions hereof and such accounts and records shall be open to inspection by the finance director or his duly authorized agent at all reasonable times where maintained by the company. These accounts and records shall display the purchaser's name and location, the basic class of service, the tax exemption status and the amount of public utility tax due the city. The finance director and his/her representatives are hereby authorized and empowered to conduct an annual audit and review of all accounts exempted from the public utility tax and all public utility tax payable to the city and shall direct that all errors and omissions be corrected by the seller and being consistent with F.S. § 364.20, shall direct that appropriate backbilling of taxes owed for the year under audit be initiated by the seller. 
(Ord. No. 92-4, § 3, 7-14-1992) 
Secs. 24-48-24-59. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PALM BEACH COUNTY'S FIRE/RESCUE MUNICIPAL SERVICES TAXING UNIT (MTSU) 

Sec. 24-60. - Intent, purpose and consent. 
    It is the intent of this division to comply with the provisions of F.S. § 125.01(1)(q). The city commission hereby consents to the inclusion of all the territory within the incorporated municipal boundaries of the City of Pahokee, as they may be amended from time to time, within Palm Beach County's Fire Rescue MSTU, which was established pursuant to enabling legislation adopted by the board of county commissioners of Palm Beach County. The purpose of the enactment of this division is to enable the county to provide fire-rescue and related services within the territorial limits of the City of Pahokee, Florida, including but not limited to, the county's enforcement of the Florida Fire Prevention Code and any Palm Beach County Local Amendments thereto (collectively "Fire Code") and any other applicable law and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2016-04 , §§ 1-3, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1-4, 8-9-2016) 
Sec. 24-61. - Effective date and duration of consent. 
    The provisions of this division shall become effective December 31, 2015. The city's consent to be included in the county's fire/rescue MSTU shall continue for a term of ten (10) years through December 31, 2025, to fund fire-rescue services by the county through 7:30 a.m. on October 1, 2026; provided, however, that the city's consent and inclusion in the county's fire/rescue MSTU shall be deemed to continue through 7:30 a.m. on October 1, 2026, to the extent necessary to enable the county to provide within the city fire-rescue and related services funded by tax year 2025, including but not limited to the enforcement of the Fire Code and any other applicable laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2016-04 , §§ 1-3, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1-4, 8-9-2016) 
Sec. 24-62. - Effectiveness of repeal. 
    Should the city repeal this division prior to its expiration, the city shall provide written notice to Palm Beach County, by March 1st of any given year, of the city's intent to repeal this division, with said repeal to be effective December 31st of the same year. In such case, the city's inclusion in the county's fire/rescue MSTU shall terminate on said December 31st; provided however, that the city's inclusion in the county's fire/rescue MSTU shall be deemed to continue through the following October 1st at 7:30 a.m. to the extent necessary to enable the county to provide within the city fire-rescue and related services funded by the final tax year, including, but not limited to the enforcement of the Fire Code and any other applicable laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2016-04 , §§ 1-3, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1-4, 8-9-2016) 
Sec. 24-63. - Ad valorem millage rate limitation. 
    The city acknowledges that by opting into the MSTU, it cannot levy an annual ad valorem millage rate that would exceed the ten (10) mill cap for municipal purposes when combined with the fire/rescue MSTU's annual ad valorem millage rate. 
(Ord. No. 2016-04 , §§ 1-3, 5-10-2016; Ord. No. 2016-09 , §§ 1-4, 8-9-2016) 
Chapter 25 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Ordinances prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations saved from repeal, § 1-7(15); junk and abandoned property, Ch. 13; mobile homes and recreational vehicles, Ch. 15; operation of bicycles and motor vehicles upon dock or breakwater of Pahokee Harbor, § 18-2(6); streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22. 
State Law reference- Motor vehicles, F.S. § 316.001 et seq.; powers of local authorities, F.S. § 316.008. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 25-1. - Adoption of Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law. 
    There is hereby adopted by reference the Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law, being F.S. Ch. 316, which law shall be in full force and effect in the city as if fully set forth in this section. 
(Code 1984, § 23-1) 
Sec. 25-2. - Parade permits. 
(a)  All parades or similar activities conducted on city streets, alleys, public ways, grounds or other public property shall be forbidden unless a permit for such purpose is obtained prior to the parade or similar activity. 
(b)  Permits may be obtained from the chief of police upon furnishing the chief of police with a minimum of seven (7) days' advance notice and the time, date and route that the parade or similar activity shall take; the name of the party or group holding the parade; the approximate number of participants and vehicles involved in the parade and any other information required by the chief of police in order to effectively monitor and control the flow of traffic, and the safety of the citizens, in the areas of the parade. 
(c)  The chief of police shall issue the permit upon being furnished the above information if, in his opinion, the parade will not endanger the public health, safety or welfare, or will not unduly interfere with local traffic. If the chief of police refuses to issue a parade permit, the applicant may petition the city commission for reconsideration of the decision. 
(Code 1984, § 23-2) 
Sec. 25-3. - Repair of motor vehicles on streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to repair any motor vehicle upon any street, sidewalk, alley, or other public right-of-way within this city, except for emergency repairs requiring not over one (1) hour which are necessary to enable a disabled vehicle to be moved. 
(Code 1984, § 23-16) 
State Law reference- Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places, F.S. § 316.1945; additional parking regulations, F.S. § 316.195. 
Sec. 25-3.5. - All-terrain vehicles on city property. 
    The City Commission of Pahokee, Florida, does hereby ordain that all-terrain vehicles are banned from city parks and other city property except where needed by city employees in the performance of their duties and for agricultural uses. Any individual whose vehicle is confiscated for violating this section will be charged an administrative fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for return of the vehicle which will be collected by the police investigative fund. 
(Ord. No. 2001-8, 9-25-2001) 
ARTICLE II. - PARKING, STOPPING, STANDING 

Sec. 25-4. - General parking prohibitions. 
(a)  Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with the law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle: 
(1)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
(2)  On a sidewalk. 
(3)  Within an intersection. 
(4)  On a crosswalk. 
(5)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the city indicates a different length by signs or markings. 
(6)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic. 
(7)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel. 
(8)  On any railroad tracks. 
(9)  On a bicycle path. 
(10)  At any place where official traffic-control devices prohibit stopping, standing or parking. 
(11)  On the roadway or shoulder of a limited access facility, except as provided by regulation of the department of transportation, or on the paved portion of a connecting ramp; except that a vehicle which is disabled or in a condition improper to be driven as a result of mechanical failure or accident may be parked on such shoulder for a period not exceed six (6) hours. This provision is not applicable to a person stopping a vehicle to render aid to an injured person or assistance to a disabled vehicle in obedience to the directions of a law enforcement officer or to a person stopping a vehicle in compliance with applicable traffic laws. 
(12)  For the purpose of loading or unloading a passenger on the paved roadway or shoulder of a limited access facility or on the paved portion of any connecting ramp. This provision is not applicable to a person stopping a vehicle to render aid to an injured person or assistance to a disabled vehicle. 
(13)  Other than on the right-hand side of any two-way street. 
(14)  Within any area designated as to a zone for emergency vehicles or fire lanes. 
(b)  No person shall stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers: 
(1)  In front of a public or private driveway. 
(2)  Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant. 
(3)  Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection. 
(4)  Within thirty (30) feet of an approach to any flashing signal, stop sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway. 
(5)  Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance of any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of such entrance (when properly signposted). 
(6)  On an exclusive bicycle lane. 
(7)  At any place where official traffic-control devices prohibit stopping. 
(c)  No person shall park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers: 
(1)  Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing unless the state department of transportation establishes a different distance due to unusual circumstances. 
(2)  At any place where official signs prohibit parking. 
(d)  No person shall stop, or park a vehicle upon the shoulder of the roadway within any city right-of-way unless the vehicle is stopped or parked with the left or right side of the vehicle nearest the roadway parallel to the edge of the roadway. 
(e)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as is unlawful. 
(f)  A law enforcement or parking enforcement officer which discovers a vehicle parked in violation of this section may issue a ticket, in a form used by the city: 
(1)  To the driver or registered owner of the vehicle; or 
(2)  If the vehicle is unattended, to the registered owner of the vehicle, leaving the ticket in a conspicuous place on the vehicle. 
(g)  No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon or within the traveled roadway or within twelve (12) inches of the edge of the pavement within the traveled roadway, except momentarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers or performing work with the traveled roadway. 
(h)  No person shall stand or park a motor vehicle upon any federal, state or local public right-of-way within the city or on any unimproved property for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying a vehicle for sale; 
(2)  Displaying any advertising, except by special use permit; 
(3)  Selling merchandise from a vehicle, except in a duly established marketplace or when so authorized by special use permit from the city; or 
(4)  Abandonment for more than twenty-four (24) hours. 
(Ord. No. 2004-03, § 1, 7-13-2004) 
State Law reference- F.S. §§ 316.1945, 705.103. 
Sec. 25-5. - Parking in alleys. 
    No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in a business district, except for the expeditious loading or unloading of materials, and in no event for a period of more than twenty (20) minutes. No person shall stop, or park a vehicle in any alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic. No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway or entrance to any abutting property. 
(Ord. No. 2004-03, § 2, 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 25-6. - Parking on private property without permission. 
    No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any private alley, drive, driveway, parking area, or other privately-owned property without the consent of owner of the property or person in charge thereof, whether the property is used exclusively by the owner or for the use and convenience of customers or guests. 
(Ord. No. 2004-03, § 3, 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 25-7. - Vehicles left unattended prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall leave a motor vehicle unattended with the ignition key in the vehicle. Enforcement personnel finding such a motor vehicle are authorized to remove the key from the vehicle and to post a notice in the vehicle stating where the key may be recovered. 
(b)  The registered owner of a vehicle found in violation of this section shall be held prima facie responsible for the violation. 
(Ord. No. 2004-03, § 4, 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 25-8. - Disabled parking restrictions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parking space specially designated and marked for parking for certain disabled or handicapped persons as provided by F.S. §§ 316.1955 and 316.1956, and any person who parks a vehicle in any parking space so designated is guilty and any person who parks a vehicle displays a parking permit or license plate issued pursuant to F.S. § 316.1985, 320.084, 320.0842, 320.0843, 320.0845 or 320.0848, and such vehicle is occupied by a person eligible for such license plate or parking permit. However, any person chauffeuring a disabled person shall be allowed, without need for an identification parking permit or special license plate, momentary parking in any such space for the purpose of loading or unloading a disabled person. No penalty shall be imposed upon the driver for such momentary parking. 
(b)  Whenever evidence shall be presented in any court of the fact that any automobile, truck or other vehicle was found to be parked in a properly designated handicapped parking space in violation of the provisions of this section, it shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle was parked and left in the space by the person, firm, or corporation in whose name the vehicle is registered and licensed according to the records of the division of motor vehicles. 
(c)  Motor vehicles displaying a special license plate or parking permit issued to a handicapped person by any such other state or district subject to the laws of the United States shall be recognized as a valid license plate or permit, allowing such vehicle the special parking privileges allowed pursuant to the provisions of this section, provided such other state or district grants reciprocal recognition for handicapped residents of the state. 
(d)  Any law enforcement officer or parking enforcement specialist shall enforce the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2004-03, § 5, 7-13-2004) 
State Law reference- Handicapped parking areas; specifications, F.S. § 316.1955. 
Sec. 25-9. - Loading zones restrictions. 
(a)  Passenger curb loading zones. No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time except for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to passenger curb loading zones are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed five (5) minutes. 
(b)  Freight curb loading zones. 
(1)  No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to these zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed thirty (30) minutes. 
(2)  The driver of a vehicle may stop temporarily at a place marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any motor vehicle used for the transportation of materials which is waiting to enter or about to enter the zone. 
(Ord. No. 2004-03, § 6, 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 25-10. - Removal of abandoned vehicles. 
    Vehicles that have been abandoned according to subsection 25-4(h)(4) are subject to removal in accordance with City Ordinance No. 2001-11. 
(Ord. No. 2004-03, § 7, 7-13-2004) 
State Law reference- F.S. § 705.103. 
Sec. 25-11. - Authority to issue parking violation tickets. 
    The chief of police, a law enforcement officer, parking enforcement officer or designated representative of the Pahokee Police Department are authorized to issue parking violation tickets. 
(Ord. No. 2004-03, § 8, 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 25-12. - Notice on illegally parked vehicles. 
    Whenever any vehicle, without a driver, is found to be parked, stopped, or standing in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the enforcement officer finding such a vehicle shall conspicuously affix to the vehicle a written notice of violation, said notice to be in a form approved by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 2004-03, § 9, 7-13-2004) 
Sec. 25-13. - Penalties. 
(a)  The city clerk shall supply the state department of highway safety and motor vehicles (DHSMV) with a magnetically encoded computer tape reel or cartridge which is machine readable by the installed computer system at the state department of highway safety and motor vehicles, listed persons who have three (3) or more outstanding parking violations or one (1) or more handicapped parking zone violations issued by the city. 
(b)  If a person's name appears on the list referred to in subsection (a) of this section, the county tax collector shall not issue a license plate or revalidation sticker to such person until such person's name no longer appears on such list or until the person presents a receipt showing that such parking fines and all applicable late charges or other related charges have been paid. The tax collector shall be entitled to receive monthly, as costs for implementing and administering this subsection, ten (10) percent of the civil penalties and fines recovered from such persons. 
(c)  If a person's name appears on the list referred to in subsection (a) of this section, the civil penalty or fine for each parking violation that contributed to the appearance of the person's name on the list will be increased by fifteen (15) percent, and tender of payment of a lesser amount will not be accepted. 
(Ord. No. 2004-03, § 10, 7-13-2004) 
State Law reference- Liability for payment of parking ticket violations, F.S. § 316.1967. 
Sec. 25-14. - Fines for parking violations. 
    Fees imposed for parking fines shall be adopted by resolution of the city commission, and adjusted from time to time. The resolution shall be available in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2000-10, 1-23-2000; Ord. No. 2007-10, § 1, 8-28-2007) 
Sec. 25-15. - Appeal. 
    Anyone wishing to contest a parking ticket may appeal to the city clerk by requesting an administrative hearing before a hearing officer designated by the city clerk within ten (10) days from the date of the ticket. The appeal should state the ticket number and the date issued. Appeals under this section shall be heard within thirty (30) days thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-03, § 12, 7-13-2004) 
Secs. 25-16-25-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 25-51-25-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - KNOWINGLY DRIVING WHILE LICENSE SUSPENDED OR REVOKED 

Sec. 25-81. - Moving violation. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b), any person whose driver's license or driving privilege has been cancelled, suspended, or revoked, except a habitual traffic offender as defined in F.S. § 322.264, who drives a vehicle upon the highways of this state while such license or privilege is cancelled, suspended, or revoked is guilty of a moving violation, punishable as proved in F.S. Ch. 318. 
(b)  Any person whose driver's license or driving privilege has been canceled, suspended, or revoked as provided by law, except persons defined in F.S. § 322.264, who, knowing of such cancellation, suspension, or revocation, drives any motor vehicle upon the highways of this state while such license or privilege is canceled, suspended, or revoked, upon: 
(1)  A first conviction is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082 or F.S. § 775.083. 
(2)  A second conviction is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree, punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082 or F.S. § 775.083. 
(3)  A third or subsequent conviction is guilty of a felony of the third degree, punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082, F.S. § 775.083, or F.S. § 775.084. 
The element of knowledge is satisfied if the person has been previously cited as provided in subsection (a); or the person admits to knowledge of the cancellation, suspension, or revocation; or the person received notice as provided in subsection (d). There shall be a rebuttable presumption that the knowledge requirement is satisfied if a judgment or order as provided in subsection (d) appears in the department's records for any case except for one (1) involving a suspension by the department for failure to pay a traffic fine or for a financial responsibility violation. 
(c)  In any proceeding for a violation of this section, a court may consider evidence, other than that specified in subsection (b), that the person knowingly violated this section. 
(d)  Any judgment or order rendered by a court or adjudicatory body or any uniform traffic citation that cancels, suspends, or revokes a person's driver's license must contain a provision notifying the person that his or her driver's license has been canceled, suspended, or revoked. 
(e)  Any person whose driver's license has been revoked pursuant to F.S. § 322.264 (habitual offender) and who drives any motor vehicle upon the highways of this state while such license is revoked is guilty of a felony of the third degree, punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082, F.S. § 775.083, or F.S. § 775.084. 
(f)  Any person who operates a motor vehicle: 
(1)  Without having a driver's license as required under F.S. § 322.03; or 
(2)  While his or her driver's license or driving privilege is canceled, suspended, or revoked pursuant to F.S. § 316.655, F.S. § 322.26(8), F.S. § 322.27(2), or F.S. § 322.28(2) or (4), and who by careless or negligent operation of the motor vehicle causes the death of or serious bodily injury to another human being is guilty of a felony of the third degree, punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082 or F.S. § 775.083. 
(g)  Any person whose driver's license or driving privilege has been canceled, suspended, revoked, or disqualified and who drives a commercial motor vehicle on the highways of this state while such license or privilege is canceled, suspended, revoked, or disqualified, upon: 
(1)  A first conviction is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree, punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082 or F.S. § 775.083. 
(2)  A second or subsequent conviction is guilty of a felony of the third degree, punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082, F.S. § 775.083, or F.S. § 775.084. 
(h)  (1)  Upon the arrest of a person for the offense of driving while the person's driver's license or driving privilege is suspended or revoked, the arresting officer shall determine: 
a.  Whether the person's driver's license is suspended or revoked. 
b.  Whether the person's driver's license has remained suspended or revoked since a conviction for the offense of driving with a suspended or revoked license. 
c.  Whether the suspension or revocation was made under F.S. § 316.646 or F.S. § 627.733, relating to failure to maintain required security, or under F.S. § 322.264, relating to habitual traffic offenders. 
d.  Whether the driver is the registered owner or co-owner of the vehicle. 
(2)  If the arresting officer finds in the affirmative as to all of the criteria in subsection (h)(1), the officer shall immediately impound or immobilize the vehicle. 
(3)  Within seven (7) business days after the date the arresting agency impounds or immobilizes the vehicle, either the arresting agency or the towing service, whichever is in possession of the vehicle, shall send notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to any co-registered owners of the vehicle other than the person arrested and to each person of record claiming a lien against the vehicle. All costs and fees for the impoundment or immobilization, including the cost of notification, must be paid by the owner of the vehicle or, if the vehicle is leased, by the person leasing the vehicle. 
(4)  Either the arresting agency or the towing service, whichever is in possession of the vehicle, shall determine whether any vehicle impounded or immobilized under this section has been leased or rented or if there are any persons of record with a lien upon the vehicle. Either the arresting agency or the towing service, whichever is in possession of the vehicle, shall notify by express courier service with receipt or certified mail, return receipt requested, within seven (7) business days after the date of the immobilization or impoundment of the vehicle, the registered owner and all persons having a recorded lien against the vehicle that the vehicle has been impounded or immobilized. A lessor, rental car company, or lienholder may then obtain the vehicle, upon payment of any lawful towing or storage charges. If the vehicle is a rental vehicle subject to a written contract, the charges may be separately charged to the renter, in addition to the rental rate, along with other separate fees, charges, and recoupments disclosed on the rental agreement. If the storage facility fails to provide timely notice to a lessor, rental car company, or lienholder as required by this paragraph, the storage facility shall be responsible for payment of any towing or storage charges necessary to release the vehicle to a lessor, rental car company, or lienholder that accrue after the notice period, which charges may then be assessed against the driver of the vehicle if the vehicle was lawfully impounded or immobilized. 
(5)  Except as provided in subsection (4), the vehicle shall remain impounded or immobilized for any period imposed by the court until: 
a.  The owner presents proof of insurance to the arresting agency; or 
b.  The owner presents proof of sale of the vehicle to the arresting agency and the buyer presents proof of insurance to the arresting agency. 
If proof is not presented within thirty-five (35) days after the impoundment or immobilization, a lien shall be placed upon such vehicle pursuant to F.S. § 713.78. 
(6)  The owner of a vehicle that is impounded or immobilized under this subsection may, within ten (10) days after the date the owner has knowledge of the location of the vehicle, file a complaint in the county in which the owner resides to determine whether the vehicle was wrongfully taken or withheld. Upon the filing of a complaint, the owner may have the vehicle released by posting with the court a bond or other adequate security equal to the amount of the costs and fees for impoundment or immobilization, including towing or storage, to ensure the payment of such costs and fees if the owner does not prevail. When the vehicle owner does not prevail on a complaint that the vehicle was wrongfully taken or withheld, he or she must pay the accrued charges for the immobilization or impoundment, including any towing and storage charges assessed against the vehicle. When the bond is posted and the fee is paid as set forth in F.S. § 28.24, the clerk of the court shall issue a certificate releasing the vehicle. At the time of release, after reasonable inspection, the owner must give a receipt to the towing or storage company indicating any loss or damage to the vehicle or to the contents of the vehicle. 
(i)  (1)  A motor vehicle that is driven by a person under the influence of alcohol or drugs in violation of F.S. § 316.193 is subject to seizure and forfeiture under F.S. §§ 932.701-932.707 and is subject to liens for recovering, towing, or storing vehicles under F.S. § 713.78 if, at the time of the offense, the person's driver's license is suspended, revoked, or canceled as a result of a prior conviction for driving under the influence. 
(2)  The law enforcement officer shall notify the department of highway safety and motor vehicles of any impoundment or seizure for violation of subsection (i)(1) in accordance with procedures established by the department. 
(3)  Notwithstanding F.S. § 932.703(1)(c) or F.S. § 932.7055, when the seizing agency obtains a final judgment granting forfeiture of the motor vehicle under this section, thirty (30) percent of the net proceeds from the sale of the motor vehicle shall be retained by the seizing law enforcement agency and seventy (70) percent shall be deposited in the general revenue fund for use by regional workforce boards in providing transportation services for participants of the welfare transition program. In a forfeiture proceeding under this section, the court may consider the extent that the family of the owner has other public or private means of transportation. 
(Ord. No. 2002-01, App. A, 3-26-2002) 
Sec. 25-82. - Costs of impoundment. 
    If there is probable cause to believe that the motor vehicle is subject to impoundment under Florida Statute, the officer shall order the continued impoundment of the vehicle unless the vehicle owner or his/her agent or authorized representative pays the city an administrative civil penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus towing and storage costs, or posts with the city a bond in the form of a money order or a certified check in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus the accumulated costs of towing and storing the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2002-01, App. A, 3-26-2002) 
Sec. 25-83. - Administrative penalty. 
    If an administrative penalty is imposed pursuant to this division, such penalty shall constitute a debt due and owing the city. The vehicles record owner's obligation to pay such debt to the city shall be independent of the cities return or release of the vehicle. If a cash bond has been posted pursuant to ordinance, the bond shall be applied towards payment of the penalty. 
(Ord. No. 2002-01, App. A, 3-26-2002) 
Sec. 25-84. - Return of vehicle. 
    An impounded vehicle shall be returned to its record owner, or the person to who is legally entitled to possess the vehicle, upon either payment of the administrative penalty to the city, plus any towing and storage fees, unless the vehicle has been sold or otherwise disposed of to satisfy a judgment or enforce a lien as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2002-01, App. A, 3-26-2002) 
Sec. 25-85. - Appeal. 
    The owner of the motor vehicle that has been the subject of a seizure and impoundment pursuant to this ordinance may appeal, in writing, to the chief of police, or his designee within ten (10) days of the date that the vehicle was impounded. The city may charge a reasonable fee for preparation of the record for purposes of making the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2002-01, App. A, 3-26-2002) 
Sec. 25-86. - Unclaimed vehicles. 
    Any motor vehicle that is not reclaimed within sixty (60) days from the date of impoundment, subjecting the owner of the motor vehicle to the administrative fee, becomes unclaimed evidence pursuant to F.S. § 705.101(6). Such unclaimed evidence shall then be disposed of by the city pursuant to F.S. § 705.105. 
(Ord. No. 2002-01, App. A, 3-26-2002) 
Chapter 26 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; public services department, § 2-106; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; flood hazard reduction requirements, §§ 10-51, 10-52; garbage and trash, Ch. 11; health and sanitation, Ch. 12; mobile homes and recreational vehicles, Ch. 15; planning, Ch. 19; public improvements, Ch. 20; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 22; subdivisions, Ch. 23. 
State Law reference- Water and sewer systems, F.S. Ch. 367; supervision and control of systems of water supply, sewerage, refuse and sewage treatment by the department of health and rehabilitative services, F.S. § 381.261. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2003-4, § 1, adopted June 10, 2003, repealed § 26-1, which pertained to shut-off and turn-on fees for delinquent accounts and was derived from Code 1984, § 25-26.5. 

Secs. 26-1-26-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Water saving fixtures, § 6-26; water supply for recreational vehicle parks, § 15-28. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-26. - Connections with waterworks system. 
    Where the waterworks system is available, the owner of every lot or parcel of land within the city shall connect or cause the plumbing of any building thereon to be connected with the public water and sewer system (PWS) owned and operated by the county, and use the facilities of such system. All such connections shall be made in accordance with the rules and regulations which shall be adopted from time to time by the PWS, which rules and regulations shall provide for a charge for making any such connections in such reasonable amount as the PWS may fix and determine. 
(Code 1984, § 25-17; Ord. No. 2010-06, 6-22-2010) 
Secs. 26-27-26-32. - Reserved. 
Sec. 26-33. - Water meter accessibility; remedies for noncompliance. 
(a)  All customers of the PWS water service shall make the water meter accessible and available to the PWS for the purpose of reading such meter. If such water meter is not readily accessible to the PWS for the purpose of reading it, any errors or inconsistencies in billing shall be the sole responsibility of the customer. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(Code 1984, § 25-41; Ord. No. 2010-06, 6-22-2010) 
Secs. 26-34-26-43. - Reserved. 
Sec. 26-44. - Unlawful diversion of water; tampering with water system; turning on water after discontinuance of service for nonpayment. 
    Any person who shall willfully divert water from the PWS water distribution system or any part thereof with the intent to appropriate fraudulently the same, or whoever breaks a meter lock or seal or both in the PWS's distribution system, or in any way tampers with any part or portion of the system, or who unlawfully turns on the water after it has been shut off by the PWS for nonpayment of a water bill, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1984, § 25-31; Ord. No. 2010-06, 6-22-2010) 
Sec. 26-45. - Tampering with waterworks property. 
    No one, except employees of the PWS and members of the fire department, in the discharge of their recognized duties, shall open, close, operate or interfere, in any manner, with any water meter, curb cock, service box, fire line valve, street valve, fire hydrant, or any other waterworks property not under their own recognized jurisdiction, except by special permission from the PWS separately secured for each instance. 
(Code 1984, § 25-35; Ord. No. 2010-06, 6-22-2010) 
Sec. 26-46. - Waste and misuse of water. 
    Water consumers are expected and required to keep their pipes and fixtures in good repair and free from leaks. The premises of any water customer may be entered at any reasonable time by any duly authorized PWS official for the purpose of examining piping, fixtures, etc., and repairs shall be promptly made after notice therefrom. Water is not to be supplied by patrons for use on other premises, except by special permission from the waterworks superintendent. 
(Code 1984, § 25-36; Ord. No. 2010-06, 6-22-2010) 
Secs. 26-47-25-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - (RESERVED) 

Secs. 26-66-26-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WATER SHORTAGE PLAN 

Sec. 26-76. - Intent and purpose. 
    It is the intent and purpose of this division to protect the water resources of the city from the harmful effects of over-utilization during periods of water shortage and to allocate available water supplies by assisting the South Florida Water Management District in the implementation of its water shortage plan. 
(Ord. No. 90-6, § 1, 4-10-1990) 
Sec. 26-77. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    District means the South Florida Water Management District. 
    Water resource means any and all water on or beneath the surface of the ground, including natural or artificial watercourses, lakes, ponds, or diffused surface water, and water percolating, standing, or flowing beneath the surface of the ground. 
    Water shortage condition means a condition when sufficient water is not available to meet present or anticipated needs of persons using the water resource, or when conditions are such as to require temporary reduction in total water usage within a particular area to protect the water resource from serious harm. A water shortage usually occurs due to drought. 
    Water shortage emergency means that situation when the powers which can be exercised under Part II of Chapter 40E-21, Florida Administrative Code, are not sufficient to protect the public health, safety or welfare; the health of animals, fish or aquatic life; the public water supply; or commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational or other reasonable uses. 
(Ord. No. 90-6, § 2, 4-10-1990) 
Sec. 26-78. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this division shall apply to all persons using the water resource within the geographical areas subject to the water shortage or water shortage emergency, as determined by the district, whether from publicly owned or privately owned water utility systems, private wells, or private connections with surface water bodies. This division shall not apply to persons using treated effluent or saltwater. 
(Ord. No. 90-6, § 3, 4-10-1990) 
Sec. 26-79. - Water users to accept provisions. 
    No water service shall be furnished to any person by a public or private utility unless such person agrees to accept all the provisions of this division. The acceptance of water service shall be in itself the acceptance of the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 90-6, § 8, 4-10-1990) 
Sec. 26-80. - Incorporation of state rules. 
    Chapter 40E-21, Florida Administrative Code, as the same may be amended from time to time, is incorporated herein by reference as a part of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 90-6, § 4, 4-10-1990) 
Sec. 26-81. - Declaration of water shortage; water shortage emergency. 
(a)  The declaration of water shortage or water shortage emergency within all or any part of the city by the governing board or the executive director of the district shall invoke the provisions of this division. Upon such declaration, all water use restrictions or other measures adopted by the district applicable to the city or any portions thereof shall be subject to enforcement action pursuant to this division. Any violation of the provisions of Chapter 40E-21, Florida Administrative Code, or any order issued pursuant thereto, shall be a violation of this division. 
(b)  In the event of a facility failure or circumstances outside the immediate jurisdiction of the South Florida Water Management District which would necessitate curtailment of water production, the city manager may declare the existence of a water shortage condition or emergency which shall activate the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 90-6, § 5, 4-10-1990) 
Sec. 26-82. - Enforcement. 
    Every police officer or sheriff having jurisdiction in the area governed by this division shall, in connection with all other duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this division. In addition, the city manager may also delegate enforcement responsibility for this division to agencies and departments of the city government or cities in the service areas governed by this division, in accordance with state and local laws. 
(Ord. No. 90-6, § 6, 4-10-1990) 
Sec. 26-83. - Penalties. 
(a)  Violation of any provision of this division shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  First violation, twenty-five dollars ($25.00); 
(2)  Second and subsequent violations, a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed sixty (60) days. 
(b)  Each day in violation of this division shall constitute a separate offense. In the initial stages of a water shortage or water shortage emergency, law enforcement officials may provide violators with no more than one (1) written warning. The city, in addition to the criminal sanctions contained in this section, may take any other appropriate legal action, including but not limited to emergency injunctive action, to enforce the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 90-6, § 7, 4-10-1990) 
Secs. 26-84-26-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Service building and facility requirements for recreational vehicle parks, § 15-29. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 26-92-26-106. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SEWER USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 26-107. - Connections with sewer required. 
    The owner of each lot or parcel of land within the city, upon which lot or parcel of land any building or trailer used as a dwelling is situated or shall be situated, for either residential, commercial or industrial use, shall connect or cause such building or trailer to be connected with the public sewer facilities of the PWS and use such facilities. All such connections shall be made in accordance with ordinances, rules and regulations which shall be adopted from time to time by the PWS. 
(Code 1984, § 25-86; Ord. No. 2010-06, 6-22-2010) 
Sec. 26-108. - Reserved. 
Sec. 26-109. - Unlawful connection. 
    No person shall be allowed to connect into any water line or sewer line owned by the PWS without the written consent of the PWS, and then the connection with such line shall be made only under the direction and supervision of the PWS. Any property owner or plumber who shall make any connection without such consent of the official, shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalties provided in this division. 
(Code 1984, § 25-89; Ord. No. 2010-06, 6-22-2010) 
Sec. 26-110. - Unlawful construction. 
    No person shall build or remodel or cause to be built or remodeled any structure used for human habitation or occupancy within the city which is within two hundred (200) feet of a public sanitary sewer line, unless it is provided with water-carried sewerage facilities. 
(Code 1984, § 25-90) 
Secs. 26-111, 26-112. - Reserved. 
Sec. 26-113. - Sanitary requirements. 
    Every residence and building in which human beings reside, are employed or congregated shall be required to have a sanitary method of disposing of human excrement, namely either a sanitary water closet that is connected with the PWS sewer, or an approved type of septic tank. A septic tank will be used only if the property is more than two hundred (200) feet from the sewer line. 
(Code 1984, § 25-93; Ord. No. 2010-06, 6-22-2010) 
Sec. 26-114. - Disposal requirements. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning or leasing any premises in the city to permit the disposal of any human excrement on any property leased or rented by any such person or the agent of any such person or except in a sanitary water closet where sewage lines are available. 
(Code 1984, § 25-94) 
Sec. 26-115. - Septic tanks. 
    No septic tanks other than those approved by the state department of environmental regulation shall be constructed within the corporate limits of the city. No septic tank shall be constructed within two hundred (200) feet of the sewer line. 
(Code 1984, § 25-95) 
Sec. 26-116. - Maintenance of plumbing system. 
    The owner of the property shall be responsible for maintaining and keeping clean the water and sewer pipes leading and connecting from the plumbing system to the PWS distribution lines and main sewers. In no event shall the owner of the property be responsible for any pipes not located on their property unless it can be determined that any damage to or problem with the PWS was caused from activity associated with the subject property. 
(Code 1984, § 25-96; Ord. No. 2010-06, 6-22-2010) 
Secs. 26-117-26-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - (RESERVED) 

Secs. 26-151-26-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - INDUSTRIAL WASTE 

Sec. 26-171. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    BOD, denoting biochemical oxygen demand, means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade, expressed in parts per million. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial processes, as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per litter of solution. 
    ppm means parts per million by weight. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage means a combination of the watercarried wastes from dwellings, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments. In effect it is the water supply of a community after it has been fouled by various uses and discharged into a sewer. 
    Sewage works is a comprehensive term which includes facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Storm sewer means a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
    Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are largely removable by laboratory filtering. 
Sec. 26-172. - Prohibited wastes. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, roof runoff, groundwater, swimming pool water, subsurface drainage, cooling water of any type or unpolluted industrial or commercial process water into any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Except as provided in this division, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described wastes or waters to any sanitary or storm sewer: 
(1)  Any liquid having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit; 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing more than fifty (50) ppm at any one (1) time or that exceeds a daily average of twenty-five (25) parts per million, when sampled three (3) consecutive times within a twenty-four-hour period, of any grease, oil, or any oil substance; 
(3)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any hazard at the discharge point of the sewage treatment plant; 
(5)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded, which shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food must be shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle size greater than one-half inch in any dimension; 
(6)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0 and having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the sewage works; 
(7)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic substances in quantities in excess of the following limits and measured at the point of discharge into the sewer system: 
Substance ppm Cyanides 0.0 Copper, total 0.1 Chromium, total 1.8 Cadmium 0.02 Zinc, total 1.0 Cobalt 0.0 Silver 0.1 Manganese 1.0 Barium 5.0 Selenium 0.02 Nickel 0.4 Detergents 0.5 Aluminum 15.0 Arsenic 0.05 Mercury 0.05 Lead 0.1 Iron 2.0 Phenols 0.2  
or any substance that will pass through the sewage treatment plant and exceed the state requirements for wastewater discharge; 
(8)  Any water or waste containing suspended solids or color of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant, without a special permit; 
(9)  Any toxic radioactive isotopes, without a special permit; 
(10)  Any noxious gases; 
(11)  Any ashes, metals, cinders, rags, mud, straw, glass, feathers, tar, plastics, wood or other interfering or obstructing solids. 
(c)  No statement contained in this section shall be construed as prohibiting any special agreement or arrangement between the utility and any person whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be admitted into the sanitary sewers for treatment by the utility either before or after pretreatment. 
(Ord. No. 89-7, § 2, 6-27-1989) 
Sec. 26-173. - Treatment of wastes. 
    The economy and desirability of the combined treatment of industrial wastes and sanitary sewage is recognized. However, not all types and quantities of industrial wastes can be so treated. Hence, it shall be the established policy to admit these types and quantities of industrial wastes that are not harmful or damaging to the structures, processes or operation of the sewage works or are not specifically prohibited by this division. It is also recognized that to provide this service additional facilities may be required and the cost must be borne by those persons receiving the benefits. 
(Ord. No. 89-7, § 3(A), 6-27-1989) 
Sec. 26-174. - Approval required. 
    In order to control the admission of industrial wastes, the discharge into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having the following characteristics shall be subject to review and approval of the utility: 
(1)  A five-day twenty-degree centigrade BOD greater than three hundred (300) ppm; 
(2)  A suspended solids content greater than three hundred (300) ppm; 
(3)  A chloride demand greater than fifteen (15) ppm; 
(4)  An average daily flow greater than two (2) percent of the average daily sewage flow at the sewage treatment works; 
(5)  Any toxic substance; 
(6)  A TKN value in excess of thirty (30) ppm or a phosphorus value in excess of fifteen (15) ppm; or 
(7)  Any wastes which are considered by the director of public services to offer possibilities of harm to structures, processes, or operation of the plant. 
(Ord. No. 89-7, § 3(B), 6-27-1989) 
Sec. 26-175. - Survey data required. 
(a)  All users of the sewage system who are now discharging industrial wastes to the public sewers shall, upon request of the director of public services, execute and file with the director within two (2) months a questionnaire which shall furnish pertinent data, including quantity of flow and an analysis of the discharge to the public sewers. 
(b)  Similarly, any person desiring to make a new connection to the sewage system for the purpose of discharging industrial wastes to the public sewers shall execute and file with the director of public services an industrial questionnaire which shall furnish pertinent or predicted data, including quantity of flow and an analysis of the industrial waste to be discharged into the sewer system, for his study and recommendations. Such flow measurement and analysis shall be at the user's expense. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the director when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision and approval of the director. 
(Ord. No. 89-7, § 3(C), 6-27-1989) 
Sec. 26-176. - Sampling and analysis. 
    Samples shall be composite samples collected over a three-day period of operation so as to be a truly representative sample of the actual quality of the wastes. Samples for analysis must be collected by a city employee. Analysis shall be made by a registered sanitary engineer or a graduate chemist whose qualifications are acceptable to the health department or a class A or B waste treatment plant operator, registered in the state, using the laboratory methods for the examination of industrial waste as set forth in the latest edition of Standard Methods for examination of Water and Sewage, as published by the American Public Health Service. 
(Ord. No. 89-7, § 3(D), 6-27-1989) 
Sec. 26-177. - Extension of time. 
    When, due to the size or complexity of the waste disposal problem of an industry, it can be shown that it is impractical to meet the schedule imposed under section 26-175, a request for an extension of time may be presented to the director of public services. 
(Ord. No. 89-7, § 3(E), 6-27-1989) 
Sec. 26-178. - Control manhole. 
(a)  Any person discharging industrial or commercial wastes into the sewage system shall cause to be constructed and maintained at his expense a suitable control manhole downstream from any treatment, storage or other approved works to facilitate observation, measurement and sampling of all wastes, including domestic sewage, from the premises. 
(b)  The control manholes shall be constructed at suitable and satisfactory locations and built in a manner approved by the director of public services. 
(c)  The control manhole shall be accessible to the city at all times for samplings. 
(Ord. No. 89-7, § 3(F), 6-27-1989) 
Sec. 26-179. - Pretreatment. 
    The user of the utility sewer system shall provide at his expense such preliminary treatment or handling as may be necessary to modify the objectionable characteristics or constituents to come within the limits set forth in this division. 
(Ord. No. 89-7, § 3(G), 6-27-1989) 
Sec. 26-180. - Right of entry. 
    The director of public services and other duly authorized employees of the utility bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 89-7, § 4, 6-27-1989) 
Secs. 26-181, 26-182. - Reserved. 
Sec. 26-183. - Penalties. 
    After investigation, if it is brought to the attention of the director of public services that the provisions of this division have not been complied with, the violator will be notified by certified mail of such violation. If, after a period of thirty (30) days, proper action has not been taken to remedy the violation, the person found in violation shall be subject to arrest by any authorized police officer of the city and upon conviction thereof by the appropriate court shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. Each day in which any violation of this division shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 89-7, § 7, 6-27-1989) 
Appendix A - CORPORATE LIMITS[1] 
    The correct corporate limits of the municipality known as the City of Pahokee are: 
Described: 
All of the plat of Streamline Village as recorded in Plat Book 38, Page 10, Palm Beach County, Florida Public Records. 
Together with: 
All of the plat of Pee-Hokey Village as recorded in Plat Book 53, Page 148, Palm Beach County, Florida Public Records. 
Together with: 
The north 552 feet of the east 108 feet of Tract 7 of the subdivision of Section 20, Township 42 South, Range 37 East, Palm Beach County, Florida, for Noble Padget, as recorded in Plat Book 7, Page 2, less the north 110 feet of said Tract 7. 
Together with: 
The west 80 feet of the northerly 552 feet of Tract 6, of the subdivision of Section 20, Township 42 South, Range 37 East, according to the plat thereof on file in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court and recorded in the Public Records Of Palm Beach County, Florida, in Plat Book 7, Page 2, less a road right-of-way dated November 7, 1956, and recorded in Deed Book 1161, Page 492. 
Together with: 
The easterly 85 feet of the westerly 165 feet of the northerly 552 feet of tract 6, of the subdivision of Section 20, Township 42 South, Range 37 East, according to the plat thereof on file in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court and recorded in the Public Records Of Palm Beach County, Florida, in Plat Book 7, Page 2, less and excluding the south 100 feet of the north 110 feet thereof. 

(Ord. No. 2003-6, §§ 1, 2, 6-24-2003) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The following ordinances regarding annexations to the corporate limits of the City of Pahokee, Florida, have been adopted. These ordinances are available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
Ord. No. Adopted 2007-02 February 13, 2007 2007-03 February 13, 2007 2007-04 February 13, 2007 2007-05 February 13, 2007 2007-06 March 13, 2007 2008-07 November 25, 2008 2009-01 January 27, 2009  

Appendix B - CABLE SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2006-02, adopted June 13, 2006, established a franchise agreement between the City of Pahokee, Florida, and National Cable Acquisition Associates, LP, locally known as Adelphia Communications. The agreement is available in the city clerk's office. 

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1984 CODE 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1984 Code, as updated through October 28, 1986, which are included herein. Sections of the 1984 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1984 Code 
Section Section 

this Code 1-2-1-11 1-2-1-11 2-1 2-1 2-19 2-26 2-36 2-29 2-46 2-52 2-62 2-53 2-64 2-86 2-126 2-126-2-128 2-181-2-183 2-141-2-144 2-202-2-205 2-145, 2-146 2-207, 2-208 2-147 2-201 2-148 2-206 2-181 2-246 2-201-2-203 2-271-2-273 3-16 3-26 3-17-3-23 3-29-3-35 3-24, 3-25 3-27, 3-28 4-1-4-8 4-1-4-8 5-1, 5-2 5-1, 5-2 6-16 9-1 6-110, 6-111 6-67, 6-68 6-114 6-69 6-116-6-118 6-70-6-72 7-1 7-1 8-1 8-1 8-1.1 8-2 8-2 8-3 8-4-8-6 8-9-8-11 8-9-8-11 8-6-8-8 10-1 11-1 10-2 11-4 10-3 11-7 10-4, 10-5 11-5, 11-6 10-6 11-10 10-7(a), 
10-7(b) 11-12, 11-13 10-8 11-3 10-9-10-11 11-14-11-16 10-12, 10-13 11-8, 11-9 10-14 11-11 10-15 11-17 10-16 11-2 11-1 12-1 11-16, 11-17 12-26, 12-27 11-18 12-29 11-19, 11-20 12-31, 12-32 11-25 12-28 11-26 12-30 12-36 13-51 12-38 13-52 14-1-14-9 16-1-16-9 14-10-14-12 16-12-16-14 14-13, 14-14 16-10, 16-11 15-1, 15-2 17-1, 17-2 15-4, 15-5 17-4, 17-5 16-1-16-4 18-1-18-4 17-2 19-1 18-1-18-5 20-1-20-5 19-16 21-26 19-17 21-41-21-43 19-18-19-23 21-44-21-49 19-24 21-53 19-26, 19-27 21-27, 21-28 19-28-19-30 21-50-21-52 19-34(2) 21-29 19-34(3) 21-28 19-76-19-79 21-126- 
21-129 20-1-20-9 22-1-22-9 20-10 22-16 20-11 22-15 20-12 22-11 20-13, 20-14 22-13, 22-14 20-15 22-20 20-16 22-12 20-17 22-10 20-18-20-20 22-17-22-19 21-1, 21-2 23-1, 23-2 21-3-21-10 23-4-23-11 21-11, 21-12 23-14, 23-15 21-13 23-13 21-14 23-16 21-15 23-12 21-16-21-20 23-17-23-21 21-21 23-3 21-22 23-22 21-23 23-24 21-24 23-23 22-16-22-23 24-26-24-33 23-1, 23-2 25-1, 25-2 23-16 25-3 24-1-24-4 15-1-15-4 24-4(a)- 
24-4(d) 15-46-15-49 24-17-24-24 15-26-15-33 24-25-24-27 15-50-15-52 25-17 26-26 25-31 26-44 25-35, 25-36 26-45, 26-46 25-41 26-33 25-86 26-107 25-89, 25-90 26-109, 
26-110 25-93-25-96 26-113- 
26-116  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1984 Code, as updated through October 28, 1986, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1984 Code, as supplemented. Prior to the adoption of Ordinance No. 99-8, enacted June 22, 1999, ordinances not listed herein were omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. Beginning with the 2005 Republication, omitted ordinances are also listed and indicated as such. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section Section 
this Code 87-2  3-10-1987 1 2-1 87-1  3-24-1987 1-3 8-12 87-13  1-12-1988 1(a) 2-46 1(b) 2-29 1(c) 2-46 88-3  5-24-1988 1 8-5 88-4  5-24-1988 1, 2 2-27, 2-28 88-5  5-24-1988 1(a)-1(e) 2-81-2-85 88-6  5-24-1988 1 2-61 2-63 88-11  8-24-1988 art. 1, § A- 
art. 1, § D 10-1-10-4 art. 2 10-5 art. 3, § A, 
art. 3, § B 10-6, 10-7 art. 3, § C 10-33 art. 3, § D- 
art. 3, § H 10-8-10-12 art. 4, § A 10-31 art. 4, § B 10-34 art. 4, § C 10-32 art. 4, § D 10-35 art. 5, § A- 
art. 5, § E 10-51-10-55 88-12  9-13-1988 1 11-14 88-14 11- 8-1988 1 2-272 89-4  3-28-1989 1, 2 2-91, 2-92 3 2-96 2-98 4, 5 2-93, 2-94 6 2-97 7 2-95 89-7  6-27-1989 2 26-172 3(A)-3(G) 26-173- 
26-179 4 26-180 7 26-183 89-9  8- 8-1989 1 2-63 89-10  8-22-1989 1-3 2-291-2-293 89-12  9-11-1989 1 19-1 88-14 10-24-1989 1 2-272 90-4  2-27-1990 1 4-3 90-5  3-27-1990 1 11-18 90-6  4-10-1990 1-3 26-76-26-78 4-7 26-80-26-83 8 26-79 90-7  5- 1-1990 Arts. I-XIV       Added 14-1-14-10 14-20-14-30 14-40-14-42 14-50-14-69 14-74-14-76 14-80-14-90 14-100-14-111 14-120-14-125 14-130-14-145 14-160-14-167 14-180-14-182 14-200-14-206 14-218-14-224 14-240 14-246-14-252 14-265-14-270 14-280-14-282 14-290, 14-291 14-300-14-305 14-400-14-417 14-430-14-441 14-450-14-452 14-460, 14-470 90-8  9-25-1990 1 11-14 90-9 10-23-1990 1 11-41 2, 3 11-43, 11-44 4 11-42 5 11-45 90-10  1- 8-1991 1 11-14 90-11  1- 8-1991 1 6-96 91-4  7-23-1991 1 3-1 91-9  9-10-1991 1 11-14 92-1  4-14-1992 1       Added 14-75(138.1)       Added 14-76(138.1) 92-3  6- 9-1992 1 15-2 92-4  7-14-1992 1 24-41, 24-42 2, 3 24-43, 24-44 3 24-45-24-47 92-6 10-13-1992 1 15-3 93-1  2-13-1993 1 15-3 93-3  4-13-1993 art. 1.0, § 1.1 8.5-22 art. 2.0, § 2.4 8.5-34 art. 3.0, § 3.2 8.5-42 art. 4.0, § 4.4 8.5-54 art. 5.0, § 5.2 8.5-62 art. 6.0, § 6.3 8.5-73 93-4  4-27-1993 1, 2 17-8 93-8 10-12-1993 1 11-14 93-10 11- 9-1993 1 11-14 94-1  7-12-1994 1 2-29 94-2 10-25-1994 1-6 22-31-22-36 95-5  9-26-1995 1 11-14 95-8 11-29-1995 1 17-7 95-9  1- 9-1996 1, 2 4-6 96-1  2-27-1996 1, 2 2-30 96-6  6-25-1996 1 2-272 96-9  9-10-1996       Added 14-75(120.1)       Added 14-76(120.1) 96-12 10-22-1996 1 8-5 97-1  2-11-1997 1-3 4-6 97-2  2-11-1997 I-XI 8.7-1- 
8.7-11 97-14 11-25-1997 1-7 2-31 97-10  7- 8-1998 6-1 98-3  7-14-1998 4-2 98-6  8-25-1998 2-2 98-7  8-25-1998 19-26 99-1  1-12-1999 1 14-181(e)(2) 99-2  3-23-1999 2-16 6-111-6-125 99-4  4-27-1999 11-14 99-7  6-22-1999 1 14-470 2       Added 14-75(13.1), (13.2) 3       Added 14-76(13.1), (13.2) 99-8  6-22-1999 16-15 93-9 10-26-1999 1-4 17-9 99-17  1-25-2000       Added 14-75(9.1), (151.1)       Added 14-76(9.1), (151.1) 2000-10  1-23-2000 25-14 2000-1  3-14-2000 6-1 2000-2  4-11-2000 21-26 2000-5  4-25-2000 16-17 2000-7 10-10-2000 11-14 2001-6  9-11-2001 16-16 2001-8  9-25-2001 25-3.5 2002-01  3-26-2002 app. A 25-81-25-86 2002-02  4- 9-2002 1 2-272 2002-7  9-10-2002 1 9-1 2002-9  9-24-2002 11-14 2003-2  4- 8-2003 1 8-9 2003-3  4- 8-2003 2-10 2-141-2-149 2003-6  6-24-2003 1, 2 App. A 2003-8  9- 9-2003 2-7 2-150-2-155 2003-9  9- 9-2003 2-7 2-156-2-161 2004-03  7-13-2004 1-10 25-4-25-13 12 25-15 2004-06 11-23-2004 2 17-31-17-41 3 17-42 4 17-71-17-77 5 17-101- 
17-114 6 17-141- 
17-152 7 17-181- 
17-185 2004-13 11-23-2004 1 2-146 2 2-146.1 2005-01  2-22-2005 1 8-14 2005-02  8-23-2005 1 2-153 2005-03  8-23-2005 1 2-159 2005-05 11- 8-2005 1(17-40) 17-206 2(17-41) 17-207 3(17-42) 17-208 4(17-43) 17-209 5(17-44) 17-210 6(17-45) 17-211 7(17-46) 17-212 8(17-47) 17-213 9(17-48) 17-214 10(17-49) 17-215 12(17-50) 17-216 13(17-51) 17-217 14(17-52) 17-218 15(17-53) 17-219 2006-03  7-11-2006 1 2-153 2006-05 11-28-2006 1 11-8, 11-9 2 11-11 2006-06  1- 9-2007 1 14-2 2006-07  1- 9-2007 2 2-2 2007-07  5- 8-2007 1(22-51)- 
1(22-54) 22-51-22-54 2007-09  8-28-2007 1 8-6 2007-10  8-28-2007 1 25-14 2007-11  8-28-2007 1 11-14 2007-12  8-28-2007 1 15-4 2008-01  5-13-2008 1 2-97 2009-02  4- 4-2009 1(2-162)- 
1(2-164) 2-170-2-172 2009-03  4-28-2009 1 4-2 2009-04  5-12-2009 1 11-15 2009-08 10-13-2009 1, 2 2-274 2009-09 10-13-2009 2-272 2009-10 10-27-2009 2 2-1, 2-2 2-26-2-31 2-46 2-61-2-64 2-81-2-85 2-91-2-98 2-101-2-107 2-126 2-141-2-146 2-146.1 2-147-2-155 2010-02  2- 9-2010 1 2-146.1 2010-03  4-13-2010 1-11 17-241- 
17-251 2010-05  6-22-2010 2-144 2-146 2-146.1 2-148 2010-06  6-22-2010 26-26 26-33 26-44-26-46 26-107 26-109 26-113 26-116 2010-07  7-13-2010 2(17-186)- 
2(17-196) 17-276- 
17-286 2010-08  8-10-2010 2 2-159 2010-09  8-10-2010 1-11 17-241- 
17-251 2010-10  8-10-2010 2 15-1-15-4 15-26-15-33 15-46-15-52 2010-11 11- 9-2010 2(8.5-74)- 
2(8.5-76) 8.5-84- 
8.5-85 2011-01  5-24-2011 2 21-26-21-29 21-41-21-53 2011-02  6-14-2011 2 17-214 2011-03 10-11-2011 1 14-75(133) 2012-01  4-10-2012 1 15-34 2012-04  5- 8-2012 2 2-162 2012-05  5- 8-2012 2 2-163 2012-06  5- 8-2012 2 2-164 2012-08  6-26-2012 2-26 2012-09  7-24-2012 1       Added 14-75(45.1) 2012-11 12-11-2012 2 2-62 2013-01  1- 8-2013 2 4-3 2013-02  5-15-2013 I-XVI 8.5-91- 
8.5-106 2013-03  7- 9-2013 2 2-182 2-246 3 2-246 4 6-1 5 6-68 6 7-1 7, 8 8-11, 8-12 2013-04  1- 8-2013 1 14-75(12), (125) 2013-07 10-22-2013 1       Added 14-69 2 14-75 2015-02  5-12-2015 1 14-76(31) 2015-04  9-22-2015 1 4-3(1) 2015-05  9- 8-2015 1       Added 4-9 2016-01  2-23-2016 1 17-216 2016-02  4-26-2016 2       Rpld 10-1-10-87       Added 10-1-10-87 2-5       Added 6-2-6-4 2016-03  5-10-2016 2 2-2(3) 2016-04  5-10-2016 1-3       Added 24-60-24-62 2016-06  6-28-2016 2       Added 17-78 2016-07  6-28-2016 2 17-281(1) 2016-08  6-28-2016 1-3       Added 22-70-22-72 2016-09  8- 9-2016 1-3 24-60-24-62 4       Added 24-63 2016-10 10-11-2016 2       Added 2-165 2016-11 10-25-2016 2       Added 2-166 2016-12 10-25-2016 2 17-78 2016-14 11-22-2016 1-3       Added 8.5-111-8.5-113 2017-02  4-25-2017 2 2-149 2017-03  4-25-2017 2 14-58 2017-04  6-13-2017 2 2-26(3) 2017-05  7-25-2017 1 8-5 2017-06  8- 8-2017 10-9 2017-07  8-22-2017 1-4       Added 16-41-16-44 2017-08 11-28-2017 2 2-63(9)  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Florida Statutes (F.S.). 
F.S. 
Section Section 

this Code 1.01 et seq. 1-2 1.01 24-32 24-44 ch. 22 Ch. 7 (note) 22.05 Ch. 7 (note) 23.011 et seq. Ch. 19 (note) 23.12 et seq. Ch. 7 (note) 28.24 25-81 34.191 1-11 ch. 50 2-149 50.041 2-149 50.051 2-149 ch. 60 17-219 60.05 Ch. 12, Art. II 17-246 17-249 ch. 97 et seq. Ch. 8 (note) 99.093 8-6 100.011 8-10 101.657 8-14 ch. 102 8-12 112.311 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 112.311 2-26 112.313 2-26 112.3143 2-26 119.041 2-64 ch. 120 17-246 120.69 17-246 ch. 121 Ch. 2, Art. VI, 
Div. 5 125.69 4-9 8.5-104 ch. 162 Ch. 2, Art. V, 
Div. 2 2-141 2-145 17-283 161.053 Ch. 10, Art. II, 
Div. 2 161.055 10-30 161.54 10-56 161.141 10-30 162.01 et seq. 17-40 162.01 8.5-104 162.09(3) 2-144 162.11 17-217 163.3161 et seq. Ch. 19 (note) 19-1 Ch. 23 (note) ch. 166 Char. § 6.06 2-145 166.101 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VII Ch. 20 (note) 166.201 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VII Ch. 24 (note) 166.231 Ch. 24, Art. II 24-26 166.241(2) 2-271 ch. 170 Ch. 20 (note) 20-2 177.011 et seq. Ch. 23 (note) 177.011- 
177.019 23-2 177.011- 
177.151 23-4 ch. 180 Ch. 20 (note) ch. 192 Ch. 24 (note) ch. 205 Ch. 16 (note) 205.042 16-1 205.043(2) 16-5 205.053 16-12 205.063 et seq. 16-13 212.08 24-42 ch. 218 Ch. 2, Art. VII ch. 252 Ch. 7 (note) 252.38 Ch. 7 (note) 267.051 2-64 286.012 2-26 ch. 316 25-1 316.001 et seq. Ch. 25 (note) 316.008 Ch. 25 (note) 316.193 25-81 316.1945 25-3, 25-4 316.195 25-3 316.1955 25-8 316.1956 25-8 316.1967 25-13 316.1985 25-8 316.646 25-81 316.655 25-81 ch. 318 25-81 320.01 15-1 Ch. 10, Art. II, 
Div. 2 17-215 320.084 25-8 320.0842 25-8 320.0843 25-8 320.0845 25-8 320.0848 25-8 320.0849 10-65 322.03 25-81 322.26(8) 25-81 322.264 25-81 322.27(2) 25-81 322.28(2) 25-81 ch. 327 17-215 Ch. 18 (note) 327.60 Ch. 18 (note) 327.65 17-215 364.20 24-47 366.02 10-25 ch. 367 Ch. 26 (note) ch. 372 Ch. 5 (note) 373.036 10-30 381.0065 10-30 381.261 Ch. 26 (note) ch. 386 Ch. 12, Art. II 403.413 3-29 403.9337 8.5-105 468.101 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) ch. 479 Ch. 3 482.1562(9) 8.5-92 493.6303 4-9 ch. 496 Ch. 21, Art. IV 496.34 Ch. 21, Art. IV ch. 513 Ch. 15 (note) 15-34 ch. 552 Ch. 9 (note) ch. 553 Ch. 6 (note) 553.70 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. II 553.73(5) 10-41 553.73(10(k) 10-25 561.01 et seq. Ch. 4 (note) 561.01 4-1 561.01(4)(b) 4-6 562.14(1) 4-3 562.45(2) 4-2, 4-3 565.02(4) 4-3 570.02 8.5-92 588.12 et seq. 5-2 590.12 Ch. 9 (note) 604.50 10-25 627.733 25-81 ch. 633 Ch. 9 (note) 633.121 Ch. 9 (note) ch. 650 Ch. 2, Art. VI, 
Div. 3 2-202 650.02(2) 2-202 650.05 Ch. 2, Art. VI, 
Div. 3 705.101(6) 25-86 705.103 25-4 25-10 705.105 25-86 713.78 25-81 ch. 716 2-273 ch. 767 5-2 ch. 775 et seq. Ch. 17 (note) 775.082 1-11 25-81 775.083 1-11 25-81 775.084 25-81 ch. 777 17-2 ch. 791 Ch. 9 (note) 796.07 17-241 812.019 17-241 817.563 17-241 817.564 17-241 ch. 823 Ch. 12, Art. II 17-248 823.14 8.5-101 823.24 15-2 870.041 et seq. Ch. 7 (note) 870.041- 
870.047 7-1 870.042 7-1 874.03 17-241 ch. 893 17-241 893.02(13)(a) 17-241 893.138 17-241 932.701- 
932.707 25-81 932.703(1)(c) 25-81 932.7055 25-81  
