CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF PALM COAST, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Published in 2004 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: January 18, 2005 
Effective: January 18, 2005 
____________ 
 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
PALM COAST, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Milissa Holland 
Mayor 
____________ 
Robert G. Cuff—Seat 1 
Heidi Shipley—Seat 2 
Nick Klufas—Seat 3 
Steven Nobile—Seat 4 
City Council Members 
____________ 
Jim Landon 
City Manager 
____________ 
William E. Reischmann, Jr. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Virginia A. Smith, MMC, CP 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Palm Coast, Florida. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of John Dombroski, Vice President, Janet Cramer, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Clare M. Hoeni, and the other members of the city staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Palm Coast, Florida. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: Organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Palm Coast, Florida. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Palm Coast, Florida. 2004. 
CITY OF PALM COAST ORDINANCE NO. 2005-04 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PALM COAST, FLORIDA, CODIFYING THE INITIAL CITY OF PALM COAST CODE OF ORDINANCES (THE CITY CODE ); PROVIDING FOR THE CODIFICATION OF THE CITY CODE IN ACCORDANCE WITH RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION; PROVIDING FOR LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS AND INTENT; PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY; PROVIDING FOR CODIFICATION; PROVIDING FOR ACTIONS PERTAINING TO AN ONGOING CODIFICATION PROGRAM BY THE CITY; PROVIDING FOR THE ASSIGNMENT OF DUTIES; PROVIDING FOR A SAVINGS OF CERTAIN LEGISLATIVE ACTIONS; PROVIDING FOR CONFLICTS AND PROVIDING FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE. 
WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Palm Coast engaged the Municipal Code Corporation (the "MCC") to review and analyze the ordinances enacted by the City Council since the incorporation of the City of Palm Coast in 1999 and assemble the initial edition of the Palm Coast Code of Ordinances (the " City Code "); and 
WHEREAS, the City Council tasked the MCC with the aforedescribed work in order to develop the City Code into a user friendly document that is of greater utility to the citizens of the City, those persons who use the City Code on a routine basis and City officials and City staff; and 
WHEREAS, the work product of the MCC has been reviewed by the City Manager, the City Attorney, the City Clerk and other members of City staff; and 
WHEREAS, based upon the review of the MCC work product, the City Council desires to take the first step in enacting the City Code as set forth herein; and 
WHEREAS, the City Council recognizes that the work of City Code codification and revision is an ongoing process that requires a continuing effort by the various City officials and City staff and it is the goal of the City Council to ensure that the City Code is kept current and of maximum use and clarity for the benefit of the citizens of the City of Palm Coast; and 
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the City Council to implement the ongoing City Code codification program; and 
WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Palm Coast has held all required public hearings in accordance with the provisions of State law in order to solicit input from the public. 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PALM COAST, FLORIDA: 
SECTION 1. LEGISLATIVE INTENT AND FINDINGS. The above recitals set forth in the whereas clauses of this Ordinance are hereby adopted as the legislative intent and findings for the enactment of this Ordinance. The City Council of the City of Palm Coast hereby finds and determines that the provisions of this Ordinance advance a legitimate public purpose and promote and protect the public health, safety, morals and welfare of the public. 
SECTION 2. SEVERABILITY. If any section or portion of a section of this Ordinance proves to be invalid, unlawful or unconstitutional, it shall not be held to impair the validity, force or effect of any other section or part of this Ordinance. 
SECTION 3. CONFLICTS. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
SECTION 4. CODIFICATION AND FURTHER CODIFICATION EFFORTS. 
(a)  It is the intention of the City Council of the City of Palm Coast, Florida, and it is hereby ordained that the provisions of this Ordinance shall be implemented by means of revising the provisions of the City Code to reflect the actions taken in this Ordinance, but the text of this Ordinance shall not be codified; provided, however, that the provisions of Subsection 4(b) shall be codified. 
(b)  The City Council hereby directs the City Clerk and the City Attorney, in conjunction with the City Manager, to undertake a recurring and consistent City Code review and analysis to minimize consultant costs and maximize the usability, currency and accuracy of the City Code on an ongoing basis. Further, the City Clerk, in conjunction with the City Manager and the City Attorney, is hereby delegated the authority to make purely editorial and formatting revisions to the City Code such as assignments of City Code provisions to appropriate parts, articles, sections, etc.; gender changes and neutralization; changes in format; the deletion of conflicting provisions pursuant to the provisions of ordinance enactments by the City Council; deletion of provisions preempted by actions of the Florida Legislature or other controlling legal authority; and such other actions as may be necessary and desirably consistent with the overriding legislative authority of the City Council with regard to the provisions of the City Code . Further, the City Clerk, in conjunction with the City Manager and the City Attorney, is hereby assigned the duty and responsibility to present City Code reviser's ordinances to the City Council on an annual or otherwise recurring basis to ensure that the City Code is maintained in an orderly and contemporaneous form, to implement an ongoing codification process, and to make such reports to the City Council as may be necessary and desirable. . Further, the City Clerk, in conjunction with the City Manager and the City Attorney, is hereby authorized to delete from and insert into the City Code such editor's notes and comments as may be necessary and desirable. 
SECTION 5. EFFECTIVE DATE. That this Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon passage and adoption. 
APPROVED on first reading the fourth day of January 2005. 
ADOPTED on second reading the 18th day of January 2005 at a public hearing. 
CITY OF PALM COAST, FLORIDA 
	/s/ James V. Canfield 
      James V. Canfield, Mayor 
 	 
ATTEST: 
/s/ Clare M. Hoeni 
      Clare M. Hoeni, City Clerk 	
 	 
 
CITY OF PALM COAST - CHARTER[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-9 , § 1, adopted April 3, 2018, approved proposed amendments to the Charter, which, in effect, replaced the Charter in its entirety. The former Charter had been amended by H.B. No. 527, §§ 1—2, 4—6, adopted on 5-1-02; Ord. No. 03-08, § 1, adopted on 4-15-03; Ord. No. 03-09, § 2, adopted on 5-20-03; Ord. No. 07-07, § 1, adopted on 4-3-07; Ord. No. 07-27, Exh. A, adopted on 12-18-07; Ord. No. 09-13, § 3, adopted on 6-2-09; Ord. No. 2011-9, § 2(Exh. A), adopted on 6-21-11; Ord. No. 2011-15, § 3, adopted on 8-16-11; Ord. No. 2011-03, § 2, adopted on 9-13-11; Ord. No. 2011-21, § 2, adopted on 9-13-11; Ord. No. 2013-07, § 3(Exh. A), adopted on 10-1-13; Ord. No. 2014-4, §§ 1—3, adopted on 2-4-14; Ord. No. 2014-12, § 3(Exh. A), adopted on 6-17-14; Ord. No. 2014-13, § 3(Exh. A), adopted on 6-17-14; Ord. No. 2015-01, § 2(Exhs. A1—4), adopted on 2-17-15; Ord. No. 2015-11, § 3(Exhs. A—D), adopted on 10-6-15; Ord. No. 2017-1, § 1(Exh. A), adopted on 1-17-17, and has been renumbered from §§ 1—12 to Arts. I—X, as set out herein. 
 
Art. I. - Municipal powers. 
The City of Palm Coast, hereinafter "City," shall be a body corporate and politic and shall have all the powers of a municipality under the Constitution and laws of the State of Florida, as fully and completely as though such powers were specifically enumerated in this Charter, unless otherwise prohibited by or contrary to the provisions of this Charter. The City shall have all governmental, corporate, and proprietary powers necessary to enable it to conduct municipal government, perform municipal functions, and render municipal services, and may exercise any power for municipal purposes unless expressly prohibited by law. The powers of the City shall be liberally construed in favor of the City, and specific mention of particular powers in this Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power granted in this Article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-9 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-3-18)  
Art. II. - Form of government. 
The City of Palm Coast shall operate under a Council-Manager form of government. The general duties of the Council (described in Art. IV) shall be to set policy; the general duties of the Manager (described in Art. V) shall be to carry out those policies. 
(Ord. No. 2018-9 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-3-18)  
Art. III. - Corporate limits. 
The corporate limits of the City shall consist of the boundaries in the initial Charter of Palm Coast filed December 31, 1999, in the Secretary of State's office, State of Florida, and, in addition thereto, all lands annexed by the City of Palm Coast, Florida, subsequent to December 31, 1999 and prior to the effective date of this Charter. All Ordinances of annexation of the City of Palm Coast heretofore adopted and as may be adopted subsequent to the effective date of this Charter are hereby incorporated herein and the lands described in such Ordinances, together with the boundaries of the City as previously described, are hereby extended to the corporate limits of the City of Palm Coast, Florida. 
(Ord. No. 2018-9 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-3-18)  
Art. IV. - City council. 
(1)  City Council: composition; qualifications for office. 
(a)  Composition. 
1.  There shall be a five member City Council consisting of four District members and a Mayor. 
2.  There shall be four districts within the City, the boundaries of which are as outlined in Article VIII. These districts shall be designated as District One, District Two, District Three, and District Four. Each of the four Council members shall run from the district in which they live, but be elected at-large; and, the Council members elected from each district shall be considered to hold Seat One, Seat Two, Seat Three, and Seat Four. 
3.  The Mayor shall live within the City boundaries. The Mayor shall run at-large, and be elected at-large. 
(b)  Qualifications for office: 
1.  Each candidate for office shall be a qualified elector of the City. 
2.  Each individual seeking to qualify as a candidate for one of the four seats on the Council shall: 
a.  Submit a petition supporting his/her candidacy to the City Clerk containing the signatures of at least one percent of the electorate residing within the district (as identified in the most recent decennial census) which he/she seeks to run no later than noon on the 28th day preceding the first day of the qualifying period for the office sought or, Pay to the City Clerk a qualifying fee of ten percent of the salary of the office he/she seeks to run for. 
b.  At the time of qualification, each candidate for a Seat on the Council shall reside within the boundaries of the district that he/she seeks to run from. For the length of their term, Council members shall maintain residency within the boundaries of the district from which he/she ran. In addition, candidates, and Council members, shall reside at least 45 weeks in each year in the district in which they live. 
3.  Each individual seeking to qualify as a candidate for Mayor shall: 
a.  Submit a petition supporting his/her candidacy to the City Clerk containing the signatures of at least one percent of the electors residing within City limits (as identified in the most recent decennial census) no later than noon on the 28th day preceding the first day of the qualifying period for the office sought; or, pay to the City Clerk a qualifying fee of ten percent of the Mayoral salary. 
b.  At the time of qualification, each candidate for Mayor shall reside within the City limits. For the length of the Mayor's, the Mayor shall maintain residency within the City limits. In addition, Mayoral candidates, and the elected Mayor, shall reside at least 45 weeks in each year within the City limits. 
(2)  Terms of office. 
(a)  The term of office for each District Member shall be four years. 
(b)  No Council member or Mayor may serve more than two successive four-year terms in the same seat. 
(c)  Each Council member shall remain in office until his/her successor is elected and assumes the duties of the position at the first meeting of the new Council, which shall be held in accordance with City ordinance. 
(3)  Powers and duties of Council. Except as otherwise prescribed herein or provided by law, legislative and police powers of the City shall be vested in the Council. The Council shall provide for the exercise of its powers and for the performance of all duties and obligations imposed on the City by law. 
(4)  Powers and duties of the Mayor. 
(a)  Powers. In addition to the regular powers invested in any other Council member, the Mayor shall: be recognized by the governor for purposes of military law; have the power to declare an emergency situation; have the power for service of process, and execution of contracts, deeds and other documents; have the power to represent the City in all agreements with other governmental entities or certifications to other governmental entities that the Council has approved. 
(b)  Duties. In addition to the Mayor's regular duties, the Mayor shall: preside at meetings of the Council and be recognized as the head of City government for all ceremonial occasions. The Mayor shall have no administrative duties other than those necessary to accomplish these actions, or such other actions as may be authorized by the City Council, consistent with general or special law. 
(5)  The Vice-Mayor: election and duties. 
(a)  Election. There shall be a Vice-Mayor elected annually by the Council from among the Council members. Such election shall take place at the first meeting after the general election, or at the organizational meeting during years when there is no election. 
(b)  Duties. The Vice-Mayor shall have the same legislative powers and duties as any other Council member, except that the Vice-Mayor shall serve as Acting Mayor during the absence or disability of the Mayor, and during such period, shall have the same duties as provided for in Art. IV. In the absence of the Mayor and Vice-Mayor, the remaining Council members shall select a Council member to serve as Acting Mayor. 
(6)  Compensation and expenses. 
(a)  Compensation. The Council members and Mayor shall receive compensation as established by ordinance. Such compensation shall not take effect until the date of commencement of the terms of Council members elected at the next regularly scheduled election that follows the adoption of said ordinance by at least six months. 
(b)  Expenses. The Council may provide for reimbursement of actual expenses incurred by its members while performing their official duties. 
(7)  Vacancies; forfeiture of office; suspension; recall; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies. A vacancy in the office of the Mayor or of a Council seat shall occur upon any of the following: upon the death of the incumbent; removal from office as authorized by law; resignation; appointment to other public office which creates dual office holding; judicially determined incompetence; or forfeiture of office as herein described. 
(b)  Forfeiture of office. The Mayor or any other Council member shall forfeit his/her office upon determination by the Council, acting as a body, that he/she: 
1.  Lacks at any time, or fails to maintain during his/her term of office, any qualification for the office prescribed by this Charter or otherwise required by law; 
2.  Is convicted of a felony, or enters a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a crime punishable as a felony, even if adjudication of guilt has been withheld; 
3.  Is convicted of a first degree misdemeanor arising directly out of his/her official conduct or duties or enters a plea of guilty or nolo contendere thereto, even if adjudication of guilt has been withheld; 
4.  Is found to have violated any standard of conduct or code of ethics established by law for public officials and has been suspended from office by the Governor, unless subsequently reinstated as provided by law; or 
5.  Is absent from three consecutive regular Council meetings without being excused by the Council. 
(c)  Suspension from office. The Mayor or any other Council member shall be suspended from office by the Council acting as a body upon return of an indictment or issuance of an information charging the Council member or Mayor with any crime which is punishable as a felony or with any crime arising out of his/her official conduct or duties which is punishable as a misdemeanor. Pursuant thereto: 
1.  During the period of suspension, the Mayor or the Council member shall not perform any official act, duty, or function, or receive any allowance, emolument, or privilege of office. 
2.  If the Mayor or the Council member is subsequently found not guilty of the charge, or if the charge is otherwise dismissed or altered so that suspension would no longer be required as provided herein, the suspension shall be lifted by the Council, and the Council member or Mayor shall be entitled to receive full back allowances and such other emoluments or as he/she would have been entitled to had the suspension not occurred. 
(d)  Recall. The electors of the City following the procedures for recall established by general law or ordinance may remove the Mayor or any member of the City Council from office. 
(e)  Filling of vacancies. 
1.  If, for any reason other than recall, a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor, the Vice Mayor shall assume the position of Mayor, and within 30 days following the occurrence of such vacancy, a Special Election shall be called as outlined in Art. VII. The Special Election for Mayor shall be for the remainder of the unfilled term. 
2.  If, for any reason other than recall, a vacancy occurs in the office of any Council seat within the first two years of a term, the office shall be filled by appointment within 30 days following the occurrence of such vacancy by majority vote of the remaining Council members. Such appointments shall last until the next regularly scheduled election, at which time the seat shall be declared open and an election held for the remaining two years of the original term, thus continuing the original staggering of district seats. 
3.  If, for any reason other than recall, a vacancy occurs in the office of any Council seat within the last two years of a term, the office shall be filled by appointment within 30 days following the occurrence of such vacancy by majority vote of the remaining Council members. Such appointments shall last until the next regularly scheduled election, at which time the seat shall be declared open and an election held for the regular four-year term. 
4.  If a vacancy occurs as a result of a Recall Petition, such vacancy will be filled by Special Election as outlined in Art. VII. 
5.  Any person appointed to fill a vacant seat on the Council is required to meet all the qualifications for office except the petition requirement. 
(8)  City Council meetings: organizational meeting; quorum; special meetings. The Council shall meet regularly at least once a month, at such times and places as the Council may prescribe by ordinance. Such meetings shall be public meetings, and shall be subject to notice and other requirements of law applicable to public meetings. Pursuant thereto: 
(a)  Organizational meeting. The first meeting following a general City election at which elected or re-elected Council members are inducted into office shall be held in accordance with City ordinance. 
(b)  Quorum. A majority of the Council, including the Mayor, shall constitute a quorum. No action of the Council shall be valid unless adopted by an affirmative vote of the majority of the Council members and Mayor in attendance, unless otherwise provided by law, ordinance, or stated herein. All actions of the City Council shall be by ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
(c)  Special meetings. Special meetings may be held at the call of the Mayor, or, in the absence of the Mayor, at the call of the Vice-Mayor. Special meetings may also be called upon the request of a majority of the Council members. The City Clerk shall provide not less than 24 hours prior notice of the meeting to the public, unless a declared emergency situation exists. 
(9)  City records. The Council shall, in a properly indexed book kept for the purpose, provide for the authentication and recording in full of all minutes of meetings, and all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Council, and the same shall at all times be a public record. In addition, the Council shall keep verbatim recordings of all meetings in accordance with state law. The Council shall further maintain a current codification of all ordinances. Such codification shall be printed and be made available to the public on a continuing basis. All ordinances or resolutions of the Council shall be signed by the Mayor or in the Mayor's absence, by the Vice-Mayor, or in the absence of both, by the Acting Mayor, and attested to by the City Clerk. 
(10)  Limit of employment of Council members. Neither Council members nor the Mayor shall be in the employment of the City while in office, nor shall any former Council member or former Mayor be employed by the City until after the expiration of one (1) year from the time of leaving office. 
(11)  Noninterference by City Council. Except for the purpose of inquiry and information, the Council and its members, including committees thereof, are expressly prohibited from interfering with the performance of the duties of any City employee who is under the direct or indirect supervision of the City Manager or City Attorney. Such action shall be malfeasance within the meaning of Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2018-9 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-3-18)  
Art. V. - Charter officers. 
The designated Charter Officers shall be the City Manager and the City Attorney. 
(1)  Designated Charter Officers: appointment; removal; compensation; filling of vacancies; candidate for City office. 
(a)  Appointment. The Charter Officers shall be appointed by a majority vote of the full Council and shall serve at the pleasure of the Council. 
(b)  Removal. The Charter Officers shall be removed from office only by a majority vote of the full Council. If the vote is less than unanimous, the Charter Officer may, within seven days of the dismissal motion by the Council, submit to the Mayor a written request for reconsideration. Any action taken by the Council at the reconsideration hearing shall be final. 
(c)  Compensation. The compensation of the Charter Officers shall be fixed by the City Council. 
(d)  Filling of Vacancy. The City Council shall begin the process to fill a vacancy in the Charter Office of the City Manager or City Attorney within 90 days of the vacancy. An Acting City Manager or Acting City Attorney may be appointed by the Council during a vacancy in office. 
(e)  Candidate for City Office. No Charter Officer shall be a candidate for any elected office while holding his/her Charter Office position. 
(2)  City Manager: qualifications; residency; powers and duties. The City Manager shall be the chief Administrative Officer of the City. 
(a)  Qualifications. The City Manager shall be selected on the basis of experience, expertise, and management ability as it pertains to running municipal government. 
(b)  Residency. Although the City Manager need not be a resident of the City at the time of appointment, within six (6) months of such appointment, he/she shall establish and maintain residency within the corporate limits of the City. Upon request of the City Manager, this 6-month period may be extended by the City Council for an additional 6-month period. 
(c)  Power and Duties. The City Manager shall: 
1.  Attend all meetings of the City Council. 
2.  Draw and sign vouchers upon depositories, and keep, or cause to be kept, a true and accurate account of same. Such vouchers shall be counter signed by the Mayor or by the Vice-Mayor in the event the office of Mayor is vacant. If both the Mayor and Vice Mayor offices are vacant, the Acting Mayor shall countersign such vouchers. 
3.  Be responsible for: signature and issuance of all licenses issued by the City; issuance of receipts for all moneys paid to the City; and deposit of said moneys in the proper depositories on the first banking day after receipt. 
4.  Provide administrative services as required by the Mayor and the Council. 
5.  Appoint a City Clerk to serve at his/her pleasure. 
6.  Appoint and suspend or remove any employee of the City. The City Manager may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to his/her direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office, or agency within the guidelines of stated personnel policies and procedures. 
7.  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the City, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law. 
8.  See that all laws, provisions of this Charter, and acts of the Council are faithfully executed. 
9.  Prepare and submit annually a balanced budget, budget message, and capital program to the Council. 
10.  Keep the Council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the City and make such recommendations to the Council concerning the affairs of the City. 
11.  Submit to the Council, and make available to the public, a complete report on finances and administrative activities of the City as of the end of each fiscal year. 
12.  Sign contracts on behalf of the City to the extent authorized by the Council. 
13.  Perform other such duties as are specified in this Charter or as may be directed by the Council. 
(3)  City Attorney: qualifications; residency; powers and duties. The City Attorney shall be the chief legal officer of the City. The City Attorney may either be retained in-house, or be retained part-time under contract. 
(a)  Qualifications. The City Attorney shall be a member in good standing of the Florida Bar. 
(b)  Residency. If retained in-house, the City Attorney shall, within six (6) months of such appointment, establish and maintain residency within the corporate limits of the City. Upon request of the City Attorney, this 6-month period may be extended by the City Council for an additional 6-month period. If City Attorney services are contracted, such attorney need not be a resident of the City. 
(c)  Powers and Duties. The City Attorney shall: 
1.  Serve as chief legal advisor to the City Council, the City Manager, and all City departments, offices, City advisory boards, and agencies. 
2.  If in-house; appoint, suspend or remove such assistant attorneys as may be required. If City Attorney services are contracted, the City Manager shall appoint, suspend or remove any in-house assistant attorneys as may be required. The remainder of the staff of the Office of City Attorney shall be employees of the City, appointed, suspended, or removed under the regular personnel policies and procedures of the City. 
3.  The City Attorney or designee shall attend all City Council meetings unless excused by the City Council, and shall perform such professional duties as may be required by law or by the Council in furtherance of the law. 
4.  The City Attorney shall prepare an annual budget for the operation of the Office of the City Attorney and shall submit this budget to the City Manager for inclusion in the annual City budget, in accordance with uniform City procedures. 
(Ord. No. 2018-9 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-3-18)  
Art. VI. - Budget and appropriations. 
(1)  Fiscal year. The City fiscal year shall begin on October 1 of each year and end on September 30 of the succeeding year. 
(2)  Budget adoption. The Council shall by resolution adopt a budget on or before the 30th day of September of each year. A resolution adopting the annual budget shall constitute appropriation of the amounts specified therein as expenditures from funds indicated. 
(3)  Appropriation amendments during the fiscal year: Supplemental appropriations; reduction of appropriations; transfer of appropriations; limitations; effective date; limitations to Council's contracting authority. 
(a)  Supplemental appropriations. If, during the fiscal year, revenues in excess of those estimated in the budget are available for appropriation, the Council may, by resolution, make supplemental appropriations for the year in an amount not to exceed such excess. 
(b)  Reduction of appropriations. If, at any time during the fiscal year, it appears probable to the City Manager that the revenues available will be insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, the City Manager shall report same to the Council without delay, indicating the estimated amount of the deficit, any remedial action to be taken, and recommendations as to any other steps that should be taken. The Council shall then take such further action as it deems necessary to prevent any deficit and, for that purpose, the Council may by resolution reduce one or more appropriations accordingly. 
(c)  Transfer of appropriations. At any time during the fiscal year, the City Manager may transfer all or part of any unencumbered appropriation balance within a department, office, or agency of the City to other programs within the same department, office or agency. And, upon written request of the City Manager, the Council may transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance from one department, office, or agency to another. 
(d)  Limitations: Effective date. No appropriation for debt service may be reduced or transferred, no appropriation may be reduced below any amount required by law to be appropriated, and no appropriation may be reduced by more than the amount of the unencumbered balance thereof. Other provisions of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the supplemental and emergency appropriations and reduction or transfer of appropriations authorized by this section may be made effective immediately upon adoption. 
(e)  Limitations to Council's Contracting Authority. Unless authorized by the electors of the City at a duly held referendum election, the Council shall not enter into lease purchase contracts or any other unfunded multiyear contracts, the repayment of which: extends in excess of 36 months; or exceeds $15,000,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2018-9 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-3-18)  
Art. VII. - Elections. 
(1)  Electors. Any person who is a resident of the City, who has qualified as an elector of this state, and who registers in the manner prescribed by law shall be an elector of the City. 
(2)  Nonpartisan elections. All elections for City elective office shall be conducted on a nonpartisan basis without any designation of political party affiliation. 
(3)  Qualifying for office. Any person who wishes to become a candidate for a City elective office shall qualify with the City Clerk concurrent with Flagler County's qualifying period as established by state law. In addition, candidates shall qualify as provided in paragraph (1)(b) of Article IV. 
(4)  Schedule of regular elections and primaries: The regular City election shall be the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each even-numbered year. Such City elections shall be general City elections. If there are more than two candidates who qualify for any office, a primary City election shall be held at the time of the State and Federal Primary Elections. 
(a)  An election to fill a vacant council seat, as outlined in paragraph (7)(e) of Article IV, when there is more than half of the term remaining shall be held during the next regularly scheduled election. Such election shall be for the remaining 2 years of the original term. 
(b)  An election to fill a vacant council seat, as outlined in paragraph (7)(e) of Article IV, when there is less than half of the term remaining shall be filled at the next regularly scheduled election. Such election shall be for a 4-year term. 
(5)  Schedule for special elections. 
(a)  A special election for a vacant position of Mayor, as outlined in paragraph (7)(e) of Article IV, shall be called within 30 days, and the City Council shall, by resolution, fix the time for holding of such election. Such special election for Mayor shall be for the remainder of the vacant term. 
(b)  All other special municipal elections shall be held in the same manner as regular elections, and the City Council shall, by resolution, fix the time for holding of such elections. 
(6)  Determination of election to office. 
(a)  If only one candidate qualifies for an office, that candidate shall be deemed to be elected and shall not be placed on either the general or the primary ballot. 
(b)  If a primary City election is held and any candidate for an office receives a majority of the votes cast in the primary election for the office, he or she shall be deemed to be elected to the office and the office shall not be subject to an election at the regular City election. 
(c)  If no single candidate for an office receives a majority of the votes cast in the City primary election for that office, the two candidates for the office receiving the highest vote in the primary City election shall run again in the regular City election. Further: 
1.  In any primary election in which there is a tie for first place, the name of each such candidate shall be placed on the City's general election ballot. 
2.  In any primary election in which there is a tie for second place and the candidate placing first did not receive a majority of the votes cast for such office, the name of the candidate placing first and the name of each candidate tying for second shall be placed on the City's general election ballot. 
(d)  The candidate receiving the highest number of votes cast for the office in the City's general election shall be elected to such office. If the vote at the general City election results in a tie, the outcome shall be determined by lot as follows: 
1.  At the first regularly scheduled council meeting after the election, the Supervisor of Elections of Flagler County shall toss a coin. In alphabetic order, the two candidates shall call the coin. 
2.  The candidate whose call matches the coin toss shall be declared the winner. 
(7)  City Canvassing Board. For purposes of certifying absentee ballots and election results, the City Clerk and a representative from the City designated by the Council shall be known as the Canvassing Board. At the close of the polls of any City election, the Canvassing Board shall ensure that the absentee ballots are delivered to the Flagler County Supervisor of Elections, and shall meet at the County election headquarters and proceed to certify the ballots and open them in the presence of a representative of the Supervisor of Elections' office. In addition, after final election results are certified by the Flagler County Supervisor of Elections, the Canvassing Board shall immediately report the results back to a meeting of the City Council held for the purpose of final certification and filing with the City Clerk as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 2018-9 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-3-18)  
Art. VIII. - City council district boundaries. 
The City shall be divided into four (4) Council Districts by an ordinance of the City. This ordinance shall comply with the general laws governing district boundaries. Following each decennial census, the City Council shall by ordinance adjust the boundaries of the City Council districts according to general law. In addition, the City Council may, at its discretion, adjust the districts provided that any such adjustment will not take place less than one year before an election. The Council may appoint a special commission to develop district boundaries, use consulting firms specializing in the process and/or use such other public governmental resources as are available to develop a plan for districts and to adjust the district boundaries when required. 
(Ord. No. 2018-9 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-3-18)  
Art. IX. - General provisions. 
(1)  Charter amendment. This Charter may be amended in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Home Rule Powers Act, chapter 166, Florida Statutes (F.S. ch. 166), as the same may be amended from time to time, or as may otherwise be provided by general law. The form, content, and certification of any petition to amend shall be established by ordinance. 
(2)  Charter review; schedule, Charter Review Committee. 
(a)  Schedule. The Charter shall be reviewed no sooner than 10 years after the creation of the City of Palm Coast on December 31, 1999, and thereafter it may be reviewed every 10 years. 
(b)  Charter Review Committee. A five-member Charter Review Committee shall be appointed. Each district council member shall appoint one member from his or her district, and the Mayor shall appoint one member at large. The Palm Coast City Council shall fund this committee. The Charter Review Committee shall be appointed at least one year before the next scheduled general election and complete its work and present any recommendations for change no later than 60 days before the general election. The Palm Coast City Council shall hold a minimum of two public hearings on the proposed changes to the Charter prior to placing the proposed changes on the scheduled general election ballot. 
(3)  Initiative and referendum. At least 10 percent of the qualified electorate of the City shall have the power to petition the Council to propose an ordinance or to require reconsideration of an adopted ordinance, or to propose an amendment to this Charter. [2] If the Council fails to adopt such ordinance or amendment so proposed, or to repeal such adopted ordinance, without any change in substance, then the Council shall place the proposed ordinance or amendment, or the repeal of the adopted ordinance, on the ballot at the next general election. This Procedure for such initiative or referendum shall be as established by ordinance. 
(4)  Adjustments of districts; number, commission, report, support, procedure, failure to enact, effect of enactment. 
(a)  Number of districts. There shall be four City Council districts as described in subsection (2) of Art. VIII. These boundaries shall remain in effect until the City Council determines, based upon each decennial census, that redistricting is appropriate to ensure that the requirements of Art. VIII are accomplished and adequately monitored or until a redistricting commission is appointed. All Council district boundaries shall be based upon population data derived from the most recent decennial census. 
(b)  Districting commission. By the first day of the month following official certification notification of the decennial census to the state, the City Council shall appoint five City electors, determined from the registration for the last statewide general election, who shall comprise the districting commission. Electors chosen shall not be employed by the City in any other capacity. 
(c)  Commission report. Within 120 days after appointment, or such earlier time as prescribed by the Council, the districting commission shall file with the official designated by the Council a report containing a recommended plan for adjustment of the council district boundaries to comply with the following specifications: 
1.  Each district shall be formed of compact, contiguous territory, and its boundary lines shall follow the center lines of natural and manmade separations, such as canals, streets, etc., where possible. 
2.  The districts shall be based upon the principle of equal and effective representation as required by the United States Constitution and as represented in the mathematical preciseness reached in the legislative apportionment of the state. 
The report shall include a map and description of the districts recommended and shall be drafted as a proposed ordinance. Once filed with the designated official, the report shall be treated as an ordinance introduced by a Council member. 
(d)  Support. It shall be the responsibility of the City Manager to provide staff assistance and technical data to the districting commission. 
(e)  Procedure. The procedure for the Council's consideration of the report shall be the same as for other ordinances, provided that any summary of the ordinance published pursuant to this Charter and general law must include both the map and a description of the recommended districts. 
(f)  Failure to enact ordinance. After receipt of the commission report, the Council shall adopt a redistricting ordinance at least 90 days before the next regular City election. If the Council fails to do so by such date, the report of the districting commission shall go into effect and have the effect of an ordinance. 
(g)  Effect of enactment. 
1.  The new council districts and boundaries, as of the date of enactment, shall supersede previous council districts and boundaries for all the purposes of the next regular City election, including qualifications. 
2.  The new council districts and boundaries shall supersede previous council districts and boundaries for all other purposes as of the date all Council members take office who were elected subsequent to the effective date of the new districts. 
3.  All district seats not up for election, but which as a result of the redistricting no longer have Council members who live within the district, shall be declared vacant for purposes of the next regularly scheduled election. Such election shall, in order to preserve the staggering of the terms, be for either four years or for the remaining two years of the term, depending on the district vacant. 
(5)  Standards of conduct. All elected officials and employees of the City shall be subject to the standards of conduct for public officers and employees set by general law. In addition, the City Council may, by ordinance, establish a code of ethics for officials and employees of the City, which may be supplemental to general law, but in no case may such an ordinance diminish the provisions of general law. 
(Ord. No. 2018-9 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-3-18)  
Art X. - Severability. 
If any provision of this act, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this act which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this act are declared severable. 
(Ord. No. 2018-9 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-3-18)  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table is a numerical listing of all ordinances the Charter of the City of Palm Coast. 
Ordinance 
No. 	Adoption 
Date 	Section 	Section 
this Charter 
03-08 	 4-15-03 	1 	5(6)(a) 
03-09 	 5-20-03 	2 	9(2) 
07-07 	 4- 3-07 	1 	5(6)(a)(1), (3) 
07-27 	12-18-07 	Exh. A 	9(1) 
09-13 	 6- 2-09 	3 	9(1) 
2011-03 	 9-13-11 	2 	8(3), (4) 
2011-9 	 6-21-11 	2(Exh. A) 	9(2) 
2011-15 	 8-16-11 	3 	9(1) 
2011-21 	 9-13-11 	2 	8(4) 
2013-07 	10- 1-13 	3(Exh. A) 	9(1) 
2014-4 	 2- 4-14 	1 	5(1)(b)2.a, 3.a 
		2 	8(3) 
		3 	8(4) 
2014-12 
 6-17-14 	3(Exh. A) 	9(1) 
2014-13 
 6-17-14 	3(Exh. A) 	9(1) 
2015-01 
 2-17-15 	2(Exhs. A1—A4) 	9(1) 
2015-11 
10- 6-15 	3(Exhs. A—D) 	9(1) 
2017-1 
 1-17-17 	1(Exh. A) 	9(1) 
2018-9 
 4- 3-18 	2(Exh. A)       Rnbd 	1—12 
		      as 	Arts. I—X 
  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Palm Coast, Florida," and may be so cited.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules shall be observed, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Charter. The word "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Palm Coast, Florida, printed as Part I of this volume. 
City. The word "City" shall be construed as if the words "of Palm Coast" followed the word "City," and shall extend to and include its several officers, boards, committees and employees. 
Code. The term "Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of Palm Coast, Florida. 
Council. The words "Council" or "City Council" shall mean the City Council of the City of Palm Coast. 
Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by ordinance the day of the act, event or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The word "County" shall mean the County of Flagler in the State of Florida. 
F.S. Whenever the abbreviation "F.S." is used, it shall refer to the official Florida Statutes and all amendments and supplements adopted by the state legislature. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only may extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; however, technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the word "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Officers, boards, committees, commissions, etc. The title of any office, officer, employee, board, committee or commission shall be used as though the words "of Palm Coast, Florida" were added. Whenever a provision appears authorizing or requiring a particular officer or employee of the City to do some act, it shall be construed to authorize said officer or employee to delegate, designate and authorize subordinates to do the act unless the terms of the provisions or section specify otherwise. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenants by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships, co-partnerships, joint ventures, other groups or combinations and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as herein defined. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery or open space adjacent thereto, all beaches, canals or other waterways. 
Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Shall/may. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The word "state" shall be construed to mean the State of Florida. 
Street. The word "street" shall be construed to include streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the City. 
Tenant, occupant. The words "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies, the whole or a part of such buildings or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven days. 
Written; in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. Unless otherwise designated, the word "year" shall mean a calendar year.  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.  
Sec. 1-4. - Internal references to chapters, articles, divisions or sections. 
Whenever in one section of this Code reference is made to another section of this Code, the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.  
Sec. 1-5. - History notes. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section.  
Sec. 1-6. - References to chapters or sections. 
All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified.  
Sec. 1-7. - References and editor's notes. 
References and editor's notes following certain sections are inserted as an aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling or meant to have any legal effect.  
Sec. 1-8. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this and the following chapters and sections, so far as they are the same as ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of this Code, shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments.  
Sec. 1-9. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or to the City, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the City or any evidence of the City's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the City; 
(2)  Appropriating funds or establishing or relating to the annual budget; 
(3)  Imposing taxes which are not inconsistent with this Code; 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by the City; 
(5)  Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, or vacating any street or public way; 
(6)  Establishing or prescribing street grades; 
(7)  Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor or establishing special districts; 
(8)  Prescribing through streets, parking prohibitions, parking limitations, one-way streets, speed limits, load limits or loading zones not inconsistent with this Code; 
(9)  Establishing land development regulations, zoning or rezoning specific property; 
(10)  Establishing subdivision regulations or dedicating, accepting or rejecting any plat or subdivision; 
(11)  Annexing or deannexing property; 
(12)  Which is special although permanent; 
(13)  Which is temporary, although general; 
(14)  Whose purposes have not been consummated. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.  
Sec. 1-10. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed.  
Sec. 1-11. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the City in effect on the date of adoption of this Code.  
Sec. 1-12. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the City Council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: "It Is Hereby Ordained by the City of Palm Coast, Florida: That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Palm Coast, Florida, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in to the extent deemed necessary by the City Council to show the context of such amendments. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "It Is Hereby Ordained by the City of Palm Coast, Florida: That the Code of Ordinances, City of Palm Coast, Florida, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which said section reads as follows:…." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be.  
Sec. 1-13. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by City personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the City. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the City Commission or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions to include, but not be limited to, moving definitions to a general section pertaining to definitions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ through _____." The inserted section numbers will indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code; and 
(5)  Make changes that reflect gender neutrality; 
(6)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-14. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
This provision shall apply to all ordinances and each ordinance shall not be required to contain a severability section or clause. Only when an ordinance or provision of an ordinance is deemed to be non-reversible will an ordinance require a special section or provision relating to severability.  
Sec. 1-15. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a City officer or City employee to perform an official duty unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00. 
(d)  The penalty of incarceration shall be [a] potential penalty only when specifically set forth with regard to violation of a provision of this Code. In such occasions, the potential penalty shall be incarceration for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days and a fine not exceeding sixty (60) days. 
(e)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(f)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise, the imposition of civil penalties or other administrative actions. 
(g)  Violations of this Code may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and no bond shall be required nor proof of intent or scienter. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
City ordinances which are enacted by the City Council and which are to be codified in this Code need not set forth a penalty provision and violation of such ordinances shall be subject to the penalty provisions of this section. Non-codified ordinances shall contain a specific penalty provision. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, § 1, 12-29-99; Ord. No. 00-6, § 1, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 1-16. - Authority. 
The provisons of this Code and ordinances of the City Council as enacted under the authority of Art. VIII, Section 2 of the Constitution of the State of Florida, Chapter 166, Florida Statutes and other applicable laws.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 7; animals, ch. 8; buildings and building regulations, ch. 15; businesses and business regulations, ch. 15; community development, ch. 17; emergency services, ch. 23; environment, ch. 24; fire prevention and protection, ch. 25; flood regulations, ch. 26; franchise regulations, ch. 27; health and sanitation, ch. 28; impact fees, ch. 29; personnel, ch. 36; solid waste, ch. 41; streets, roads, bridges and other public places, ch. 42; taxation, ch. 43; traffic and vehicles, ch. 44; utilities, ch. 49; waterways, ch. 50; land development code, app. A. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-1. - City of Palm Coast—Corporate seal; logo; use of. 
(a)  Corporate seal; design. The Corporate Seal of the City of Palm Coast, Florida, shall be circular in form. The circumference of the Seal, which shall be one and thirteen sixteenths inches (1 13/16 "), is formed by the words "City of Palm Coast, Florida" in the upper part of the circle, and the words "Incorporated 1999" in the lower part of the circle. Within the circle formed by these words are images of the sun, a palm tree and a wave of water, on a white background; superimposed upon the landscape and band of wording are the words "Palm Coast" in large decorative lettering. A facsimile of the above-described City Seal is as follows: 
 
Corporate Seal 
(b)  City logo. The City of Palm Coast Logo shall be similar to the corporate seal but in an oval shape with or without the "Palm Coast Incorporated 1999" band. A facsimile of the "banded" City of Palm Coast logo is as follows: 
 
City Logo 
(c)  Use of corporate seal and logo. The Corporate Seal and logo of the City of Palm Coast, including any facsimile thereof, are intended for use by authorized agents or officers of the City of Palm Coast in conducting the official business of the City. No other person shall use the City Seal or City Logo for any other purpose. 
(Ord. No. 04-02, §§ 1—3, 2-17-04)  
Sec. 2-2. - Reorganization of City boards and committees. 
(a)  The following are adopted as policies of the City relative to the appointment of members to the various boards and committees, by whatever name, of the City: 
(1)  All appointees shall be limited to two consecutive terms of office on the same body unless the City Council by a four-fifths vote determines that it is in the best interests of the City to appoint a person to a term of office exceeding that limitation. 
(2)  Absent a controlling provision in Federal, State, County or City law, ordinance, rule or regulation, every appointee must, at the time of appointment, be a resident of the City and an elector of Flagler County. 
(3)  Absent a controlling provision in Federal, State, County or City law, ordinance, rule or regulation, appointments shall be for terms of four years. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be for the unexpired term of the member vacating office. 
(4)  Advisory bodies shall be created by resolution as opposed to ordinance except in unusual circumstances or in the event that controlling law requires otherwise. 
(5)  In appropriate circumstances the City Council shall make every reasonable effort to ensure that City Council Districts are as equally represented as practicable; provided, however, that the City's local planning agency (Planning and Land Development Regulation Board) shall have at least one appointed from each City Council District. 
(6)  Absent a controlling provision in Federal, State, County or City law, ordinance, rule or regulation, if any member fails to attend three successive meetings or 25 percent of the meetings held while a member without cause and without prior approval of the chair, the body shall report such occurrence to the City Council which shall consider whether or not to declare a vacancy in office and appoint a replacement member. 
(7)  Members shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council and may be suspended or removed for cause as determined to exist by the City Council at a public meeting. 
(8)  Unless required by accordance with Federal, State, County or City law, ordinance, rule or regulation, members should not be elected officials. In the instance that Federal, State, County, or City law ordinance, rule or regulation permits elected officials to be a member, it is the policy of the City to prohibit elected officials from being members except in unusual circumstances as defined by the City Council. 
(b)  The following are adopted as policies of the City relative to the operation of the various boards and committees, by whatever name, of the City: 
(1)  All proceedings shall be guided by the latest edition of Roberts Rules of Order. 
(2)  Unless otherwise empowered by Federal, State, County or City law, ordinance, rule or regulation, no bylaws shall be adopted by the board or body and matters within the jurisdiction of the body shall be implemented in accordance with the provisions of the creating City Code provision, ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. No. 06-23, § 1, 12-5-06) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-23, § 1, adopted Dec. 5, 2006, amended the Code by adding provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, said provisions were included herein as § 2-2.  
DIVISION 2. - TRAVEL POLICY 
 
Sec. 2-16. - Applicability. 
These regulations shall apply to all City elected officials, employees, and members of advisory boards, volunteers and all others who are authorized to travel on official City business. 
(Ord. No. 00-59, 1-2-01)  
Sec. 2-17. - Authorization. 
All travel must be pre-approved by the applicable authority. Department directors will approve travel for all employees within their departments. Department directors' travel shall be approved by the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 00-59, § 1, 1-2-01)  
Sec. 2-18. - Credit cards. 
To reduce processing time and expense within the administrative services department and to provide for greater accountability of travel expenses, selected individuals will receive a City credit card which may be used for all City related travel. The credit card may be utilized for such payments as registration prepayments, hotel reservations, and airline tickets to facilitate the payment of these travel related costs without the need for a purchase order or special processing of a vendor check. The City credit card is not intended for personal use and all charges must be substantiated by submission of the travel expense authorization form and the appropriate supporting documentation. To keep the account current it is imperative that employees submit the travel expense report in a timely manner, within five days after completing travel. Credit card billings that are not substantiated by the employee within 30 days of the completion of travel will be deemed to be personal charges and the employee will be held responsible for reimbursing the City. 
(Ord. No. 00-59, § 2, 1-2-01)  
Sec. 2-19. - Reimbursement of travel related expenses. 
Each City officer and employee authorized to travel outside Flagler County to a convention, conference, meeting, seminar or to otherwise conduct bona fide City business shall be reimbursed under one of the following options below for the following expenses incurred while engaged in such travel and at the destination: 
(1)  Transportation. The most economic and efficient mode of transportation shall be used. 
a.  Transportation by common carrier is reimbursable when substantiated by a receipt or on an advanced basis provided the applicable authority approves it. 
b.  Transportation by privately owned automobiles shall be reimbursed at the standard mileage rate established annually by the Internal Revenue Services for business travel. 
1.  Computation of mileage. Mileage should be shown from point of origin to point of destination. The official highway mileage chart (Attachment 3*) shall be used in the calculation of mileage within the State of Florida. Once the traveler has reached their destination, vicinity mileage necessary to conduct official business is allowable and should be shown as a separate item on the travel expense report. Travelers with vicinity mileage in excess of 50 miles should attach a note to the travel expense report substantiating the mileage claim. 
(2)  Other expenses. The following incidental traveling expenses may be reimbursed if actually and necessarily expended while on travel when substantiated by receipts: 
a.  Taxi fare, including airport bus or limo service. 
b.  Ferry fares, bridge, turnpike and other tolls. 
c.  Vehicle rental, storage and parking fees. 
d.  Communication expenses. 
e.  Registration fees. 
(3)  Meals, lodging and miscellaneous expense. 
a.  Meals. Travelers will receive a meals allowance consistent with federal IRS regulations for accountable reimbursement plans. This allowance will be in lieu of reimbursement for actual expenses substantiated by receipts. Travelers shall not be reimbursed for meals included in a convention or conference registration fee paid by the City. 
b.  Lodging. Actual expenses for lodging shall be reimbursed at a single occupancy rate to be substantiated by paid bills or on an advanced basis provided it is approved by the applicable authority. 
(4)  The City Manager may make or authorize advances to cover anticipated costs of travel. If the amount of the advancement is more than the amount actually due, the City officer or employee shall promptly return the difference to the City. If the amount of the advancement is less than actually expended, the City will reimburse the difference to the employee. Receipts must substantiate expenditures. 
(5)  The City will not reimburse for the cost of alcoholic beverages. 
(6)  If deemed appropriate, the City Manager may adjust payment amounts to meet special conditions. 
(Ord. No. 00-59, § 3, 1-2-01) 
Editor's note— * Attachment A is not included herein but is available for public inspection in City offices.  
Sec. 2-20. - Procedures. 
A travel expense authorization form shall be completed before travel takes place. Such form will be reviewed, approved and, as appropriate, signed by the applicable authority. A travel expense report shall be completed with all applicable receipts and signatures and submitted to administrative services office within five days of completion of travel. 
(Ord. No. 00-59, § 4, 1-2-01)  
Sec. 2-21. - Local mileage reimbursement request. 
The local mileage reimbursement form is to be submitted when an employee uses their privately owned vehicle to conduct City business. This form shall be utilized for intra-county travel and out-of-county travel when mileage is the only travel expense. When expenses other than mileage are incurred, the traveler should submit the travel expense report. 
Employees receiving a car allowance shall not receive reimbursement for destinations within the State of Florida. 
(Ord. No. 00-59, § 5, 1-2-01)  
Sec. 2-22. - Reports. 
When an employee or less than the entire City Council travels to a convention, conference, meeting or seminar held outside of Flagler County said traveler(s) shall provide a written report. 
(Ord. No. 00-59, § 6, 1-2-01)  
DIVISION 3. - PURCHASES AND CONTRACTUAL SERVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-8 , § 2, adopted June 20, 2017, amended div. 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 3, §§ 2-27—2-31, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2002-06, §§ 1—5, adopted Dec. 17, 2002; and Ord. No. 03-26, § 1, adopted Oct. 7, 2003. 
 
Sec. 2-24. - Quotes and formal solicitations. 
(a)  Informal quotes ($3,000.00 to $29,999.99). Except as provided in this division, procurement of goods or services (including leases) with an estimated value greater than or equal to $3,000.00 but less than or equal to $29,999.99 require two or more written quotes in accordance with the procedures adopted by the City. 
(b)  Formal request for quotes ($30,000.00 to $49,999.99). Except as otherwise provided in this division, procurement of goods or services (including leases) with an estimated value greater than or equal to $30,000.00 but less than or equal to $49,999.99 require a formal request for quotes which shall be posted on the City's procurement portal in an attempt to obtain two or more written quotes. The requesting department shall submit the required specifications to the Central Services Division. 
(c)  Request for formal sealed competitive solicitation ($50,000.00 or greater). Except as otherwise provided in this division, procurement of goods or services (including leases) with an estimated value greater than or equal to $50,000.00 shall require a formal sealed competitive solicitation. Such solicitations may be in the form of an invitation to bid (ITB), request for proposal (RFP), request for statement of qualifications (RFSQ), request for information (RFI) or any other formal solicitation process. 
(d)  Items may not be purchased in divided quantities to avoid the requirements of this division. For example, a department may have several similar items that are needed for their operation throughout the fiscal year and individually these items are less than $30,000.00 but in aggregate the items are in excess of $30,000.00. These items should not be split into several requisitions but should be consolidated and procured following the applicable solicitation process. 
(e)  The solicitation of competitive bids or proposals for professional services covered by the Consultants Competitive Negotiation Act (CCNA) shall be accomplished in accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 287.055. 
(f)  The solicitation of competitive bids or proposals for any City construction project that is projected to cost more than $200,000.00 shall be accomplished in accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 255.0525. 
(g)  The solicitation of competitive bids or proposals for City utility projects shall be accomplished in accordance with the provisions of F.S. ch. 180. 
( Ord. No. 2017-8 , § 2, 6-20-17)  
Sec. 2-25. - Exemptions to quotes and formal solicitations. 
(a)  Small purchases. Non-recurring purchases of goods or services under $3,000.00. 
(b)  Emergency purchase. An emergency exemption occurs when i) certain conditions might adversely affect the life, health, safety and welfare of City employees or citizens of the City, ii) when City property or equipment are endangered, iii) when it is necessary to maintain or restore vital services, or iv) situations arise which may cause major financial impact to the City should immediate action not be taken. In the case of an emergency, the City Manager, or designee may authorize certain imminent needs purchases. Those delegated the authority to implement emergency purchases are authorized to waive the bid process within their authority. A report listing all emergency purchases and the circumstances of the emergency shall be submitted to the City Council at the next Council meeting after the purchase and the termination of the emergency. It shall be the responsibility of all authorized personnel implementing this exemption to ensure such emergency purchase is accomplished in accordance with City policy and that emergency purchase procedures are invoked properly and not used solely to circumvent the regular established purchasing procedures. 
(c)  Piggybacking. Piggybacking is a procedure of procuring goods or services without the formal solicitation process by means of utilizing another public entities' award of an invitation for bid or request for proposal. This procedure includes but is not limited to piggybacks of State contracts with the State of Florida, Department of Management Services, and Division of Purchasing, SNAPS Contracts, and Federal GSA contracts. 
(1)  The City may forego the formal solicitation process by piggybacking. The award will be in accordance with all the terms and conditions, prices, time frames, and other criteria as included in the other public entities' invitation for bid or request for proposal. Additional options may be included in a procurement unless the total dollar value of the options is in excess of the City's bid limit. Expired bids cannot be piggybacked. 
(2)  The City Manager, Department Head, or designee may make purchases/awards, utilizing other public entity bids, provided the contract being piggybacked is approved by City Council, if applicable, the amounts are within the City Council approved budget and the purchase is made in the best interests of the City. For amounts within the City Manager approval authority, the City Manager must approve the piggyback or contract after review by Central Services Division Staff. For amounts within the Department Head's approval authority, the Department Head must approve the piggyback or contract after review by Central Services Division Staff. 
(d)  Sole source. Sole source purchasing is when there is only one person or company that can provide the goods and/or services needed because of the specialized or unique characteristics of the goods and/or services. 
(1)  The following criteria must be met in order to procure goods and services that are a sole source. 
a.  It is the only item that will produce the desired results (or fulfill the specific need) and, 
b.  The item is available from only one source of supply, or 
c.  The item is available from more than one vendor, but due to other circumstances (such as exclusive sales territory by manufacturer, prohibitive delivery time and cost, etc.), only one vendor is suited to provide the goods or services. 
(2)  Any purchase of goods and/or services with an estimated value greater than or equal to $30,000.00 that is intended to be purchased from a sole source, must be electronically posted for seven business days, in accordance with F.S. § 287.057(3). The notice must include a request that potential vendors provide information regarding their ability to supply the goods and/or services described. 
(3)  Purchases of good and/or services from a sole source are exempt from competitive requirements upon written approval of the City Manager, or designee and other appropriate City personnel within their expenditure authority as set forth in this section. 
(4)  The request for sole source purchases shall set forth the purpose and need, an explanation why the item will exclusively produce the desired results (or fulfill the specific need) and the criteria. Compatibility to existing equipment shall be an acceptable justification for this exemption, provided the item is only available from a sole source of supply. 
(5)  The user department and/or the buyer shall attempt to locate competition (alternate sources of supply). 
(6)  Central Services Division shall keep a log of sole source purchases, which includes the vendor name, the amount, item description, justification, and the purchase order number, which shall be filed with the City Manager and reported quarterly to the City Council. 
(7)  Central Services Division shall conduct negotiations, as appropriate, as to price, delivery, and terms. 
(e)  Special circumstances. Under circumstances where, after competitive bidding, no bids meeting bid requirements are received or all bids are rejected for failure to meet bid requirements. 
(f)  Additional exemptions. The purchase of the following goods and services is exempt from quotes and formal solicitations: 
(1)  Water, sewer, gas, electrical and other utility services; telecommunication services including, but not limited to, cable television, telephone lines, internet connectivity, data and voice circuits, voice over internet protocol ("VOIP"), cellular/wireless phones, wide area network ("WAN") connectivity, pagers, and wireless adapters for cellular data ("air cards"). 
(2)  Postage. 
(3)  Advertisements. 
(4)  Membership fees. 
(5)  Subscriptions. 
(6)  Any items covered under the City's travel policy. 
(7)  Software/technology maintenance and support renewal fees for existing software or technology licenses. 
(8)  Goods and/or services provided by governmental entities. 
( Ord. No. 2017-8 , § 2, 6-20-17)  
Sec. 2-26. - Approval requirements. 
(a)  City Council approval shall be required for all contracts and bid awards, piggybacking awards, and sole source awards with an estimated value greater than or equal to $30,000.00. 
(b)  The City Manager or designee shall have approval authority as follows: 
(1)  Any purchases less than or equal to $29,999.99; or 
(2)  Any purchases of capital items, goods and services pursuant to contracts and bid awards, piggybacking awards, and sole source awards approved by City Council and/or as set out in the annual budget as adopted by the City Council. 
(c)  Department heads or their designee shall have authority to approve purchases of capital items, goods and services less than or equal to $15,000.00, where such purchase does not exceed the item and/or department budget limit. 
(d)  Emergency purchases shall be accomplished in accordance with section 2-25(b). 
( Ord. No. 2017-8 , § 2, 6-20-17)  
Sec. 2-27. - Additional procedures/powers of city manager. 
The City Manager is hereby granted authority to adopt any and all such additional administrative policies and procedures supplemental to the provisions of this division that are in the best interests of the City, and not inconsistent with the intent of this division. 
( Ord. No. 2017-8 , § 2, 6-20-17)  
Sec. 2-28. - Disposal of surplus property. 
Surplus property may be disposed of by trade, sealed bid, donated, or sold at public auction depending on the item, its value, or other factors all as may be in accordance with law and City policy. If the surplus property is determined to be only of scrap value or have no commercial value, City staff is authorized sell the surplus property as scrap if possible, or dispose in any other appropriate manner. City Council may approve of disposal of surplus property that has commercial value by any method other than as provided herein. 
( Ord. No. 2017-8 , § 2, 6-20-17)  
Sec. 2-29. - Bid protest procedures. 
(a)  In any case where a bidder or interested bidder wishes to protest either the results of or intended disposition of any bid, the following action is required: 
(1)  The bidder or interested bidder must file a written notice to the Administrative Services and Economic Development Director explaining in detail the nature of the protest and the grounds on which it is based. This notice must be received by the Administrative Services and Economic Development Director no later than three business days after the City's notice of intent to award. At that time, the final bid award shall be delayed until the protest procedure, herein described, has been completed. 
(2)  The Administrative Services and Economic Development Director shall respond in writing to the written protest in a timely manner, determine whether the protest is with or without merit, and revise the administrative decision or recommendation, if necessary. 
(b)  In any case where a bidder, or interested bidder wishes to appeal the determination by the Administrative Services and Economic Development Director, the following action is required: 
(1)  The bidder or interested bidder must file a written appeal to the City Manager explaining in detail the nature of the appeal and the grounds on which it is based. This notice must be received by the City Manager no later than three business days after the Administrative Services and Economic Development Director's written response. At that time, the final bid award shall be delayed until the protest procedure, herein described, has been completed. Each written appeal must be accompanied by a bid protest appeal bond in the form of a certified check, cashier's check or money order made payable to the City of Palm Coast, in the amount not less than five percent of the lowest responsible bid and in amount to secure any City damages or costs arising from the appeal, to be determined by the Administrative Services and Economic Development Director. 
(2)  Upon timely receipt of the formal written protest and bid protest appeal bond, the City Manager shall respond in writing to the written appeal, determine whether the appeal is with or without merit, and revise the administrative decision or recommendation, if necessary. 
(c)  In any case where a bidder, or interested bidder wishes to appeal the determination by the City Manager, the following action is required: 
(1)  The bidder or interested bidder must file a written appeal to City Council, addressed to the City Clerk, explaining in detail the nature of the appeal and the grounds on which it is based. This notice must be received by the City Clerk no later than three business days after the date of the City Manager's written response. At that time, the final bid award shall be delayed until the protest procedure, herein described, has been completed. 
(2)  The City Clerk shall schedule the bid protest appeal to be heard at an upcoming City Council meeting and provide all relevant documents in the agenda package. 
(3)  The bidder or interested bidder must attend the scheduled City Council meeting. City staff and the bidder or interested bidder will be provided an opportunity to present evidence related to the bid protest appeal. 
(4)  At the scheduled City Council meeting, City Council will determine whether the appeal is with or without merit, and revise the administrative decision or recommendation, if necessary. 
(d)  The bid bond protest bond shall be forfeited to the City if one of the following occurs: 
(1)  The bid protest appeal is determined to be without merit or non-valid by the City Manager and no further appeal is filed; 
(2)  The bid protest appeal is determined to be without merit or non-valid by the City Council, or 
(3)  The bidder or interested bidder who filed the appeal did not attend the scheduled City Council meeting. 
( Ord. No. 2017-8 , § 2, 6-20-17)  
Sec. 2-30. - Local business preference. 
(a)  Excepted as provided in this division or as may be exempted by applicable state or federal law, a local business preference shall apply to all purchases or acquisitions of products, materials and services of the City of Palm Coast. 
(1)  Local business priority preference applies to Palm Coast persons, firms, and/or corporations, which meet the established criteria, set forth below. In all quotes and formal solicitations covered in section 2-24 of this division, qualified Palm Coast persons, firms, and/or corporations shall receive a local business preference. The local business priority preference as set forth herein shall apply and shall result in the otherwise qualified local Palm Coast business being awarded the contract, at the amount of the submitted quote or bid, if the local Palm Coast vendor's quote or bid is the next lowest bid and the bid amount is within the applicable percentage of the lowest bid submitted by a non-local business, as set forth herein. 
(2)  If the local business priority preference does not result in the Palm Coast business being awarded the contract, then the local business preference applies to Flagler County persons, firms, and/or corporations, which meet the established criteria, set forth below. In all quotes and formal solicitations covered in section 2-24 of this division, qualified persons, firms, and/or corporations shall receive a local business preference. The local business priority preference as set forth herein shall apply and shall result in the otherwise qualified local business being awarded the contract, at the amount of the submitted quote or bid, if the local vendor's quote or bid is the next lowest bid and the bid amount is within the applicable percentage of the lowest bid submitted by a non-local business, as set forth herein. 
(3)  Local business preference amounts and limit are as follows: 
a.  Five percent of the net quote or bid price up to $200,000.00 as referenced on the quote tabulation or bid price schedule. 
b.  Three percent of the net bid price above $200,000.00 as referenced on the bid price schedule. 
c.  The total local business preference shall be limited to $20,000.00 for each quote or project. 
Example: Local business bid of $250,000.00 would be provided a local business preference of $11,500.00. ((5% x $200,000.00) + (3% x $50,000.00)) 
(4)  To qualify as a Palm Coast person, firm and/or corporation, a vendor must have its headquarters, manufacturing facility, or locally-owned franchise located in, or having a street address within, the legal boundaries of the City of Palm Coast for at least one year immediately prior to the request for a quote or formal bid solicitation (Post office boxes do not qualify as a verifiable business address). 
(5)  To qualify as a Flagler County person, firm and/or corporation, a vendor must have its headquarters, manufacturing facility, or locally-owned franchise located in, or having a street address within, the legal boundaries of Flagler County for at least one year immediately prior to the request for a quote or formal bid solicitation (Post office boxes do not qualify as a verifiable business address). 
(6)  Local business preference shall not apply to: 
a.  Purchases that are funded in whole or part by assistance from any federal, state, or local agency that disallows local preference; 
b.  Purchases exempt from obtaining quotes or soliciting formal proposals or bids as described in section 2-25, Exemptions to quotes and formal solicitations. 
(7)  The local business preference established in this section does not prohibit the right of the City Council or other purchasing authority to compare quality or fitness for use of supplies, materials, equipment and services proposed for purchase and compare qualifications, character, responsibility and fitness of all persons, firms, or corporations submitting bids or proposals. 
(8)  Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the City reserves its right to reject any quote, bid, or proposal deemed non-responsive or non-responsible at any time prior to award of a contract. 
(9)  Application of local businesses preference to a particular purchase, contract, or category of contracts for which the City Council is the awarding authority may be waived upon written justification and recommendation by the City Manager and approval of the City Council. 
(10)  The local business preference established in this section does not prohibit the City Council, or other authorized purchasing authority, from giving any other preference permitted by law in addition to the local business preference. 
( Ord. No. 2017-8 , § 2, 6-20-17)  
DIVISION 4. - CITY PROCUREMENT ACTIVITIES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-05, §§ 1—4, adopted on March 21, 2006 did not specifically amend the Code; hence, at the discretion of the editor these provisions have been included as a new division 4, §§ 2-32—2-35. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 2-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Design-build contract means a single contract with a design-build firm for the design and construction of a public construction project. 
(2)  Design-build firm means a partnership, corporation, or other legal entity which: 
a.  Is certified under Section 489.119, Florida Statutes, to engage in contracting through a certified or registered general contractor or a certified or registered building contractor as the qualifying agent; and 
b.  Is certified under Section 471.023, Florida Statutes, to practice or to offer to practice engineering, certified under Section 481.219, Florida Statutes, to practice or to offer to practice architecture, or certified under Section 481.319, Florida Statutes, to practice or to offer to practice landscape architecture. 
(3)  Design criteria package means concise, performance-oriented drawings or specifications of the public construction project. The purpose of the design criteria package is to furnish sufficient information so as to permit design-build firms to prepare a bid or a response to a request for proposal, or to permit the City to enter into a negotiated design-build contract. The design criteria package shall specify such performance-based criteria for the public construction project, including, but not limited to, the legal description of the site, survey information concerning the site, interior space requirements, material quality standards, schematic layouts and conceptual design criteria of the project, cost or budget estimates, design and construction schedules, site development requirements, provisions for utilities, stormwater retention and disposal, and parking requirements, as may be applicable to the project. 
(4)  Design criteria professional means a firm who holds a current certificate of registration under Chapter 481, Florida Statutes, to practice architecture or landscape architecture, or a firm who holds a current certificate as a registered engineer under Chapter 471, Florida Statutes, to practice engineering and who is employed by or under contract to the City for the providing of professional architect services, landscape architect services, or engineering services in connection with the preparation of the design criteria package. 
(Ord. No. 06-05, § 1, 3-21-06)  
Sec. 2-33. - Evaluation team. 
For each separate project, a design-build evaluation committee shall be established to review design-build proposals, to determine the best-qualified design-build firms for specific projects, to analyze bids for design-build projects, and to recommend to the City Council the award of design-build contracts. The members of the design-build evaluation team shall be selected by the City Manager, or designee, who shall appoint the chairperson of the evaluation team. Technical advisors may assist the team, but shall be subject to the conflict provisions of Chapter 112, Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 06-05, § 2, 3-21-06)  
Sec. 2-34. - Preparation of design criteria package. 
A design criteria package shall be prepared and sealed by a design criteria professional employed by or retained by the City. If the City elects to enter into a professional services contract for the preparation of a design criteria package, then the design criteria professional shall be selected and contracted with in accordance with the requirements of Section 287.055, Florida Statutes, and the Consultants Competitive Negotiations Act. A design criteria professional who has been selected to prepare the design criteria package shall not be eligible to render services under a design-build contract executed pursuant to the design criteria package. 
(Ord. No. 06-05, § 3, 3-21-06)  
Sec. 2-35. - Rules and procedures. 
The City Manager, or designee, shall promulgate rules and procedures for the implementation of this section. The rules and procedures shall, as a minimum, provide for the following: 
(1)  The preparation of a design criteria package for the design and construction of the public construction project. 
(2)  The qualification and selection of no fewer than three design-build firms as the most qualified based on the qualifications, availability, and past work of the firms, including the partners or members thereof. 
(3)  The criteria, procedures, and standards for the evaluation of design-build contract proposals or bids, based on price, technical, and design aspects of the public construction project, weighted for the project. 
(4)  The solicitation of competitive proposals, pursuant to a design criteria package, from those qualified design-build firms and the evaluation of the responses or bids submitted by those firms based on the evaluation criteria and procedures established prior to the solicitation of competitive proposals. 
(5)  Consultation with the employed or retained design criteria professional concerning the evaluation of the responses or bids submitted by the design-build firms, the supervision or approval by the City of the detailed working drawing of the project; and for evaluation of the compliance of the project construction with the design criteria package by the design criteria professional. 
(6)  In the case of public emergencies, for the City Council to declare an emergency and authorize negotiations with the best qualified design-build firm available at that time. The failure of at least three qualified design-build firms to submit bids shall constitute a public emergency. 
(Ord. No. 06-05, § 4, 3-21-06)  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL 
 
Sec. 2-36. - Meetings. 
(a)  The City Council of the City of Palm Coast, Florida, shall meet in accordance with the provisions of the City Charter. The City Council shall hold its organizational meeting on the third Tuesday of November each year at which meeting elected or re-elected City Council members shall be inducted into office and a Vice-Mayor shall be elected. 
(b)  The City Council of the City of Palm Coast, Florida, shall meet in regular session on the first and third Tuesday of every month. The first Tuesday monthly meeting shall begin at 6:00 p.m. and the subsequent Tuesday monthly meeting (the third Tuesday) shall begin at 9:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 99-1, § I, 12-16-99; Ord. No. 00-4, § 1, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 07-18, § 1, 9-4-07; Ord. No. 2017-13 , § 2, 9-19-17)  
Sec. 2-37. - Election procedures. 
(a)  Generally. Pursuant to section 8 of the City Charter, the City Council hereby provides for election procedures to ensure the secrecy of the ballot and integrity of the poll for all City elections. 
(b)  Conduct of elections. The City Clerk shall coordinate the conduct of all City elections with the Flagler County Supervisor of Elections. All City elections shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of State law. 
(c)  Printing of ballots. The City Clerk shall coordinate the printing of ballots for any City election with the Flagler County Supervisor of Elections in accordance with the provisions of State law. 
(d)  Absentee procedures. The City Clerk shall coordinate absentee ballot procedures with the Flagler County Supervisor of Elections in accordance with the provisions of State law. 
(e)  Canvass of returns. The Flagler County Canvassing Board shall canvass the returns of all City elections held in conjunction with County elections, in accordance with the provisions of State law. 
(Ord. No. 2014-5, § 1, 2-4-14)  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY  
DIVISION 2. - EMPLOYEES 
 
Sec. 2-73. - Screening of employees, appointees and contractors, etc. 
(a)  Screening is hereby required for any position of City employment or appointment which the City Council finds is critical to security or public safety, or for any private contractor, employee of a private contractor, vendor, repair person, or delivery person who has access to any public facility or publicly operated facility that the City Council finds is critical to security or public safety. Each person applying for, or continuing employment in, any position that is found by the City Council to be critical to security or public safety, and any person who is a private contractor, employee of a private contractor, vendor, repairperson, or delivery person having access to any such facility shall be fingerprinted. Persons required to be screened in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be established by the City Council pursuant to adoption of a resolution stating the positions and persons that are subject to the screening provisions set forth herein. 
(b)  The fingerprints obtained pursuant to subsection (a) shall be submitted to the Florida Department of Law Enforcement for a State criminal history record check and to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for a national criminal history record check. 
(c)  The information obtained from the criminal history record checks conducted pursuant to this section may be used by the City to determine an applicant's eligibility for employment or appointment, to determine an employee's eligibility for continued employment, or to determine a person's access to a public facility under the control of the City Council. 
(d)  Any other background screening, including, but not limited to, criminal history background checks, which the City may lawfully undertake are not prohibited by this supplemental grant and implementation of authority. 
(Ord. No. 03-10, § 2, 5-20-03)  
DIVISION 3. - HEARING OFFICERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-24, §§ 16—18, adopted Dec. 19, 2006, amended the Code by adding provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, said provisions were included herein as §§ 2-81—2-83. 
 
Sec. 2-81. - Legislative findings. 
The City Council of the City of Palm Coast hereby finds that from time-to-time it is beneficial and desirable for various matters, arising from the provisions of the City's codes and ordinances, to be referred to hearing officers to make findings of facts and conclusions of law; to hear administrative appeals; or to hear other matters of a similar nature. 
(Ord. No. 06-24, § 16, 12-19-06)  
Sec. 2-82. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Hearing Officer means a person whom the City Council authorizes to conduct appeals or other administrative hearings. Hearing Officers must be members of The Florida Bar in good standing and have adequate experience or knowledge in the area of the matters over which they will preside and make recommendations, determinations, decisions, or findings of facts and conclusions of law, or any combination thereof. Hearing Officers shall be selected through the request for proposal process in a manner authorized by the City Attorney consistent with the City's purchasing procedures. 
(Ord. No. 06-24, § 17, 12-19-06)  
Sec. 2-83. - Referrals to Hearing Officers. 
(a)  The City Council may determine that matters will be referred to Hearing Officers for a determination, a decision, a recommendation, or findings of facts and conclusions of law, or any combination thereof, by providing for same in the provisions of an ordinance enacted or a resolution adopted by the City Council. 
(b)  The rules of procedure relating to a matter referred to a Hearing Officer shall be set forth in the ordinance or resolution providing for the involvement of Hearing Officers; provided, however, that in the absence of such rules of procedure, Hearing Officers shall conduct proceedings in accordance with the Uniform Rules of Procedure set forth in the Florida Administrative Code. 
(Ord. No. 06-24, § 18, 12-19-06)  
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS  
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES  
DIVISION 1. - CODE ENFORCEMENT BOARD  
Subdivision 1. - Generally 
 
Sec. 2-201. - Title. 
This article may be known and cited as the Code Enforcement Board ordinance of the City. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, §§ 1, 3, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 2-202. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this division to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City by authorizing the creation of administrative boards with authority to impose administrative fines and other noncriminal penalties to provide an equitable, expeditious, effective and inexpensive method of enforcing any codes and ordinances in force in the City, where a pending or repeated violation continues to exist. 
(Ord. No. 00-41, § 2, 8-1-00)  
Sec. 2-203. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Code Enforcement Officer means any designated employee or agent of a county or municipality whose duty it is to enforce codes and ordinances enacted by the county or municipality. 
Computation of time means, in computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by ordinance the day of the act, event or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
Decision or order means an administrative act of the enforcement board constituting final agency action consistent with the powers of the enforcement board as described in this article. 
Enforcement Board means the Code Enforcement Board. 
Repeat violation means a violation of a provision of a code or ordinance by a person whom the Code Enforcement Board who has been previously found through a Code Enforcement Board or any other quasi-judicial or judicial process, to have violated or who has admitted violating the same provision within five years prior to of the violation, notwithstanding the violations occur at different locations. 
Respondent or alleged violator means those persons, including both landowners and tenants, who have been issued a notice of violation. 
Violator means a person who has been ordered to correct a violation pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, §§ 1, 3, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 00-41, § 1, 8-1-00; Ord. No. 00-42, § 2, 8-1-00; Ord. No. 01-30, § 1, 11-6-01) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 2-204. - Provisions supplemental. 
It is the legislative intent of this chapter to provide an additional and supplemental means of obtaining compliance with City codes and ordinances. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the City from enforcing its codes or ordinances by any other means. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, §§ 1, 3, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 00-41, § 11, 8-1-00; Ord. No. 00-42, § 12, 8-1-00)  
Sec. 2-205. - Code Enforcement Board organization. 
(a)  Members; qualifications. The City Council shall appoint a Code Enforcement Board with seven regular members and two alternate members who shall vote only when a regular member is unable to attend a meeting or hear a particular case or does not sit during a particular time of a meeting, which alternate members may attend meetings and sit without participating or voting with regard to other hearings. Members of the Enforcement Board shall be residents of the City and appointments shall be made on the basis of experience or interest in the subject matter jurisdiction of the Code Enforcement Board in the sole discretion of the City Council. The composition of the Enforcement Board shall, whenever possible, include an architect, a business person, an engineer, a general contractor, a subcontractor and a realtor. 
(b)  Chairman; quorum; compensation. The members of the Code Enforcement Board shall elect from among its members a chair, who shall be a voting member. The presence of four or more members shall constitute a quorum of the Board. Members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for such travel, mileage and per diem expenses as may be authorized by the City Council or as otherwise provided by law. 
(c)  Counsel. Legal counsel shall be provided to the Code Enforcement Board. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, §§ 1, 3, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 00-41, § 3, 8-1-00; Ord. No. 06-23, § 2, 12-5-06; Ord. No. 07-02, § 1, 2-20-07; Ord. No. 2014-19, § 2, 10-7-14)  
Sec. 2-206. - Jurisdiction. 
The enforcement board shall have the jurisdiction and authority to hear and decide alleged violations of the codes and ordinances enacted by the City where a pending or repeated violation continues to exist, including, but not limited to the following codes: Building, electrical, environmental, fire, gas, health, landscape, plumbing, sign, zoning and any other similar type codes which may be passed by the City which regulate aesthetics, construction, environmental health, safety, or location of any structure on real property in the City. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, §§ 1, 3, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 2-207. - Powers of Code Enforcement Board. 
The Code Enforcement Board shall have the power to: 
(1)  Adopt rules for the conduct of its hearings. 
(2)  Subpoena alleged violators and witnesses to its hearings. Subpoenas may be served by the City Manager or his designee or police department of the City. 
(3)  Subpoena evidence to its hearings. 
(4)  Take testimony under oath. 
(5)  Issue orders having the force of law to command whatever steps are necessary to bring a violation into compliance. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, §§ 1, 3, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 00-41, § 4, 8-1-00) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.08.  
Sec. 2-208. - Enforcement procedure. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the code officer to initiate enforcement proceedings of the various codes and ordinances; however, no member of the Code Enforcement Board shall have the power to initiate such enforcement proceedings. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsections (c) and (d) of this section, if a violation of a code or ordinance is found, the code officer shall notify the violator and give him a reasonable time to correct the violation. If the violation continues beyond the time specified for correction, the code officer shall notify the Code Enforcement Board and request a hearing. The Code Enforcement Board, through its clerical staff, shall schedule a hearing, and written notice of the hearing shall be hand delivered or mailed as provided in section 2-209 of this article to the violator. At the option of the Code Enforcement Board, notice may additionally be served by publication as provided in section 2-209 of this article. If the violation is corrected and then recurs or if the violation is not corrected by the time specified for correction by the code officer, the case may be presented to the Code Enforcement Board even if the violation has been corrected prior to the board hearing and the notice shall so state. 
(c)  If a repeat violation is found, the code officer shall notify the violator but is not required to give the violator a reasonable time to correct the violation. The code officer, upon notifying the violator of a repeat violation, shall notify the enforcement board and request a hearing. The Code Enforcement Board, through its clerical staff, shall schedule a hearing and shall provide notice pursuant to section 2-209 of this article. The case may be presented to the Code Enforcement Board even if the repeat violation has been corrected prior to the board hearing and the notice shall so state. 
(d)  If the code officer has reason to believe a violation or the condition causing the violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible in nature, the code officer shall make reasonable effort to notify the violator and may immediately notify the Code Enforcement Board and request a hearing. 
(e)  If the owner of property which is subject to an enforcement proceeding before the board transfers ownership of the property between the time the initial pleading or notice was served and the time of the hearing, such owner shall: 
(1)  Disclose, in writing, the existence and the nature of the proceeding to the prospective transferee. 
(2)  Deliver to the prospective transferee a copy of the pleadings, notices, and other materials relating to the code enforcement proceeding received by the transferor. 
(3)  Disclose, in writing, to the prospective transferee that the new owner will be responsible for compliance with the applicable code and with orders issued in the code enforcement proceeding. 
(4)  File a notice with the code enforcement official of the transfer of the property, with the identity and address of the new owner and copies of the disclosures made to the new owner, within five days after the date of the transfer. 
A failure to make the disclosures described in paragraphs (1), (2), (3), and (4) before the transfer creates a rebuttable presumption of fraud. If the property is transferred before the hearing, the proceeding shall not be dismissed, but the new owner shall be provided a reasonable period of time to correct the violation before the hearing is held. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, §§ 1, 3, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 00-41, § 5, 8-1-00)  
Sec. 2-209. - Notices. 
(a)  All notices required by this part shall be provided to the alleged violator by: 
(1)  Certified mail, return receipt requested, provided if such notice is sent under this paragraph to the owner of the property in question at the address listed in the tax collector's office for tax notices, and at any other address provided to the local government by such owner and is returned as unclaimed or refused, notice may be provided by posting as described in subparagraphs (b)(2)a. and b. and by first class mail directed to the addresses furnished to the local government with a properly executed proof of mailing or affidavit confirming the first class mailing; 
(2)  Hand delivery by the sheriff or other law enforcement officer, code officer, or other person designated by the local governing body; 
(3)  Leaving the notice at the violator's usual place of residence with any person residing therein who is above 15 years of age and informing such Person of the contents of the notice; or 
(4)  In the case of commercial premises, leaving the notice with the manager or other person in charge. 
(b)  In addition to providing notice as set forth in subsection (a), at the option of the Code Enforcement Board, notice may also be served by publication or posting, as follows: 
(1)  a.  Such notice shall be published once during each week for four consecutive weeks (four publications being sufficient) in a newspaper of general circulation in the City where the Code Enforcement Board is located. The newspaper shall meet such requirements as are prescribed under F.S. ch. 50 for legal and official advertisements. 
b.  Proof of publication shall be made as provided in F.S. §§ 50.041 and 50.051. 
(2)  a.  In lieu of publication as described in paragraph (1)a., such notice may be posted at least ten days prior to the hearing, or prior to the expiration of any deadline contained in the notice, in at least two locations, one of which shall be the property upon which the violation is alleged to exist and the other of which shall be, in the case of municipalities, at the primary municipal government office, and in the case of counties, at the front door of the courthouse in said City. 
b.  Proof of posting shall be by affidavit of the person posting the notice, which affidavit shall include a copy of the notice posted and the date and places of its posting. 
(3)  Notice by publication or posting may run concurrently with, or may follow, an attempt or attempts to provide notice by hand delivery or by mail as required under subsection (a). 
Evidence that an attempt has been made to hand deliver or mail notice as provided in subsection (a), together with proof of publication or posting as provided in subsection (b), shall be sufficient to show that the notice requirements of this part have been met, without regard to whether or not the alleged violator actually received such notice. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, §§ 1, 3, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 00-41, § 10, 8-1-00)  
Sec. 2-210. - Conduct of hearing. 
(a)  Upon request of the code officer or at such other times as may be necessary, the chairman of the Code Enforcement Board may schedule a hearing of the Code Enforcement Board; hearings may also be called by written notice, signed by at least three members of the board. Written notice of such hearings shall be given in the manner set forth in section 2-209 of this article, which notice shall state an exact date, time and place for the hearing, and shall give at least ten days' notice of the hearing. The board shall meet at least annually for the purpose of electing a chairman. Minutes shall be kept of all hearings, and all hearings and proceedings shall be open to the public. The City Council shall provide clerical and administrative personnel as may be reasonably required by the board. 
(b)  Each case before the board shall be presented by the code officer designated by the City Manager, unless special legal counsel has been appointed for the prosecution of a particular violation. If the City prevails in prosecuting a case before the Code Enforcement Board, it shall be entitled to recover all costs incurred in prosecuting the case before the board and such costs may be included in the lien authorized under section 2-211 of this article. 
(c)  The Code Enforcement Board shall proceed to hear the cases on the agenda for the day. All testimony shall be under oath and shall be recorded. The board shall take testimony from the code officer and alleged violator. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but fundamental due process shall be observed and govern the proceedings. 
(d)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the Code Enforcement Board shall issue findings of fact, based on evidence of record and conclusions of law, and shall issue an order affording the proper relief consistent with powers granted in this subdivision. The finding shall be by motion approved by a majority of those present and voting, except that at least four members of the Code Enforcement Board must vote for the action to be official. The order may include a notice that it must be complied with by a specified date and that a fine may be imposed and, under the conditions specified in section 2-211 of this article the cost of repairs may be included along with the fine if the order is not complied with by the specified date. A certified copy of such order may be recorded in the public records of Flagler County and shall constitute notice to any subsequent purchasers, successors in interest or assigns if the violation concerns real property, and the findings therein shall be binding upon the violator and, if the violation concerns real property, any subsequent purchasers, successors in interest or assigns. If an order is recorded in the public records pursuant to this subsection and the order is complied with by the date specified in the order, the Code Enforcement Board shall issue an order acknowledging compliance that shall be recorded in the public records. A hearing is not required to issue such an order acknowledging compliance. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, §§ 1, 3, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 00-41, § 6, 8-1-00) 
State Law reference— Conduct of hearing, F.S. § 162.07.  
Sec. 2-211. - Administrative fines and liens. 
(a)  The Code Enforcement Board, upon notification by the code officer that an order of the Board has not been complied with by the set time or, upon finding that a repeat violation has been committed, may order the violator to pay a fine in an amount specified in this section for each day the violation continues past the date set by the Board for compliance, or, in the case of a repeat violation, for each day the repeat violation continues, beginning with the date the repeat violation is found to have occurred by the Code Officer. In addition, the City may be awarded all reasonable costs of the proceeding and, if the violation is a violation described in subsection 2-208(d) of this article, the Board shall notify the City Council, which may make all reasonable repairs which are required to bring the property into compliance and charge the violator with the reasonable cost of the repairs along with the fine imposed pursuant to this section. Making such repairs does not create a continuing obligation on the part of the City to make further repairs or maintain the property and it does not create any liability against the City for any damages to the property if such repairs were completed in good faith. If a finding of a violation or a repeat violation has been made as provided in this division, a hearing shall not be necessary for issuance of the order imposing the fine. If, after due notice and hearing, the Code Enforcement Board finds violation to be irreparable or irreversible in nature, it may order the violator to pay a fine as specified in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  A fine imposed pursuant to this section shall not exceed $1,000.00 per day for a first violation and shall not exceed $5,000.00 per day for a repeat violation and, in addition, may include all costs of repairs pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. However, if the Code Enforcement Board finds the violation to be irreparable or irreversible in nature, it may impose a fine not to exceed $15,000.00 per violation. 
(c)  In determining the amount of the fine, if any, the Code Enforcement Board shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  The gravity of the violation. 
(2)  Any actions taken by the violator to correct the violation. 
(3)  Any previous violations committed by the violator. 
(d)  The Code Enforcement Board may reduce a fine imposed pursuant to this section, but may not reduce or satisfy liens in favor of the City. 
(e)  A certified copy of an order imposing a fine may be recorded in the public records of Flagler County and thereafter shall constitute a lien against the land on which the violation exists and upon any other real or personal property owned by the violator. All liens filed by the Code Enforcement Board shall be liens co-equal with the lien of all state, County, City, district and municipal taxes, superior in dignity to all other liens, titles, and claims, until paid or extinguished. Upon petition to the circuit court, the order may be enforced in the same manner as a court judgment by the sheriffs of this state, including levy against the personal property, but such order shall not be deemed to be a court judgment except for enforcement purposes. A fine imposed pursuant to this section shall continue to accrue until the violator comes into compliance or until judgment is rendered in a suit to foreclose on a lien filed pursuant to this section, whichever occurs first. A lien arising from a fine imposed pursuant to this section runs in favor of the City Council and the City Council may execute a satisfaction or release of lien entered pursuant to this section. After three months from the filing of any such lien which remains unpaid, the Code Enforcement Board may authorize the attorney to foreclose on the lien. No lien created pursuant to the provisions of this division may be foreclosed on real property which is a homestead under Section 4, Art. X of the State Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, §§ 1, 3, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 00-41, § 7, 8-1-00; Ord. No. 05-44, § 1, 10-18-05) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.09.  
Sec. 2-212. - Duration of lien. 
No lien provided for under this division shall continue for a period longer than 20 years after the certified copy of an order imposing a fine has been recorded, unless within that time an action to foreclose on the lien is commenced in a court of competent jurisdiction. In an action to foreclose on a lien, the prevailing party is entitled to recover all costs, including a reasonable attorney's fee that it incurs in the foreclosure. The City Council shall be entitled to collect all costs incurred in recording and satisfying a valid lien. The continuation of the lien effected by the commencement of the action shall not be good against creditors or subsequent purchasers for valuable consideration without notice, unless a notice of lis pendens is recorded. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, §§ 1, 3, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 00-41, § 8, 8-1-00) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, F.S. § 162.10.  
Sec. 2-213. - Appeal. 
An aggrieved party, including the City, may appeal a final administrative order of the Code Enforcement Board to the circuit court. Such an appeal shall not be a hearing de novo but shall be limited to appellate review of the record created before the Code Enforcement Board. An appeal shall be filed within 30 days of the execution of the order to be appealed. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, §§ 1, 3, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 00-41, § 9, 8-1-00) 
State Law reference— Appeals, F.S. § 162.11.  
Sec. 2-214. - Application for satisfaction or release of code enforcement liens. 
Where a certified copy of an order imposing a penalty or fine, as described above in section 2-211, has been recorded in the public records and has become a lien against the land and/or property of the violator/property owner, such violator/property owner may apply for a satisfaction or release of such lien as follows: 
(a)  Upon full payment by the violator/property owner of the fine or penalty imposed in accordance with this section, the City Manager or designee is hereby authorized to execute and record a satisfaction of lien. 
(b)  Upon request for a reduction or forgiveness of a fine or penalty imposed in accordance with this chapter, the violator/property owner shall submit a written application to the City Manager or designee. 
(c)  The application shall include the following: 
(1)  A copy of the order imposing a lien upon the property; 
(2)  The code enforcement case number; 
(3)  The date upon which the violator/property owner brought the subject property into compliance with the City Code; 
(4)  The factual basis upon which the violator/property owner believes the application for reduction or forgiveness of the lien should be granted; 
(5)  The terms upon which the violator/property owner believes a satisfaction or release of lien should be granted; 
(6)  The reasons, if any, compliance was not obtained prior to the order of penalty of fine being recorded; and 
(7)  The amount of the reduction in penalty or fine sought by the violator/property owner; 
(8)  This application shall be executed under oath and sworn to in the presence of a notary public. 
(d)  Upon receipt of the application for satisfaction or release of lien and payment provided above, the City Manager or designee shall confirm through the Code Enforcement Office that the violation which resulted in the order imposing penalty or fine has been brought into compliance. 
(e)  The City Manager or designee shall then review and consider the application for satisfaction or release of lien for the threshold criteria as follows: 
(1)  If a property owner has purchased property on which a lien was recorded, a waiver or reduction on lien shall not be granted as in such cases, the lien should have been considered in reaching a purchase price, or 
(2)  If a title insurance policy is issued upon the purchase of the property and the title insurance policy failed to identify or consider the lien, a waiver of reduction in lien shall not be granted. In such cases, the lien should have been discovered by the title insurer and providing a reduction of waiver would place the City in the position of indemnifying the title insurer against its losses, which losses should be reflected in premium charges, or 
(3)  A request for waiver or reduction in lien shall not be granted if the City Council has previously reduced the amount of lien. This statement applies whether or not the request is received from the original applicant for reduction or a subsequent applicant. 
(f)  If the City Manager or designee determines that the request fails any one of the above-established guidelines, the City Manager or designee shall issue a written denial of the request. If the applicant wishes to appeal the City Manager's decision to the City Council, the applicant may do so by filing a written appeal with the City Manager stating why the City Council should make an exception to its established guidelines and reduce or waive the lien. Upon proper appeal, the City Manager shall present the information to the City Council at a regular meeting for their consideration and final determination. 
(g)  If the City Manager or designee determines that the request does not fall under any one of the above-established guidelines, the City Manager or designee shall review the request further. The City Manager or designee, in determining its recommendations, shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  The gravity of the violation; 
(2)  The time in which it took the violator/property owner to come into compliance; 
(3)  The accrued amount of the code enforcement lien; as compared to the value of the property and 
(4)  Any previous code violations. 
(h)  The City Manager or designee shall place the application for satisfaction or release of lien upon the agenda of the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting. The City Council may take action based solely upon the sworn application, recommendation of the City Manager or designee and the applicant shall have opportunity to address the City Council as to the factors warranting reduction or waiver of lien in considering the application for satisfaction or release of lien. 
(i)  The City Council may reduce the amount of the lien, waive the full amount of the lien or continue the lien in its full amount. 
(j)  When a lien is satisfied as a result of full payment, reduced payment or waiver as ordered by the City Council, the City shall record the satisfaction/release of lien in the Public Records of Flagler County, Florida and provide a copy to the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 06-08, § 2, 6-6-06)  
Subdivision 2. - Civil Citation System 
 
Sec. 2-221. - Intent. 
The City hereby creates a supplemental and additional method of enforcing its codes and ordinances by the issuance of citations for violation of City codes or ordinances. The provisions of this article may be used for the enforcement of any City code or ordinance, or for the enforcement of all City codes and ordinances as provided by law. Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the City from enforcing its codes or ordinances by another other means. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, §§ 1, 3, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 00-42, § 1, 8-1-00)  
Sec. 2-222. - Designation of Code Enforcement Officers. 
The City Manager is authorized to designate certain City employees or agents as Code Enforcement Officers. The training and qualifications of the employees or agents designated as Code Enforcement Officers shall be determined by the City Manager. Designation as a Code Enforcement Officer does not provide the Code Enforcement Officer with the power to arrest or subject the Code Enforcement Officer to the provisions of F.S. §§ 943-085 and 943.255. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, §§ 1, 3, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 00-42, § 3, 8-1-00)  
Sec. 2-223. - Authority of Code Enforcement Officers. 
All Code Enforcement Officers are authorized to issue a citation to a person when, based upon personal investigation, the Code Enforcement Officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person has committed a civil infraction in violation of a City code or ordinance and that the County Court will hear the charge. Code Enforcement Officers shall have the authority to issue citations to any person who obstructs or hinders a Code Enforcement Officer from performing the responsibilities of a Code Enforcement Officer. A Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to issue a order and may issue a citation to any person who willfully refuses to comply with a order. A citation for refusing to may be issued without a warning notice. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, §§ 1, 3, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 00-42, § 4, 8-1-00; Ord. No. 01-30, § 2, 11-6-01)  
Sec. 2-224. - Citation procedures. 
Prior to issuing a citation, a Code Enforcement Officer shall provide a warning notice to the person that the person has committed a violation of a code or ordinance and shall establish a reasonable time period within which the person must correct the violation except as provided in the City Parking Ordinance. Such time period shall be no more than 30 days. If, upon personal investigation, a Code Enforcement Officer finds that a person has not corrected the violation within the time period, a Code Enforcement Officer may issue a citation to a person who has committed the violation. A Code Enforcement Officer is not required to provide the person with a reasonable time period to correct the violation prior to issuing a citation and may immediately issue a citation if the Code Enforcement Officer has reason to believe that the violation presents a serious threat to the public health, safety or welfare, or if the violation is irreparable or irreversible. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, §§ 1, 3, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 00-42, § 5, 8-1-00; Ord. No. 01-30, § 3, 11-6-01)  
Sec. 2-225. - Delivery of warning notices and citations. 
(a)  A copy of warning notices and citations shall be provided to the alleged violator by hand delivery by the Code Enforcement Officer. In the absence of the alleged violator, the warning notice or citation shall be delivered to the alleged violator by leaving a copy of the warning notice or citation at the alleged violator's usual place of residence with any person residing therein who is above 15 years of age and informing such person of the contents of the warning notice or citation or the warning notice or citation shall be provided by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(b)  Issuance of a warning notice or citation to a person doing business may be accomplished by leaving a copy at the person's place of business, during regular business hours, with any employee and informing the employee of the contents or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. Each employee of a person doing business shall be deemed to be an agent of the person doing business for service of warning notices and citations. 
(c)  Whenever an alleged violator is required to do some act within a prescribed period after a warning notice or citation is delivered by mail, three days shall be added to the prescribed period. 
(Ord. No. 00-42, § 6, 8-1-00)  
Sec. 2-226. - Violation classification and civil penalty. 
(a)  (1)  Violations of City codes or ordinances and the applicable civil penalties shall be classified as follows: 
Violation Classification 	Civil Penalty 
Class I 	$50.00 
Class II 	100.00 
Class III 	200.00 
Class IV 	250.00 
 
(2)  City Codes and ordinances subsequently enacted or amended may set forth the applicable civil penalty for violations by designating the appropriate violation classification. 
(b)  Each violation of a City Code or ordinance in the schedule of violations in section 2-227, herein, is a separate civil infraction. Each day such violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate civil infraction. 
(c)  Civil penalties received by the City Clerk from violators of City codes or ordinances shall be paid into the general fund of the City. Court costs shall be retained by the clerk of the circuit court. The civil penalties set forth above include said court costs. 
(Ord. No. 00-42, § 7, 8-1-00; Ord. No. 01-30, § 4, 11-6-01; Ord. No. 2018-16 , § 2, 8-7-18)  
Sec. 2-227. - Schedule of violations. 
(a)  Violation of the following City codes or ordinances is a civil infraction for which a citation may be issued: 
Code Requirement 	Class 
Violation of convenience business security standards 	III 
Violation of land development code regulations 	II 
Abandoned refrigerators 	I 
Abandoned vehicles 	I 
Wrecked or discarded vehicles 	I 
Disabled vehicle violations 	I 
Illegal parking of vehicles over one ton 	I 
Other parking violations 	I 
Parking in fire lane 	I 
Parking on the lawn 	I 
Recreational vehicle parking violations 	I 
Solid waste, junk and trash violations 	I 
Collecting solid waste without franchise agreement 	III 
Container or refuse bins required 	I 
Placement, containment and bundling of solid waste violations 	I 
Animal control and protection ordinance violations 	I 
Interference with an animal control officer or sheriff's deputy 	III 
Animal running at large 	I 
Animal creating a nuisance 	I 
Failure to restrain animal in an open vehicle 	I 
Failure to license an animal 	I 
Failure to vaccinate animal 	I 
Animal not wearing tag 	I 
Failure to confine dog/cat in heat 	I 
Failure to remove dog waste 	I 
Cruelty to animal 	II 
Failure to register dangerous dog 	II 
Failure to confine, restrain or maintain a dangerous dog 	III 
Lawn maintenance violations 	I 
Loud noise prohibited 	I 
Specific noise violations 	I 
Nuisances and property maintenance violations 	I 
Failure to comply with architectural and aesthetic regulations 	II 
Garage sale violations 	I 
Failure to obtain a building permit 	IV 
Failure to obtain a right-of-way use permit 	III 
Violations of right-of-way utilization regulations 	I 
Failure to post uniform building number 	I 
Watering violations 	I 
Adult bookstores and adult entertainment violations 	IV 
Failure to maintain landscaping 	II 
Failure to have valid City occupational license 	II 
Boat speed violations 	II 
Alcoholic beverages violations (in parks) 	I 
Hours of sale, service or consumption of alcohol violations 	II 
Violations of music or entertainment festival regulations 	IV 
Conduct at recreational facilities 	I 
Standard fire prevention code violations 	II 
Alarm system violations 	I 
Violation of drainage regulations 	I 
Unlawful discharge into storm drainage system 	II 
Pollution control violations 	IV 
Protection of surface water bodies violation 	II 
Violation of flood damage protection regulations 	II 
Violation of fair housing code 	IV 
Violation of cable TV franchise regulations 	III 
Violation of the synthetic marijuana and bath salts 	IV 
Violation of handicapped parking 	IV 
 
(b)  The citations issued pursuant to this chapter may be contested to the City's Hearing Officer, pursuant to this section and section 44-38, City Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 00-42, § 8, 8-1-00; Ord. No. 01-30, § 5, 11-6-01; Ord. No. 08-24, § 2, 11-4-08; Ord. No. 2012-10, § 3, 10-2-12; Ord. No. 2018-16 , § 3, 8-7-18)  
Sec. 2-228. - Procedures to pay or contest citations. 
(a)  Any person cited for a violation under this chapter shall, within 30 days of issuance of the citation: 
(1)  Pay the civil penalty set forth in the schedule of violations at City Hall in the City of Palm Coast; or 
(2)  Contact City Hall, City of Palm Coast, to schedule a court date to contest the citation in County Court. 
(b)  If the person cited pays the civil penalty as provided in subsection (a)(1) of this section, he shall be deemed to have admitted the civil infraction and to have waived his right to a hearing to contest the citation. 
(c)  If the person cited receives a court date as provided in subsection (a)(2) of this section, he shall appear on said court date to contest the citation in County Court and he shall be deemed to have waived his right to the civil penalty set forth in the schedule of violations and shall be subject for each violation to the maximum civil penalty which shall not exceed $500.00 plus any applicable court costs. 
(d)  If the person cited fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed, or fails to appear in court to contest the citation, he shall be deemed to have waived his right to contest the citation and judgment may be entered against the person for each violation for an amount up to the maximum civil penalty not to exceed $500.00 plus any applicable court costs. 
(e)  Any person who willfully refuses to sign and accept a citation issued by a Code Enforcement Officer or refuses to provide the information required in the citation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided in F. S. § 775.082 or § 775.083. 
(Ord. No. 00-42, § 9, 8-1-00; Ord. No. 01-30, § 6, 11-6-01)  
Sec. 2-229. - Citation contents. 
The citation issued by the Code Enforcement Officer shall be in a form prescribed by the City and shall contain: 
(1)  The date and time of issuance. 
(2)  The name and address of the person to whom the citation is issued. 
(3)  The date and time the civil infraction was committed. 
(4)  The facts constituting reasonable cause. 
(5)  The number or section of the code or ordinance violated. 
(6)  The name and authority of the Code Enforcement Officer. 
(7)  The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay the civil penalty or to contest the citation. 
(8)  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects not to contest the citation. 
(9)  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects to contest the citation. 
(10)  A conspicuous statement that if the person fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed, or fails to appear in court to contest the citation, he shall be deemed to have waived his right to contest the citation and that, in such case, judgment may be entered against the person for an amount up to the maximum civil penalty. 
(Ord. No. 00-42, § 10, 8-1-00)  
Sec. 2-230. - Disposition of citations and civil penalties. 
(a)  After issuing a citation to an alleged violator, the Code Enforcement Officer shall deposit the original citation and one copy of the citation with the City Clerk; 
(b)  Provide the alleged violator with one copy; and 
(c)  Retain one copy in the Code Enforcement Officer's department file; 
(d)  All civil penalties received by the County Court from violators of City codes or ordinances shall be paid into the general fund of the City. All court costs shall be retained by the Clerk of the Circuit Court. 
(Ord. No. 00-42, § 11, 8-1-00; Ord. No. 01-30, § 7, 11-6-01)  
Subdivision 3. - Inspection Warrants 
 
Sec. 2-236. - Denial of access. 
(a)  No person shall refuse reasonable entry or access to a Code Enforcement Officer who, based upon reasonable cause, requests entry for purposes of inspection and who presents appropriate credentials. Reasonable cause for this purpose shall mean whether under the facts as known, the Code Enforcement Officer reasonably believes that an infraction has been committed given the officer's observations, information, and experience at the time entry is sought. If entry or access is denied, the Code Enforcement Officer may initiate procedures for the issuance of an inspection warrant, as provided herein. 
(b)  If access is voluntarily granted upon the Code Enforcement Officer's initial request for entry for purposes of inspection, the owner or operator of the premises shall receive a report, if requested, setting forth facts found which relate to compliance status. The Code Enforcement Officer shall inform the owner or operator of the right to receive such a report at the time of entry. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, §§ 1, 3, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 2-237. - Authorization. 
An inspection warrant may be issued by any judge, including any Circuit Judge for the Seventh Judicial Circuit or any County Court Judge for the County, upon affidavit being made by a Code Enforcement Officer. The inspection warrant request with affidavit shall be presented to the court by the City Attorney or his designee. The inspection warrant signed by a judge shall authorize a Code Enforcement Officer to conduct an inspection of the stated premises. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, §§ 1, 3, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 2-238. - Requirements for issuance. 
An inspection warrant shall be issued based upon cause. The affidavit of the Code Enforcement Officer shall particularly describe the place, dwelling, structure or premises to be inspected and the purpose for which the inspection is to be made. In addition, the affidavit shall also contain a statement that consent to inspect was sought but refused, consent to inspect was sought but was unobtainable, or setting forth facts or circumstances reasonably justifying the failure to seek such consent. In addition, the affidavit may contain a request to execute the warrant if the owner or the occupant at the premises sought to be investigated refuses access. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, §§ 1, 3, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 2-239. - Content of warrant. 
If the judge is satisfied that cause for the inspection exists, the judge may issue the warrant which describes the place, dwelling, structure or premises to be inspected and designating on the warrant the purpose and limitations of the inspection, including the duration of the warrant and whether execution of the warrant may proceed with or without actual notice, as provided for in section 9-65 below. The warrant shall not be effective for a period of more than 14 days. The Code Enforcement Officer must execute and return the warrant to the judge within the time frame provided in the warrant. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, §§ 1, 3, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 2-240. - Conduct of inspection. 
(a)  The inspection authorized by the warrant shall not proceed after 6:00 p.m. and before 8:00 a.m. of any day; nor on Saturday, Sunday or any legal holiday; nor in the absence of the owner of the property or an occupant who is at least 18 years old, unless the judge specifically authorizes such action in the warrant, in order to effectuate the purpose of the ordinance or code provision being investigated. 
(b)  Prior to execution of the warrant, the Code Enforcement Officer shall provide the owner of the premises to be inspected with notice of such inspection. The Code Enforcement Officer shall provide notice of the warrant by first attempting to hand deliver the warrant to the owner of the premises or an occupant at least 18 years old at the premises to be inspected. If hand delivery is unsuccessful, the Code Enforcement Officer shall post the warrant on the premises to be inspected at least 24 hours before the warrant is executed. 
(c)  Execution of the warrant may commence immediately upon hand delivery of the warrant on the owner of the premises or an occupant at least 18 years old. If notice is provided by posting, execution of the warrant may commence 24 hours after posting. 
(d)  Notice, either by hand delivery or by posting, is not required if the judge determines, as provided in the warrant, that the violation of an ordinance or code presents an immediate and serious threat to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City. Under these circumstances, the Code Enforcement Officer shall attempt to provide notice by hand delivery; however, if notice by hand delivery is unsuccessful, the Code Enforcement Officer may execute the warrant and inspect the premises without posting. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, §§ 1, 3, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 2-241. - Refusal of entry. 
Any person who willfully refuses to permit an inspection authorized by an inspection warrant is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. In addition, such person may also be cited for obstructing a Code Enforcement Officer. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, §§ 1, 3, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 2-242. - Malicious issuance. 
Any person or Code Enforcement Officer who maliciously, or with knowledge that cause to issue an inspection warrant does not exist, causes the issuance of an inspection warrant by executing a supporting affidavit or by directing or requesting another to execute a supporting affidavit or who maliciously causes an inspection warrant to be executed and served for purposes other than the enforcement of the City's ordinances and Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, §§ 1, 3, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 2-243. - Use of information from inspection. 
A Code Enforcement Officer shall not give information as a confidential informer, shall not testify as a witness, and shall not execute an affidavit as a predicate for the issuance of a criminal search warrant if the Code Enforcement Officer learned of or obtained such information during an inspection pursuant to a warrant issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, §§ 1, 3, 3-7-00)  
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-01, § 1, adopted on January 15, 2008 repealed division 2, §§ 2-261—2-264, in its entirety. The former division 2 pertained to construction board of adjustments and appeals. See also the Code Comparative Table.  
DIVISION 3. - LEISURE SERVICES ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 2-276. - Title. 
This division shall be known as the Leisure Services Advisory Committee (LSAC) Ordinance of the City of Palm Coast. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § 1, 2-6-01)  
Sec. 2-277. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the City of Palm Coast Leisure Services Advisory Committee is to consult with the City Department of Recreation and Parks, Department of Public Works, Department of Development Services, Flagler County and the municipalities within Flagler County and advise and make recommendations to the City Council, City Manager and the Director of Recreation and Parks on matters relating to the arts, culture, recreation and parks activities, and open space needs. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § 2, 2-6-01)  
Sec. 2-278. - Leisure Services Advisory Committee organization. 
(a)  Members; qualifications. The City Council shall appoint a Leisure Services Advisory Committee with seven members. 
(b)  Chair, quorum; compensation. The members of the Leisure Services Advisory Committee shall elect from among its members a chair and a vice-chair, who shall be voting members. The presence of four or more members shall constitute a quorum of the committee. Members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for such travel, mileage and per diem expenses as may be authorized or as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § 3, 2-6-01; Ord. No. 06-23, § 4, 12-5-06)  
Sec. 2-279. - References and procedures. 
(a)  The Leisure Services Advisory Committee is empowered and directed to consider and study the entire field of arts, cultural, recreation and parks activities and open space in the City, and shall advise, counsel and consult with the City Council and the City Manager in connection with all arts, cultural, recreation and parks activities and open space of the City. The Leisure Services Advisory Committee shall consider all matters submitted to it by the City Council or the City Manager or designee, and shall offer suggestions and recommendations on its own initiative in regard to the arts, cultural, recreation and parks activities and open space needs use of City properties in that regard. It shall receive petitions and suggestions from the citizens of the City, and shall cooperate with citizen groups, civic clubs, governmental agencies and other organizations regarding the arts, cultural, recreation and parks activities and open space needs. 
(b)  The Leisure Services Advisory Committee shall recommend to the City Council such overall projects as seem warranted, but shall not concern itself with the day-to-day affairs of normal City functions. 
(c)  Staff support to the Leisure Services Advisory Committee shall be provided by the Recreation and Parks Manager's Office. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § 4, 2-6-01)  
DIVISION 4. - PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION BOARD 
 
Sec. 2-296. - Creation. 
(a)  PLDRB created. A Planning and Land Development Regulation Board is hereby created. The jurisdiction of the board shall be throughout the corporate limits of the City. It shall have the following membership, powers, duties, responsibilities and limitations. 
(b)  Membership of representative appointed by the Flagler County School District. One member of the board shall be appointed by the Flagler County School District acting through the Flagler County School Board. The member shall not be a voting member of the board. The member shall not count with regard to the establishment of a quorum or count with regard to any requirement relating to the number of board members required to approve, deny or take action on any matter. The member shall sit with the board when the board reviews applications or proposals for changing the zoning classification or land use designation on properties which actions would, if approved, potentially increase residential density on the property sought to be rezoned or changed relative to the land use designation assigned to the property. The member shall serve at the pleasure of the Flagler County School District which shall advise the City Council of appointments in an appropriate manner. 
(c)  Membership. The City Council shall appoint a Planning and Land Development Regulation Board with seven regular members and two alternate members. Alternate members shall vote only when a regular member is unable to attend a meeting, hear a particular case, or is absent during a vote at a meeting. Alternate members may attend any meeting and sit without participating or voting unless they are required to vote as provided herein. No elected official or employee of the City government shall be appointed to serve on the board. 
(d)  Officers, employees. The board shall elect a chair, vice-chair and secretary from among its members. The Community Development Department shall provide clerical and staff assistance. The board shall meet at regular monthly intervals, and at such other times as it may deem necessary, for the transaction of its business. A quorum shall be four members. 
(Ord. No. 00-39, § 1, 8-1-00; Ord. No. 03-01, § 1, 1-7-03; Ord. No. 06-23, § 5, 12-5-06; Ord. No. 2019-1 , § 2, 2-19-19)  
Sec. 2-297. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The board shall hear applications from the City Council, any department or agency of City government, or from any person for amendment or special exceptions to this Code. If the proposed amendment or special exception relates to a specific area of land, it shall be heard only if it is presented by the person owning 51 percent or more of that land or upon an administrative application by the City Council.new designation-of-beneficiary form. Upon such change, the rights of all previously designated beneficiaries to receive any benefits under the system shall cease. 
(b)  If a deceased member or retiree failed to name a beneficiary in the manner prescribed in subsection (a), or if the beneficiary (or beneficiaries) named by a deceased member or retiree predeceases the member or retiree, the death benefit, if any, which may be payable under the system with respect to such deceased member or retiree, shall be paid to the estate of the member or retiree and the board, in its discretion, may direct that the commuted value of the remaining monthly income benefits be paid in a lump sum. 
(c)  Any payment made to any person pursuant to this section shall operate as a complete discharge of all obligations under the system with regard to the deceased member and any other persons with rights under the system and shall not be subject to review by anyone but shall be final, binding and conclusive on all persons ever interested hereunder.  
Sec. 2-537. - Claims procedures. 
(a)  The board shall establish administrative claims procedures to be utilized in processing written requests ("claims"), on matters which affect the substantial rights of any person ("claimant"), including members, retirees, beneficiaries, or any person affected by a decision of the board. 
(b)  The board shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents for discovery prior to and at any proceedings provided for in the board's claims procedures. The claimant may request in writing the issuance of subpoenas by the board. A reasonable fee may be charged for the issuance of any subpoenas not to exceed the fees set forth in Florida Statutes. 
( Ord. No. 2015-02 , § 1, 3-3-15)  
Sec. 2-538. - Reports to division of retirement. 
Each year and no later than March 15, the board shall file an annual report with the division of retirement containing the documents and information required by F.S. § 175.261. 
( Ord. No. 2015-02 , § 1, 3-3-15)  
Sec. 2-539. - Roster of retirees. 
The secretary of the board shall keep a record of all persons enjoying a pension under the provisions of this division in which it shall be noted the time when the pension is allowed and when the same shall cease to be paid. Additionally, the secretary shall keep a record of all members in such a manner as to show the name, address, date of employment and date of termination of employment. 
( Ord. No. 2015-02 , § 1, 3-3-15)  
Sec. 2-540. - Maximum pension. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this division to the contrary, the aggregate amount of length of service awards (including all benefits under this division, such as retirement, disability, supplemental benefits) accruing for any member under the system with respect to any year of credited service shall not exceed the limit set forth in Section 457(e)(11)(B)(ii) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
( Ord. No. 2015-02 , § 1, 3-3-15; Ord. No. 2019-07 , § 1, 4-16-19)  
Sec. 2-541. - Reserved.  
Sec. 2-542. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  System fund. Contributions shall be deposited in the fund upon receipt, and such contributions and earnings thereon shall be held and invested by the board for the purpose of providing benefits to members and retirees and their spouses or beneficiaries as prescribed by the system. 
(b)  No reduction of accrued benefits. No amendment or ordinance shall be adopted by the City Council which shall have the effect of reducing the then vested accrued benefits of members or a member's beneficiaries. 
(c)  Compliance with Code Section 457(e)(11). At all times, the system shall be administered in accordance with and construed to be consistent with Code Section 457(e)(11) and its accompanying regulations as now in effect or hereafter amended. Any modification or amendment of the system may be made retroactively, if necessary or appropriate, to qualify or maintain the system as a plan meeting the requirements of the applicable provisions of the Code as now in effect or hereafter amended, or any other applicable provisions of the U.S. federal tax laws, as now in effect or hereafter amended or adopted, and the regulations issued thereunder. 
(d)  Use of forfeitures. Forfeitures arising from terminations of service of members shall serve only to fund the system. 
(e)  USERRA. Effective December 12, 1994, notwithstanding any other provision of this system, contributions, benefits and service credit with respect to qualified military service are governed by Code Section 414(u) and the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994, as amended. To the extent that the definition of "credited service" sets forth contribution requirements that are more favorable to the member than the minimum compliance requirements, the more favorable provisions shall apply. 
(f)  Electronic forms. In those circumstances where a written election or consent is not required by the plan or the Internal Revenue Code, an oral, electronic, or telephonic form in lieu of or in addition to a written form may be prescribed by the board. 
(g)  Compliance with F.S. ch. 175. It is intended that the system will continue to qualify for funding under F.S. § 175.101, accordingly, unless otherwise required by law, any provision of the system which violates the requirements of F.S. ch. 175, as amended from time to time, shall be superseded by and administered in accordance with the requirements of such chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2015-02 , § 1, 3-3-15)  
Sec. 2-543. - Repeal or termination of system. 
(a)  This division establishing the system and fund, and subsequent ordinances pertaining to said system and fund, may be modified, terminated, or amended, in whole or in part; provided that if this or any subsequent ordinance shall be amended or repealed in its application to any person benefiting hereunder, the amount of benefits which at the time of any such alteration, amendment, or repeal shall have accrued to the member or beneficiary shall not be affected thereby. 
(b)  If this division shall be repealed, or if contributions to the system are discontinued or if there is a transfer, merger or consolidation of government units, services or functions as provided in F.S. ch. 121, the board shall continue to administer the system in accordance with the provisions of this division, for the sole benefit of the then members, any beneficiaries then receiving retirement allowances, and any future persons entitled to receive benefits under one of the options provided for in this division who are designated by any of said members. In the event of repeal, discontinuance of contributions, or transfer, merger or consolidation of government units, services or functions, there shall be full vesting (100 percent) of benefits accrued to date of repeal and such benefits shall be nonforfeitable. 
(c)  The fund shall be distributed in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The board shall determine the date of distribution and the asset value required to fund all the nonforfeitable benefits after taking into account the expenses of such distribution. The board shall inform the City if additional assets are required, in which event the City shall continue to financially support the plan until all nonforfeitable benefits have been funded. 
(2)  The board shall determine the method of distribution of the asset value, whether distribution shall be by payment in cash, by the maintenance of another or substituted trust fund, by the purchase of insured annuities, or otherwise, for each firefighter entitled to benefits under the plan as specified in subsection (3). 
(3)  The board shall distribute the asset value as of the date of termination in the manner set forth in this subsection, on the basis that the amount required to provide any given retirement income is the actuarially computed single-sum value of such retirement income, except that if the method of distribution determined under subsection (2) involves the purchase of an insured annuity, the amount required to provide the given retirement income is the single premium payable for such annuity. 
(4)  If there is asset value remaining after the full distribution specified in subsection (3), and after the payment of any expenses incurred with such distribution, such excess shall be returned to the City, less return to the state of the state's contributions, provided that, if the excess is less than the total contributions made by the City and the state to date of termination of the plan, such excess shall be divided proportionately to the total contributions made by the City and the state. 
(5)  The board shall distribute, in accordance with subsection (2), the amounts determined under subsection (3). 
If, after 24 months after the date the plan terminated or the date the board received written notice that the contributions thereunder were being permanently discontinued, the City or the board of the fund affected has not complied with all the provisions in this section, the Florida Department of Management Services will affect the termination of the fund in accordance with this section. 
( Ord. No. 2015-02 , § 1, 3-3-15)  
Sec. 2-544. - Domestic relations orders; retiree directed payments; exemption from execution, non-assignability. 
(a)  Domestic relations orders. 
(1)  Prior to the entry of any domestic relations order which affects or purports to affect the system's responsibility in connection with the payment of benefits of a retiree, the member or retiree shall submit the proposed order to the board for review to determine whether the system may legally honor the order. 
(2)  If a domestic relations order is not submitted to the board for review prior to entry of the order, and the system is ordered to take action that it may not legally take, and the system expends administrative or legal fees in resolving the matter, the member or retiree who submits such an order will be required to reimburse the system for its expenses in connection with the order. 
(b)  Retiree directed payments. The board may, upon written request by a retiree or by a dependent, when authorized by a retiree or the retiree's beneficiary, authorize the system to withhold from the monthly retirement payment those funds that are necessary to pay for the benefits being received through the City, to pay the certified bargaining agent of the City, to make payments to insurance companies for insurance premiums if permitted by F.S. ch. 175, and to make any payments for child support or alimony. 
(c)  Exemption from execution, non-assignability. Except as otherwise provided by law, the pensions, annuities, or any other benefits accrued or accruing to any person under the provisions of this division and the accumulated contributions and the cash securities in the fund created under this division are hereby exempted from any state, county or municipal tax and shall not be subject to execution, attachment, garnishment or any legal process whatsoever and shall be unassignable. 
( Ord. No. 2015-02 , § 1, 3-3-15)  
Sec. 2-545. - Pension validity. 
The board shall have the power to examine into the facts upon which any pension shall heretofore have been granted under any prior or existing law, or shall hereafter be granted or obtained erroneously, fraudulently or illegally for any reason. The board is empowered to purge the pension rolls or correct the pension amount of any person heretofore granted a pension under prior or existing law or any person hereafter granted a pension under this division if the same is found to be erroneous, fraudulent or illegal for any reason; and to reclassify any person who has heretofore under any prior or existing law been or who shall hereafter under this division be erroneously, improperly or illegally classified. Any overpayments or underpayments shall be corrected and paid or repaid in a reasonable manner determined by the board. 
( Ord. No. 2015-02 , § 1, 3-3-15)  
Sec. 2-546. - Forfeiture of pension. 
(a)  Any member who is convicted of the following offenses committed prior to retirement, or whose employment is terminated by reason of his admitted commission, aid or abetment of the following specified offenses, shall forfeit all rights and benefits under this system, except for the return of his accumulated contributions as of the date of termination. Specified offenses are as follows: 
(1)  The committing, aiding or abetting of an embezzlement of public funds; 
(2)  The committing, aiding or abetting of any theft by a public officer or employee from employer; 
(3)  Bribery in connection with the employment of a public officer or employee; 
(4)  Any felony specified in F.S. ch. 838; 
(5)  The committing of an impeachable offense; 
(6)  The committing of any felony by a public officer or employee who willfully and with intent to defraud the public or the public agency, for which he acts or in which he is employed, of the right to receive the faithful performance of his duty as a public officer or employee, realizes or obtains or attempts to obtain a profit, gain, or advantage for himself or for some other person through the use or attempted use of the power, rights, privileges, duties or position of his public office or employment position; or 
(7)  The committing on or after October 1, 2008, of any felony defined in F.S. § 800.04, against a victim younger than 16 years of age, or any felony defined in F.S. ch. 794, against a victim younger than 18 years of age, by a public officer or employee through the use or attempted use of power, rights, privileges, duties, or position of his or her public office or employment position. 
(b)  Conviction shall be defined as an adjudication of guilt by a court of competent jurisdiction; a plea of guilty or a nolo contendere; a jury verdict of guilty when adjudication of guilt is withheld and the accused is placed on probation; or a conviction by the senate of an impeachable offense. 
(c)  Court shall be defined as any state or federal court of competent jurisdiction which is exercising its jurisdiction to consider a proceeding involving the alleged commission of a specified offense. Prior to forfeiture, the board shall hold a hearing on which notice shall be given to the member whose benefits are being considered for forfeiture. Said member shall be afforded the right to have an attorney present. No formal rules of evidence shall apply, but the member shall be afforded a full opportunity to present his case against forfeiture. 
(d)  Any member who has received benefits from the system in excess of his accumulated contributions after member's rights were forfeited shall be required to pay back to the fund the amount of the benefits received in excess of his accumulated contributions. The board may implement all legal action necessary to recover such funds. 
( Ord. No. 2015-02 , § 1, 3-3-15)  
Sec. 2-547. - Conviction and forfeiture; false, misleading or fraudulent statements. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a person to willfully and knowingly make, or cause to be made, or to assist, conspire with, or urge another to make, or cause to be made, any false, fraudulent, or misleading oral or written statement or withhold or conceal material information to obtain any benefit from the system. 
(b)  A person who violates subsection (a) commits a misdemeanor of the first degree, punishable as provided in F.S. §§ 775.082 or 775.083. 
(c)  In addition to any applicable criminal penalty, upon conviction for a violation described in subsection (a), a member or beneficiary of the system may, in the discretion of the board, be required to forfeit the right to receive any or all benefits to which the person would otherwise be entitled under the system. For purposes of this subsection, "conviction" means a determination of guilt that is the result of a plea or trial, regardless of whether adjudication is withheld. 
( Ord. No. 2015-02 , § 1, 3-3-15)  
Sec. 2-548. - Indemnification. 
(a)  To the extent not covered by insurance contracts in force from time to time, the City shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless members of the board from all personal liability for damages and costs, including court costs and attorneys' fees, arising out of claims, suits, litigation, or threat of same, herein referred to as "claims", against these individuals because of acts or circumstances connected with or arising out of their official duty as members of the board. The City reserves the right, in its sole discretion, to settle or not settle the claim at any time, and to appeal or to not appeal from any adverse judgment or ruling, and in either event will indemnify, defend and hold harmless any members of the board from the judgment, execution, or levy thereon. 
(b)  This division shall not be construed so as to relieve any insurance company or other entity liable to defend the claim or liable for payment of the judgment or claim, from any liability, nor does this division waive any provision of law affording the City immunity from any suit in whole or part, or waive any other substantive or procedural rights the City may have. 
(c)  This division shall not apply nor shall the City be responsible in any manner to defend or pay for claims arising out of acts or omissions of members of the board which constitute felonies or gross malfeasance or gross misfeasance in office. 
( Ord. No. 2015-02 , § 1, 3-3-15)  
Sec. 2-549. - Supplemental benefit. 
There is hereby established an additional supplemental retirement, termination, death and disability benefit to be paid in addition to the benefits provided for in the previous sections of this division, such benefit shall be funded solely and entirely by a portion of the existing excess state premium tax reserve in the amount of $1,505,738.00 ("reserve amount"), and future premium tax revenues in excess of $200,000.00, beginning with the plan year ending September 30, 2017, all of which represent premium tax monies received or to be received by the plan pursuant to F.S. ch. 175. 
(a)  Individual member share accounts. The board shall create individual share accounts for all retirees who retire on or prior to September 30, 2014 ("eligible retiree"), retirees retiring after September 30, 2014 ("recent retiree") and all current and future members, and shall maintain appropriate books and records showing the respective interest of each eligible retiree or member hereunder. Current members and members hired on or after the effective date of the ordinance adopting this provision, as well as recent retirees as provided for in subsection (c)(1), receive an allocation of the tax revenues in excess of the 2013 base amounts, forfeitures and income and expense adjustments relating thereto. Members and eligible retirees of the plan shall have a portion of the reserve amount allocated to their share account. The board shall maintain a separate membership share account for each member and eligible retiree, however, the maintenance of separate accounts is for accounting purposes only and a segregation of the assets of the trust fund to each account shall not be required or permitted. Members shall be provided annual statements setting forth their share account balance as of the end of the calendar year. 
Retirees who again become active firefighters shall be deemed new members and shall receive an allocation based solely on the credited service in the new participation period. 
(b)  Share account funding. 
(1)  Allocation of available reserve amount. An initial calculation shall be conducted to divide the reserve amount, less 20 percent of the reserve amount, such resulting amount to be known as the available reserve amount, into "unallocated reserve amounts" to be attributed to each member and eligible retiree as of September 30, 2014. Twenty percent of the reserve amount shall not be included in the calculation and shall remain in the reserve account to be used to offset any future required City funding as provided for in subsection (b)(4) below. The "available reserve amount" shall be allocated as provided for in this subsection (b)(1). 
The unallocated reserve amount to be attributed to each member and eligible retiree shall be determined as of September 30, 2014, and shall be an amount equal to a fraction of the available reserve amount, the numerator of which shall be the total years and fractional parts of years of credited service of the member or eligible retiree to whom the unallocated reserve amount is to be attributed, and the denominator of which shall be the sum of the total years and fractional parts of years of credited service of all the members and eligible retirees as of September 30, 2014. Members or eligible retirees shall have no interest in this unallocated reserve amount until such time that amounts are actually allocated to share accounts. 
(2)  Eligible retiree allocations. Effective as of December 31, 2014, and on each December 31 thereafter until all unallocated reserve amounts attributable to eligible retirees are fully allocated to share accounts, an amount shall be allocated to all eligible retiree share accounts from the available reserve amount. The amount to be allocated to each eligible retiree's share account shall be the greatest dollar amount that can be allocated to an eligible retiree from that eligible retiree's unallocated reserve amount, without exceeding the limitation set forth in Code Section 457(e)(11), as adjusted (see subsection (j) below), or the balance of the eligible retiree's unallocated reserve amount, if less, or without exceeding the amount that can be distributed to the eligible retiree as limited by section 2-540, maximum pension. Amounts allocated pursuant to this subsection shall reduce an eligible retiree's unallocated reserve amount by the amount of the allocation. Each year, upon determination of the allocation provided for in this subsection, the entire balance of the share account of the eligible retiree shall be paid in a lump sum (or rolled over if otherwise eligible) to the eligible retiree, provided that no distribution shall be made which exceeds the limits set forth in section 2-540, maximum pension and subsection (j) below. Once all allocations and distributions of the unallocated reserve amount of an eligible retiree are made pursuant to this subsection, allocation and distributions to that eligible retiree shall cease. 
(3)  Member allocations. Beginning on December 31, 2014 and on each December 31 thereafter, and subject to the limitation in subsection (j) below, individual member share accounts (but not eligible retiree accounts) shall be credited with: 
a.  Florida Statutes ch. 175, premium tax revenues received in a plan year in excess of the 2013 base amounts, if any, beginning with the plan year ending September 30, 2014, and all similar premium tax revenues received in subsequent fiscal years which exceed the 2013 base amounts shall also be allocated to member share accounts as provided for in subsection (c)(2)a., plus 
b.  A portion of the reserve amount, as calculated in subsection (b)(1) above, which will be incrementally allocated to member share accounts as provided in subsection (c)(2)b. 
c.  In addition, any forfeitures as provided in subsection (f), shall be allocated to the individual member share accounts in accordance with the formula set forth in subsection (c)(2)a. 
d.  Investment gains or losses as provided in subsection (d), shall be allocated to the individual member share accounts in accordance with subsection (d). 
(4)  City reserve. Twenty percent of the reserve amount shall remain in the reserve account to be used only to reduce or eliminate any future required funding requirement of the City, as determined by the most recent actuarial valuation. 
(c)  Future allocation of F.S. ch. 175 contributions. 
(1)  Effective as of December 31, 2014, the amount of premium tax monies in excess of the 2013 base amounts, if any, of the plan year ending September 30, 2014, shall be allocated to all individual member share accounts, but not eligible retiree accounts, as provided for in this subsection. Members retiring on or after September 30, 2014 ("recent retirees") shall receive a final allocation on the next valuation date following their retirement. In addition, all premium tax monies actually received in any subsequent plan year which exceed the 2013 base amounts shall also be allocated as provided for in this subsection. All monies received from F.S. ch. 175, premium tax rebates for the previous plan year, shall be allocated to individual member and recent retiree share accounts at the end of each calendar year on December 31 (a "valuation date"). (e.g., The amount received for the plan year ending September 30, 2014 will be allocated on December 31, 2014.) 
(2)  On each valuation date, each current member of the plan and each recent retiree (not eligible retirees), beneficiary, or terminated vested person who is otherwise eligible for an allocation as of the valuation date shall receive a share allocation as follows: 
a.  The total funds subject to allocation on each valuation date in excess of the 2013 base amounts for the immediately preceding plan year shall be allocated to the share account of those members and recent retirees eligible for an allocation in an amount equal to a fraction of the total amount, the numerator of which shall be the total years and fractional parts of years of credited service as of September 30 immediately preceding the valuation date of the member or recent retiree to whom the allocation is attributable, and the denominator of which shall be the sum of the total years and fractional parts of years of credited service of all members and recent retirees to whom allocations are being made. 
b.  In addition to the allocation set forth in [subsection] a. above and after the allocation of investment gains and losses pursuant to subsection (d) below, and any allocation of forfeitures pursuant to subsection (f) below, an amount shall also be allocated from the member's or recent retiree's unallocated reserve amount to the member's or recent retiree's share account from the available reserve amount. The allocated amount shall be determined in the same manner described in subsection (b)(2) above. 
(d)  Allocation of investment gains and losses. On each valuation date, each individual member or recent retiree share account (but, not eligible retiree accounts) shall be adjusted to reflect the net earnings or losses resulting from investment during the immediately preceding plan year. The investment earnings or losses allocated to the individual member or recent retiree share accounts shall be determined prior to the allocation for that year and shall be in the same percentage as are earned or lost by the total net investment earnings or losses of the fund as a whole, net of all investment related costs, fees and expenses of the fund. No adjustment may be made that would cause the benefit to exceed the limitation in subsection (j) below. 
(e)  No right to allocation. The fact of allocation or credit of an allocation to a member's share account by the board shall not vest in any member any right, title, or interest in the assets of the trust or in F.S. ch. 175 tax revenues except at the time or times, to the extent, and subject to the terms and conditions provided in this section. All assets of the trust or in the F.S. ch. 175 tax revenues will remain solely the property and right of the City or state, as applicable, subject only the claims of the City's or state's general creditors, as applicable, until made available to the member or the member's beneficiary. 
(f)  Forfeitures. Any member who has less than five years of credited service (non-vested) and who is not otherwise eligible for payment of benefits after (1) termination of membership as a Volunteer Firefighter or (2) death, shall forfeit his individual member share account. Forfeited amounts shall be redistributed to all the other individual member accounts on each valuation date in an amount determined in accordance with subsection (c)(2)a. Unallocated reserve amounts attributable to the non-vested terminating or deceased member shall be redesignated as a plan reserve. 
(g)  Eligibility for benefits. Any member who terminates membership as a Volunteer Firefighter, upon application filed with the board, shall be entitled to be paid the value of his individual member share account, subject to the following criteria, and subject to the limitation of subsection (j) below: 
(1)  Retirement benefit. 
a.  A Member shall be entitled to 100 percent of the value of his share account upon normal or early retirement. 
b.  Such payment shall be made as provided in subsection (h). 
(2)  Termination benefit. 
a.  In the event that a member's membership as a Volunteer Firefighter is terminated by reason other than retirement, death, or disability, he shall be entitled to receive the value of his share account only if he is vested in accordance with section 2-534 and subsection (f) above. 
b.  Such payment shall be made as provided in subsection (h). 
(3)  Disability benefit. 
a.  In the event that a member is determined to be eligible for either an in-line of duty disability benefit pursuant to subsection 2-533(a), or a not-in-line of duty disability benefit pursuant to subsection 2-533(c), he shall be entitled to 100 percent of the value of his share account. 
b.  Such payment shall be made as provided in subsection (h). 
(4)  Death benefit. 
a.  In the event that a member dies while an active Volunteer Firefighter, 100 percent of the value of his share account shall be paid to his designated beneficiary as provided in section 2-536, but only if he is vested in accordance with section 2-534 and subsection (f) above. 
b.  Such payment shall be made as provided in subsection (h). 
(h)  Payment of benefits. 
(1)  Form of payment. If a member terminates membership as a Volunteer Firefighter for any reason and is otherwise entitled to receive all or a portion of the balance in the member's share account, the member's share account shall be valued on the next valuation date as provided for in subsection (c) above, following termination of membership. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (j) below, payment of the calculated share account balance shall be payable in one lump sum payment and only upon written request of the member on forms designated by the board. No optional forms of payments shall be permitted. 
(2)  Unallocated reserve amounts. In the event that a member or recent retiree retires or terminates participation as a firefighter and has not received an allocation to his share account of the full amount of his unallocated reserve amount, allocations of the unallocated reserve amount attributed to such person shall continue to be allocated in the same manner as for eligible retirees as provided for in subsection (b)(2) until the remaining balance of the unallocated reserve amount is allocated and distributed to such person as provided for in subsection (b)(2), subject to the limitation of subsection (j) below. 
(i)  Benefits not guaranteed. All benefits payable under this section 2-549 shall be paid only from the assets accounted for in individual member share accounts. Neither the City nor the board shall have any duty or liability to furnish any additional funds, securities or other assets to fund share account benefits. Neither the board nor any trustee shall be liable for the making, retention, or sale of any investment or reinvestment made as herein provided, nor for any loss or diminishment of the share account balances, except due to his or its own negligence, willful misconduct or lack of good faith. All investments shall be made by the board subject to the restrictions otherwise applicable to fund investments. 
(j)  Maximum benefit. Notwithstanding any provision of this division to the contrary, the aggregate amount of length of service awards (including all benefits under this division, such as retirement, disability, supplemental benefits) accruing for any member under the system with respect to any year of credited service shall not exceed the limit set forth in Section 457(e)(11)(B)(ii) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
( Ord. No. 2015-02 , § 1, 3-3-15; Ord. No. 2015-10 , § 1, 8-4-15; Ord. No. 2017-21 , § 1, 11-21-17; Ord. No. 2019-07 , § 2, 4-16-19)  
Sec. 2-550. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - LAW ENFORCEMENT UNIT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-21, § 1, adopted Nov. 21, 2006, amended the Code by adding provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, said provisions were included herein as § 2-751. 
 
Sec. 2-751. - Creation of Municipal Law Enforcement Unit; implementing administrative actions. 
(a)  A City of Palm Coast Law Enforcement Unit is hereby created. The City's Law Enforcement Coordinator shall serve as the Director of the Unit under the City Manager in accordance with the provisions of Section 6(2)(c)6. and 7. of the City Charter. 
(b)  The City Law Enforcement Unit shall have all powers consistent with State law. 
(c)  The interlocal funding agreement between the City and the Sheriff of Flagler County, and such other agreements as may be entered between the City and the Sheriff from time-to-time, shall operate as mutual aid agreements between the City and the Sheriff. 
(d)  The City Manager, or designee, is hereby granted the power and authority to implement the provisions of this article to include, but not be limited, to taking any and all administrative actions required by the Florida Department of Law Enforcement to establish the City's Law Enforcement Unit. 
(Ord. No. 06-21, § 1, 11-21-06)  
Chapter 7 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 15; businesses and business regulations, ch. 16; fire prevention and protection, ch. 25; health and sanitation, ch. 28. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 7-1. - Hours of sale. 
(a)  For purposes of this section: 
(1)  Alcoholic beverage means all beverages containing more than one percent of alcohol by weight and shall include intoxicating beverages. 
(2)  Intoxicating beverages means all liquors, wines and beers containing more than three and two-tenths percent of alcohol by weight. 
(b)  No alcoholic beverages may be sold, delivered, served or consumed or permitted to be sold, delivered, served or consumed between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. during weekdays and on Saturday, and 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Sunday, in any place licensed by the state for the sale of alcoholic beverages located in the City, or by any business not licensed by the state for the sale or service of alcoholic beverages including, but not limited to any vendor, club, or organization which dispenses alcoholic beverages. Nothing in this section shall apply to alcoholic beverages sold or served on any dining, club, parlor, buffet or observation car operated on any railroad to passengers on the cars for consumption thereon. 
(Ord. No. 99-6, § 1, 12-29-99; Ord. No. 00-9, § 1, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 06-10, § 1, 8-1-06; Ord. No. 2015-4 , § 2, 4-21-15; Ord. No. 2016-4 , § 3, 3-15-16) 
State Law reference— Local regulations of hours of sale, F.S. § 562.14.  
Sec. 7-2. - Prohibiting the purchase, sale, possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages in or on the premises of any public playground, recreational area or park. 
(a)  Definition of alcoholic beverage. For purposes of this section, "The definitions contained in the Beverage Law of the State (F.S. 561.01 et seq.) shall apply to the terms used in this chapter. The meaning and intent of the words and terms used in the Beverage Law of the State as the same have been interpreted by the courts of this state, the Attorney General, and the State Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverages and Tobacco of the Department of Business Regulation, shall be the same for the City." 
(b)  Prohibition. It [shall be] unlawful for any person to possess or consume any alcoholic beverage or beverages, as defined in F.S. § 856.015 or F.S. § 561.01, in any City Park or recreation area unless a permit for such is issued by the City Manager or his designee for a particular event occurring in such City Park or recreation area. 
(c)  Removal from premises. Any person violating subsection (b) of this section may be ordered by the Recreation and Parks Manager or designee or any other person having authority to enforce this section to leave the premises of the public playground or public recreation area or public park in which the violation occurs. Failure to comply with said order shall constitute a separate violation of this section. 
(d)  Enforcement. Provisions of this section may be enforced by any person having the authority to enforce ordinances of the City. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the Sheriff of Flagler County from exercising the authority granted in Section 30.07, Florida Statutes, to appoint individuals as deputies for the purpose of enforcing this section. At the option of the City, any violation may be processed through the City's code enforcement process as an alternative to prosecution. For citation enforcement purposes, an infraction of this section is a class I violation. 
(e)  Penalties. Violations of this section shall be punishable by imprisonment in the County jail for not more than 60 days and a fine of $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 00-56, §§ 1—5, 11-21-00; Ord. No. 2013-2, § 2, 3-19-13) 
Editor's note— Section 9(a) of Ord. No. 2007-12, adopted May 15, 2007, states the following: "It is unlawful for a person to possess or consume any alcoholic beverage or beverages, as defined in F.S. §§ 856.015 or 561.01, in any City Park unless a permit is issued by the City for a particular event occurring in a City Park."  
ARTICLE II. - NUDITY PROHIBITED IN ESTABLISHMENTS SELLING ALCOHOL 
 
Sec. 7-26. - Nudity prohibited upon alcohol licensed premises and bottle clubs. 
(a)  Definitions. When used in this section the following terms shall have the following meanings as follows: 
Breast shall mean a portion of the human female mammary gland (commonly referred to as the female breast) including the nipple and the areola (the darker colored area of the breast surrounding the nipple) and an outside area of such gland wherein such outside area is: (i) Reasonably compact and contiguous to the areola; and (ii) contains at least the nipple and the areola and one-fourth of the outside surface area of such gland. 
Buttocks shall mean (for a short general description see the last sentence of this subsection) the area at the rear of the human body (sometimes referred to as the gluteus maximus) which lies between two imaginary straight lines running parallel to the ground when a person is standing, the first or top of such line being one-half inch below the top of the vertical cleavage of the nates (i.e. the prominence formed by the muscles running from the back of the hip to the back of the leg) and the second or bottom of such line being one-half inch above the lowest point of the curvature of the fleshy protuberance (sometimes referred to as the gluteal fold), and between two imaginary straight lines, one on each side of the body (the "outside lines"), which outside lines are perpendicular to the ground and to the horizontal lines described above and which perpendicular outside lines pass through the outermost point(s) at which each nate meets the other side of each leg. Notwithstanding the above, buttocks shall not include the leg, the hamstring muscle below the gluteal fold, the tensor fasciae latae muscle or any of the above-described portion of the human body that is between either: (i) The left inside perpendicular line and the left outside perpendicular line, or (ii) the right inside perpendicular line and the right outside perpendicular line. For the purpose of the previous sentence the left inside perpendicular line shall be an imaginary straight line on the left side of the anus: (i) That is perpendicular to the ground and to the horizontal lines described above, (ii) that is one-third of the distance from the anus to the left outside line, and the right inside perpendicular line shall be an imaginary straight line on the right side of the anus (i) that is perpendicular to the ground and to the horizontal lines described above, and (ii) that is one-third of the distance from the anus to the right outside line. (The above description can generally be described as covering one-third of the buttocks centered over the cleavage for the length of the cleavage). 
Nudity or nude shall be used interchangeably and shall mean any person insufficiently clothed in any manner so that any of the following body parts are not entirely covered with a fully opaque covering: 
(1)  The male or female genitals, or 
(2)  The pubic area, or 
(3)  The vulva, or 
(4)  The penis, or 
(5)  The female breast (each female person may determine which one-fourth of her breast surface area (see definition of breast) contiguous to and containing the nipple and the areola is to be covered), or 
(6)  The anus, or 
(7)  The anal cleft, or 
(8)  The anal cleavage, or 
(9)  The buttocks. Attire which is insufficient to comply with this requirement includes, but is not limited to, G-strings, T-backs, dental floss and thongs. 
For purposes of this definition, body paint, body dyes, tattoos, liquid latex whether wet or dried, string and dental floss and similar substances shall not be considered "opaque covering". 
Person shall mean any live human being aged ten years of age or older. 
(b)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful within the City for any manager, officer, agent, servant, employee, contractor, person in charge, customer, or invitee of any premises or bottle club licensed under the laws of the State of Florida to sell or allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages to knowingly, intentionally, or recklessly exhibit, suffer, allow, permit, engage in, participate in, or be connected with nudity upon the licensed premises. The combination of nudity and alcoholic beverages at any premises or bottle club licensed under the laws of the State of Florida to allow the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages within the City is hereby strictly prohibited. 
(c)  Exceptions. It is not a violation of this section for any person to engage in the ordinary and customary bona fide use of an enclosed single sex public restroom, enclosed single sex functional shower, or enclosed single sex locker and/or dressing room facilities. It is also not a violation of this section for a mother to breast feed her baby. 
(d)  Enforcement and penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be prosecuted in the same manner as misdemeanors are prosecuted. Such violations shall be prosecuted in the name of the State of Florida in a court having jurisdiction of misdemeanors by the prosecuting attorney thereof and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment in the County Jail not to exceed 60 days or by both such fine and imprisonment as provided in F.S. § 162.22, (2000). Each incident or separate occurrence of any act that violates this section shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition to the penalties provided under this section, violators of this section shall be subject to any other appropriate civil or criminal action provided by law in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 99-6, § 2, 12-29-99; Ord. No. 00-9, § 2, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 01-40, § 1, 12-4-01)  
Chapter 8 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; health and sanitation, ch. 28. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 8-2. - Inoculation of dogs; health certificate. 
(a)  Each dog possessed or owned within the City shall be inoculated annually against the following diseases: 
(1)  Canine distemper; 
(2)  Infectious hepatitis; 
(3)  Leptospirosis; 
(4)  Tracheobronchitis; and 
(5)  Canine parvo virus. 
(b)  Dogs shall be vaccinated for rabies as required by Florida law. 
(c)  The person who owns or possesses a dog within the City, shall, at all times, have available for inspection an official health certificate of the dog. As used in this section, the term "official health certificate" means a certificate signed by a veterinarian licensed by the state which shows the age, sex, breed, description and health record of the dog, and which shall list the date of all vaccines by type and lot number administered by a licensed veterinarian to the dog and shall state that the animal has no contagious or infectious disease. 
(Ord. No. 99-7, § 1, 12-29-99; Ord. No. 00-11, § 1, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 06-16, § 1, 10-3-06)  
Sec. 8-3. - Inoculation of cats; health certificate. 
(a)  Each cat possessed or owned within the City shall be inoculated annually against the following diseases: 
(1)  Feline respiratory infection; and 
(2)  Feline distemper. 
(b)  Cats shall be vaccinated for rabies as required by Florida law. 
(c)  The person who owns or possesses a cat within the City shall, at all times, have available for inspection an official health certificate of the cat. As used in this section, the term "official health certificate" means a certificate signed by a veterinarian licensed by the state which shows the age, sex, breed, description and health record of the cat, and which shall list the date of all vaccines by type and lot number administered by a licensed veterinarian to the cat and shall state that the animal has no contagious or infectious disease. 
(Ord. No. 99-7, § 1, 12-29-99; Ord. No. 00-11, § 1, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 06-16, § 2, 10-3-06)  
ARTICLE II. - CITY OF PALM COAST ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Sections 1—33 of Ord. No. 2010-10, adopted July 20, 2010, repealed the former arts. II and III, §§ 8-26, 8-28—8-41, 8-61—8-70, 8-72, 8-74, and enacted a new art. II as set out herein. The former art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 99-7, adopted Dec. 29, 1999; and Ord. No. 00-11, adopted March 7, 2000. 
 
Sec. 8-26. - Common name or short title. 
This article shall hereafter be known and may be cited as the "Animal Control Ordinance of the City of Palm Coast." 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 1, 7-20-10)  
Sec. 8-27. - Purpose/applicability/legislative findings. 
(a)  This article establishes, under the City's "policing powers" enforcement standards in regard to controlling the animal population in the City of Palm Coast for the health, safety and general welfare of its residents. This article also provides for the safe and humane treatment of animals. Every person who owns any animal or who owns, conducts, manages or operates any animal establishment for which a business tax receipt is required by this article shall comply with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  It is the intent of this article to reasonably control the ownership of animals in the City of Palm Coast and to provide reasonable opportunities for the enjoyment of animals by the residents of the City. 
(c)  It is the intent of this article to adopt by reference as a part of this chapter all of F.S. ch. 767, as the same may be amended from time to time. It is the intent of this article to supplement the provisions of F.S. ch. 767 and F.S. ch. 828, and to be more restrictive than the provisions set forth therein. Except as authorized pursuant to F.S. § 767.14, in the event of any conflict between the terms of this chapter and chapter 767, chapter 767 shall control. (1) 
(d)  The expression of legislative intent set forth in F.S. § 767.10, is hereby adopted. (2) 
(e)  It is not the intent of this article to regulate bona fide agricultural activities that are conducted in a manner that does not create a nuisance and which are conducted in accordance with sound and generally acceptable good husbandry practices. 
(f)  It is not the intent of this article to rezone any property or to change the list of permitted uses on property as permitted by the land use designation and zoning classification assigned to a parcel of property. 
Note— (1) F.S. ch. 767, relates to damage by dogs and F.S. ch. 828, pertains to animal cruelty, sales and protection. 
(2) The statute provides that "[t]he Legislature finds that dangerous dogs are an increasingly serious and widespread threat to the safety and welfare of the people of this state because of unprovoked attacks which cause injury to persons and domestic animals; that such attacks are in part attributable to the failure of owners to confine and properly train and control their dogs; that existing laws inadequately address this growing problem; and that it is appropriate and necessary to impose uniform requirements for the owners of dangerous dogs." 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 2, 7-20-10; Ord. No. 2017-4 , § 2, 4-18-2017)  
Sec. 8-28. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them, and where the context requires, the singular shall include the plural and vice versa: 
Abandon means to forsake an animal or to neglect or refuse to provide or perform the legal obligations for care and support of an animal by its owner or keeper. Such abandonment shall constitute the relinquishment of all rights and claims by the owner to such animal, in accordance with F.S. [ch.] 705. Intervals between monitoring, watering, and feeding shall not exceed 24 hours. An animal shall be considered abandoned after five calendar days. 
Adult animal means any animal over the age of six months. 
Animal means, unless otherwise clearly required by the context, any dog, cat, bird, snake and every other living, nonhuman creature, but does not include livestock. 
Animal at large means any animal off its owner's property and not under restraint (whether licensed or unlicensed). 
Animal control authority means the City of Palm Coast Code Enforcement Division. 
Animal control officer means any person appointed, designated, employed or contracted with the City for the purpose of enforcing this article, as designated by the City Manager or designee, and includes any law enforcement officer of the City. The term "animal control officer" also means "code enforcement officer" but only for the purpose of providing confidentiality and exemption from public disclosures of the home addresses and telephone numbers of animal control officers that is accorded to code enforcement officers. 
Animal exposed to rabies means an animal bitten by or associated with any animal determined by an animal control officer to be infected with rabies. 
Animal quarters means the premises and all buildings, pens, yards and their appurtenances used for the keeping of animals; provided, however, that a proper enclosure of a dangerous dog shall mean an enclosure as described in F.S. § 767.11(4), or its successor provision(s). 
Animal under restraint shall mean any animal secured by a leash, chain, rope, or lead or confined within a vehicle or confined and controlled within the property limits of any parcel of land. 
Attack dog means a dog that has been trained to attack humans or other animals. 
Baiting means an act of worrying or tormenting a chained or confined animal by setting dogs upon it for sport. 
Business tax receipt means a current City registration. 
Cattery means an establishment for the breeding or boarding of cats 
Citation: 
(1)  Civil citation shall mean a written notice, in the form required by F.S. § 828.27, and issued by an officer to a person, either in person, by certified mail, or by conspicuous posting upon a dwelling, when the officer has probable cause to believe that the person has committed a civil infraction in violation of this article. 
(2)  Criminal citation means a written notice, issued to a person by an animal control officer or law enforcement officer who has probable cause to believe that the person has committed a criminal infraction of this article and that the County Court will hear the charge. 
City means the City of Palm Coast. 
Compost pile means a mixture of decayed or decaying organic matter used to fertilize soil. Compost is usually made by gathering plant material, such as leaves, grass clippings, and vegetable peels, into a pile or bin and letting it decompose as a result of the action of aerobic bacteria, fungi, and other organisms. 
Control means the regulation or the possession, ownership, care and custody of animals. 
Cruelty means any act of neglect, torture, or torment that causes unjustifiable pain or suffering of an animal. 
Current rabies vaccination means a rabies vaccination certificate of the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, or an equivalent form approved by the City, that states the animal has been vaccinated against rabies according to the schedule set forth in F.S. § 828.30. 
Dangerous animals means all animals which by reason of their wild nature, training, venomous characteristics, size or other attributes pose a special hazard to humans or other animals and includes, by way of illustration and not limitation, bears, lions, leopards, cheetahs, venomous reptiles, constricting reptiles, piranha, sharks, poisonous insects and spiders, alligators and crocodiles, attack dogs, tigers, eagles, hawks, simians, large primates and elephants. Any rabies-susceptible animal which, because of the nonavailability of a licensed vaccine, cannot be vaccinated against rabies shall also be deemed a dangerous animal. 
Dangerous dog means any dog that, according to animal control authority records, other animal control or law enforcement authorities: 
(1)  Has aggressively bitten, attacked, or endangered or has inflicted severe injury on a human being on public or private property; 
(2)  Has more than once severely injured or killed a domestic animal while off the owner's property; or 
(3)  Has, when unprovoked, chased or approached a person upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, provided that such actions are attested to in a sworn statement by one or more persons and dutifully investigated by the appropriate authority. 
Domestic animal means any equine or bovine animal, goat, sheep, swine, dog, cat, bird, ferret or other domestic animal. 
Estrous cycle means the correlated phenomena of the endocrine and reproductive systems of a female mammal from the beginning of one period of estrus to the beginning of the next (also referred to as "in season"), 
Exotic animal means any species of animal not indigenous to the State of Florida. 
Feral means an untamed domestic animal that has returned to the wild, or the offspring of such an animal. 
Flea market/outdoor sales means a market, usually held outdoors, where animals of all types are sold, traded, bartered, etc., to the public. 
Fowl shall mean all kinds of birds, whether wild or domesticated. 
Hearing officer/special magistrate shall be the person that determines whether a violation of this article has occurred. 
Hobby breeder means a person or entity that is an active member of a national, state, or local breeder organization and that houses or breeds dogs or cats at or adjoining a private residence for the purpose of: improving the breed; exhibiting dogs or cats at shows operated by a national, state, or local breeder organization; or raising service animals or animals used for law enforcement or other types of work. A hobby breeder may sell two litters of puppies or kittens per year per household, so long as the total number of dogs kept on the premises does not constitute a kennel as defined in this section. A hobby breeder that sells more than two litters per year per household shall be deemed to be a pet dealer. 
Impounding or holding facility or animal shelter means any one or combinations of a pet shop, kennel, cattery or humane society or any facility the City may so designate. 
Kennel means a shelter for housing of four or more animals, or an establishment for the breeding or boarding of animals. 
(1)  Commercial kennel means any facility or business operation where one of more dogs or cats are kept, maintained, cared for or boarded overnight for remuneration. 
(2)  Noncommercial kennel means the keeping of dogs, six months of age or older, on premises used for residential purposes, in excess of four animals. 
Keeper shall mean any person having temporary (less than 30 calendar days) possession, custody or control of an animal. 
Law enforcement agency means any Federal, State, County or Municipal agency. 
Licensed veterinarians means all veterinarians actively engaged in the practice of that profession in the State of Florida, who are duly registered and licensed as such by the State, and who are authorized to vaccinate any warm blooded animals, against rabies, and to execute certificates of vaccination. 
Livestock means all animals of the equine, bovine or swine class including, but not limited to, goats, sheep, mules, horses, hogs, cattle and other grazing animals; provided, however, that domestic pot-belly pigs shall not be considered to be livestock. 
Mistreat means every act or omission which causes or unreasonably permits the continuation of unnecessary abuse or unjustifiable pain or suffering. 
Neglect/abandonment means failure to provide food, water, adequate ventilation and protection from the elements or other care generally considered to be normal, usual and accepted for an animal's health and well being consistent with the species, breed and type of animal or abandonment of animal. 
Notice of violation means an official written warning issued by the City Manager or designee to an owner or responsible custodian for a violation. 
Owner means any person, firm, corporation, or organization possessing, harboring, keeping or having control or custody of an animal or, if the animal is owned by a person under the age of 18, then that person's parent or guardian. 
Pet dealer means any person, facility, or business which is engaged in the buying, selling, or keeping of animals. 
Pet groomer means any person, facility or business where dogs and cats and other domestic animals are bathed, clipped or groomed. 
Person means any individual, firm, association, organization whether social or business, partnership, joint venture, trust company, corporation, receiver, syndicate, business trust or other group or combination acting as a unit, including any government. 
Pet shop means any person, facility or business that sells animals, fish, reptiles or animal supplies. 
Poultry means all domesticated food birds including, but not limited to, chickens, turkeys, ducks, guineas, geese and pigeons. 
Proper enclosure for a dangerous dog shall mean that while on the owner's property, a dangerous dog is securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure, suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. Such pen or structure shall have secure sides, top, and flooring to prevent the dog from escaping over, under or through the structure and shall also provide adequate ventilation and protection from the elements. This area must have secure gates that are to be locked at all times when the animal is present. 
Provoked shall mean to tease, molest, torment, abuse, assault, or to instigate behavior in a dog or cat that may lead to the animal attacking or biting a person or another animal. 
Public nuisance animal means any animal which meets any one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  An animal that is repeatedly (in excess of two times) found at large. 
(2)  An animal that damages, harms or destroys the property of anyone other than their owner. 
(3)  An animal that has been determined to be a dangerous animal that is not confined as required by this Code. 
(4)  An animal that causes unsanitary conditions of enclosures or surroundings, determined by the animal control officer. 
(5)  An animal that is a diseased animal and dangerous to human health. 
(6)  An animal that repeatedly or excessively (in excess of 20 minutes) barks, cries, howls, screeches, squawks, screams, whines or makes other prolonged or disturbing noises interfering with the peace, comfort, repose or quietude of the neighboring properties, providing the complainant has filed a sworn statement with either a City of Palm Coast animal control officer, a law enforcement officer or a code enforcement officer. 
(7)  An animal that has been determined to be a stray. 
(8)  An animal that is a female animal that is not confined within a building, structure, cage, or not otherwise kept under restraint during her estrous cycle (in heat). 
(9)  An animal that is a rabies-susceptible animal that has not been appropriately inoculated against rabies. 
(10)  An animal that causes offensive odors from or upon the premises on which the animal is maintained, as to prevent a public nuisance which affects the public health, safety or welfare or livability of adjacent or proximate property 
(11)  Chasing vehicles, livestock, domestic animals, humans or running at large. 
(12)  Acting in an aggressive manner. 
(13)  Damaging or destroying public or private property exclusive of the owner's property. 
Rabies alert means a public designation of high priority made by the City Manager or designee when both a rabid animal and human exposure to said rabid animal has been confirmed by a Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services laboratory. 
Rabies watch means a public designation of lower priority made by the City Manager or designee when a rabid animal has been confined by the Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services laboratory, but no human exposure has been involved. 
Rabies-susceptible animals means all warm-blooded animals which are capable of contracting rabies and which are domestic by nature or domesticated or tamed. 
Restraining device shall mean a chain, cord, or cable, with a minimum length of eight feet, used to confine an animal. This device must provide for humane, unrestrained range of movement for the animal to ensure that the animal is not exposed to hazard or injury and shall not prevent the animal from having food, water, shelter, adequate ventilation, protection from the elements or other care. The device shall generally be proportional in size, weigh no more than one-eighth of the dog or puppy's body weight, and designed for use with the specific breed of animal with an appropriate collar. These devices shall not be used to confine a dog on an owner's property during times of extreme weather, e.g., hurricanes, or other adverse weather conditions including, but not limited to, freezing temperatures. 
Restraint means controlled by chain, tether or leash; confined within a vehicle being driven or parked on the street; confined within the property limits of any parcel of land with the property owner's consent; or confined within a crate or cage or fenced in accordance with sound animal husbandry practices. 
Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones, multiple bites, or disfiguring lacerations requiring sutures or reconstructive surgery. 
Shelter shall mean a secure weather resistant structure which protects an animal from exposure to the elements including, but not limited to, rain, cold, wind and heat, that provides for adequate ventilation, and in size is a minimum of six inches higher than the animal's height at full stand with head erect, one and one-half times the animal's full body length, and sufficient in width to permit the animal to turn around. 
Stray animal means any "at large animal" which is unlicensed, without a current tag on its body, unattended, or without the appearance of an owner or custodian. 
Tag means a current rabies tag issued by a licensed veterinarian. 
Tethered means a rope, chain, or similar restraint for holding an animal in place, allowing a short radius in which the animal can move about and/or does not allow the animal to move outside the bed of an open vehicle. 
(1)  Double tether means using two tethers attached to an animal which do not allow the animal to move around the inside of the bed of an open vehicle. 
(2)  Open vehicle tether system shall mean a system designed to keep a dog securely attached and restrained in an open vehicle safe and free of hazard and away from the sides of the open vehicle. 
Unprovoked means that the victim who has conducted himself/herself peacefully and lawfully has been bitten or chased in a menacing fashion or attacked by an animal. 
Vaccinated shall mean an animal that has been administered a current one-year or three-year rabies vaccine by a licensed practitioner. 
Waterfowl means any swan, duck, geese, coots, ganinules, or any other kind commonly classified as waterfowl. 
Wholesome exercise shall mean uninhibited movement for a period of time sufficient for the physical well being of an animal, considering the size, age, and breed of that animal. 
Wild animal means any animal which is not accustomed to living in or about the habitation of humans and which is regulated under the provisions of F.S. ch. 379, or its successor provision(s). 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 3, 7-20-10; Ord. No. 2017-4 , § 3, 4-18-2017)  
Sec. 8-29. - Animal control officer; powers and duties; unlawful interference. 
(a)  The City Manager, or designee, shall have supervision of the performance of the duties of the City's animal control officers, who shall have full and complete authority to pick up, catch or procure animals as provided below. The City Manager and animal control officers may capture, seize or pick up: 
(1)  Any animal at large; 
(2)  Any domestic animal constituting a nuisance; 
(3)  A dangerous dog not in compliance with written notification of their classification; 
(4)  Any dog being considered for dangerous classification; 
(5)  Any animal in heat, not properly confined by the owner or keeper; 
(6)  Any neglected, abused, cruelly treated, sick or injured animal or animal at risk of injury or death; 
(7)  Any animal for the purpose of quarantine or rabies testing; 
(8)  Any animal deemed to be abandoned; 
(9)  Any animal released to the City by a veterinarian or a law enforcement official; 
(10)  Any animal that appears to be unlicensed when required to be licensed. 
(b)  An animal control officer or any law enforcement officer as defined in F.S. § 943.10(1), or its successor provision(s), is hereby authorized to issue citations for a violation of this Code, when, based upon personal investigation, the officer has reasonable and probable grounds to believe that a violation of this Code has occurred; provided, however, nothing in this Code shall be construed to prohibit an animal control officer, under appropriate circumstances, to issue a warning notice to the alleged violator. However, failure to provide this notice shall not impose any civil or criminal liability upon the City, its agents or employees. 
(c)  Each animal control officer shall have the right to enter upon any public property or may enter private property with the consent of owner or proper warrant, or as otherwise provided by law, for the purposes of examining or capturing any animal. Each animal control officer shall have appropriate official identification with them which identifies them as agents of the City when they enter private property on official duty. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person to interfere with any animal control officer in the legal performance of his or her duties, to take or attempt to take an animal from any animal control officer or from any vehicle used by an animal control officer to transport any animal, or to take or to attempt to take any animal from the control of the City without proper authority. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 4, 7-20-10; Ord. No. 2017-4 , § 4, 4-18-2017)  
Sec. 8-30. - Public nuisance; animals at large. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any owner to allow any animal to be a public nuisance as defined in section 8-28. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any animal owner to allow, either willfully or through failure to exercise due care and control, his or her animal(s) to run at large. 
(c)  When any domestic animal is found at large anywhere within the City, whether licensed or otherwise and whether owned or otherwise, said animal may be taken into custody by the animal control officer to be impounded at an animal shelter and disposed of as provided in this article. 
(d)  Failure by an owner or keeper to observe any of the following mandatory duties shall constitute a violation of this article: 
(1)  The owner or keeper of every domestic animal shall be held responsible for every behavior of such domestic animal under the provisions of this article; 
(2)  The owner or keeper of every animal shall be responsible for the removal of any excreta deposited by an animal on public ways; recreation areas, or private property; 
(3)  The owner or keeper of an animal shall maintain that animal and the property upon which it is located so as to prevent a public nuisance which affects the public health, safety, or welfare or livability of adjacent or proximate property. 
(e)  The City shall not be liable for any injury to the animal that may occur while any animal control officer is attempting to capture, transport, load or unload or otherwise process any animal found at-large in violation of this Code. In the event an animal is injured or property is damaged, the animal control officer shall file a written report of the circumstances with the City Manager, or designee, within one working day of such incident. 
(f)  Every animal owner who intentionally, willfully, carelessly, or negligently suffers or permits such animal to run at large shall be liable in damages for all injury and property damage to any person, animal or property by reason thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 5, 7-20-10)  
Sec. 8-31. - Duties of animal owners. 
(a)  Each owner of any animal, or anyone having any animal in his or her possession or custody, shall have the duty to exercise reasonable care and to take all necessary steps and precautions to protect other people, property and animals from injuries or damage which might result from his or her animal's behavior, regardless of whether such behavior is motivated by mischievousness, playfulness, ferocity or any other motivation. 
(b)  In the event that the owner or keeper of any animal is a minor, the parent(s) or guardian(s) of the minor shall be responsible to ensure that all provisions of this Code are complied with and said parent(s) or guardian(s) shall have the duties prescribed under the Code. 
(c)  Every owner of any animal, or anyone having any animal in his or her possession or custody, shall have the duty to ensure that reasonable care and precautions are taken to prevent the animal from leaving, while unattended, the real property limits of its owner, possessor or custodian. 
(d)  Each owner of any animal or anyone having an animal in his or her possession shall keep the animal under restraint at all times while the animal is off the real property limits of the owner, possessor or custodian unless the owner of the animal has the consent of the person on whose property the animal is at large. The foregoing shall not apply to a performing animal, engaged in a bona fide commercial performance or participating in a parade or similar event; provided, however, that the owner of the animal shall ensure that all reasonable and necessary steps and actions are taken to protect the general public. 
(e)  It is prohibited and unlawful for the owner of any female dog or cat in season to fail to confine said animal, either willfully or through failure to exercise due care and control, in such a manner so as to make said animal inaccessible to any male dog or cat except for breeding purposes. 
(f)  Animals takes off owner's property shall be on a leash which shall not exceed eight feet in length. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 6, 7-20-10)  
Sec. 8-32. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  It is prohibited and unlawful for any owner or other person to deprive any animal under his or her control or custody of food, water, shelter, and protection; or to abandon, poison, beat, whip or kill any animal under his, her, another's or no one's control or custody or to mutilate, overdrive, overload, overwork, torment, torture or otherwise ill-use any animal. This section shall not apply to wild animals killed in the hunt by customary and nonbrutal methods, nor to wild rats, mice, insects, fish, arthropods or vermin; nor shall this section apply to medical research organizations duly licensed or otherwise recognized or supported by State or Federal law; nor shall this section apply to the implementation of control techniques pertaining to Muscovy Ducks, as recognized by the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission or other authorized organizations. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall be construed as being supplemental to the provisions of F.S. § 828.12, or its successor provision(s). 
(c)  Pursuant to F.S. § 828.122, as may be amended, fighting or baiting animals is a criminal offense. The City shall report incidents involving such action to the appropriate law enforcement agency and support investigations when so requested and refer cases where probable cause exists to the state attorney's office for criminal prosecution. 
(d)  The following acts or omissions shall constitute improper fighting or baiting under this article: 
(1)  Baiting, breeding, training, transporting, selling, owning, possessing, or using any wild or domestic animal for the purpose of animal fighting or baiting; 
(2)  Owning, possessing, or selling equipment for use in animal fighting or baiting; 
(3)  Owning, leasing, managing, operating, or having control of any property kept or used for animal fighting or baiting; 
(4)  Promoting, staging, advertising, or charging any admission fee to a fight or baiting between two or more animals; 
(5)  Performing any service or act to facilitate animal fighting or baiting, including, but not limited to, providing security, refereeing, or handling or transporting animals or being a stakeholder of any money wagered on animal fighting or baiting; 
(6)  Betting or wagering any money or other valuable consideration on the fighting or baiting of animals; 
(7)  Attending the fighting or baiting of animals. 
(e)  These provisions shall not apply to any person: 
(1)  Simulating a fight for the purpose of using the simulated fight as part of a motion picture that will be used on television or in a motion picture. 
(2)  Using animals to pursue or take wildlife or to participate in any hunting regulated or subject to being regulated by the rules and regulations of the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission. 
(3)  Using animals to work livestock for agricultural purposes. 
(4)  Simulating bloodless bullfighting. 
(5)  Using animals to hunt wild hogs or retrieve domestic hogs. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit, impede, or otherwise interfere with recognized animal husbandry and training techniques or practices not otherwise specifically prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 7, 7-20-10)  
Sec. 8-33. - Neglect/abandonment of animals. 
(a)  It is prohibited and unlawful for any person to impound or confine any animal in any place and fail to supply the animal during such confinement with a sufficient quantity of good and wholesome food and water. 
(b)  It is prohibited and unlawful for any person to keep any animal in any enclosure without the animal being provided wholesome exercise, change of air and protection from any adverse weather conditions. 
(c)  It is prohibited and unlawful for any person who is the owner or possessor of an animal or has charge or custody of an animal to abandon an animal. 
(d)  It is prohibited and unlawful for any person to keep any animal in any enclosure or unattended parked vehicle for more than 30 minutes. In the event that prevailing weather conditions are such that the life of the animal is in jeopardy as determined by the animal control officer, then said maximum time limit shall not be applicable. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall be construed as being supplemental to the provisions of F.S. § 828.13, or its successor provision(s). 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 8, 7-20-10)  
Sec. 8-34. - Selling or obtaining dogs or cats for purpose of human or animal consumption. 
It is prohibited and unlawful for any person to sell, obtain or purchase a live or dead dog or cat for the purpose of human or animal consumption. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 9, 7-20-10)  
Sec. 8-35. - Injuring, catching or detaining waterfowl prohibited. 
It is prohibited and unlawful for any person, unless authorized by the City, to catch, kill, maim, wound, detain, shoot at or molest any n kind of waterfowl within the City limits; provided, however, that this provision does not apply to Muscovy Ducks which may be controlled in accordance with control techniques recognized by the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 10, 7-20-10)  
Sec. 8-36. - Removal of animal waste; prohibitions. 
(a)  The owner of every animal shall be responsible for the removal of any excreta deposited by his/her animal(s) on public walks, recreation areas, public right-of-ways or private property, other than the owner's property. 
(b)  It is prohibited and unlawful for any person to leave manure or waste materials accumulating from an animal(s) above ground upon any premises so they produce objectional odor that can be noted from 20 feet away. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 11, 7-20-10)  
Sec. 8-37. - Investigation. 
(a)  An animal control officer may request the owners of any animal to produce the animal and, if applicable, any requested records of such animal. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the animal control officer to keep the following records: 
(1)  Accurate and detailed records of the licensing, impoundment and disposition of all animals coming into the City's custody. 
(2)  Accurate and detailed records of all reported bite cases and investigations for a period of no less than three years or as required by State law. 
(3)  Accurate and detailed records on all money collected and expended. 
(4)  Accurate records of all rabies certificates that have been provided for City review. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 12, 7-20-10)  
Sec. 8-38. - Animals for sale or gift within the City. 
(a)  This section applies to all animals transported into, or native to the City, for sale or gift. 
(b)  Each animal transported into the City for sale and each animal offered in the City for sale or gift shall be subject to the provisions of F.S. § 828.29, or its successor provision(s), which are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference. 
(c)  The sale, transfer or display of all live animals at flea markets or similar outdoor markets are subject to the following restrictions and/or limitations: 
(1)  All displays of animals in crates shall meet current minimum United States Department of Agriculture requirements regarding crating of live animals. 
(2)  Crates shall allow for a free flow of air. Crates shall be displayed in such a manner that access to the animals is controlled by the vendor. 
(3)  A source of heat and mechanical ventilation shall be available at the site for use as necessary. 
(4)  Animals shall be kept in a clean and sanitary environment. 
(5)  Animals shall be located in a shaded area. 
(6)  Animals must be provided with adequate water and food available to them at all times. 
(7)  The owner or manager of a flea market or related outdoor market shall inspect the site of all animal vendors on a daily basis and shall report any violations that he or she is, or should be, aware of to the appropriate agencies. 
(d)  With regard to the sale of animals at pet shops or other nonoutdoor markets, the following requirements shall apply: 
(1)  Animals shall only be displayed in animal crates that meet current minimum United States Department of Agriculture requirements regarding crating of live animals. Animals must be able to stand up and turn around. 
(2)  It is prohibited and unlawful to house more than two animals per crate. 
(3)  Crates shall allow for a free flow of air. Crates shall be displayed in such a manner that access to the animals is controlled by employees. 
(4)  Animals shall be kept in a clean and sanitary environment. 
(5)  Animals shall be provided with adequate water and food which shall be available at all times. 
(6)  Cages shall be cleaned and disinfected at least once per day with a disinfectant which is normally used in the kennel industry. 
(e)  It is prohibited and unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 13, 7-20-10)  
Sec. 8-39. - Pet groomers. 
(a)  All animals located at pet groomer establishments shall be kept in animal crates that meet current minimum United States Department of Agriculture requirements regarding crating of live animals. 
(b)  It is prohibited and unlawful for a pet groomer to board or maintain an animal overnight unless all other permits relating to the boarding of animals have been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 14, 7-20-10)  
Sec. 8-40. - Classification of dogs as dangerous. 
(a)  Investigation and initial sufficient cause determination. 
(1)  The animal control authority shall investigate reported incidents involving any dog that may be dangerous and shall, if possible, interview the owner and require a sworn affidavit from any person, including any animal control officer or enforcement officer, desiring to have a dog classified as dangerous. 
(2)  A dog that is the subject of a dangerous dog investigation because of a severe injury to a human being may be immediately confiscated, placed in quarantine, if necessary, for the proper length of time, or impounded, pending the outcome of the investigation and resolution of any hearings or appeals related to the dangerous dog classification or any penalty imposed under this section. The owner shall be responsible for payment of all boarding costs or other fees as may be required to humanely and safely keep the dog pending any hearing or appeal. 
(3)  A dog that is the subject of a dangerous dog investigation which is not impounded pursuant to subsection (2) above must be humanely and safely confined by the owner in a securely fenced or enclosed area. The dog shall be confined in such manner pending the outcome of the investigation and the resolution of any hearings or appeals related to the dangerous dog classification or any penalty imposed under this section. The address at which the dog resides shall be provided to the City. During such time, the owner shall immediately notify the City if the dog becomes loose or unconfined, bites a human being, attacks another animal, or dies. 
(4)  A dog that is the subject of a dangerous dog investigation may not be relocated or its ownership transferred pending the outcome of the investigation and any hearings or appeals related to the dangerous dog classification or any penalty imposed under this section. If a dog is to be destroyed, the dog may not be relocated or its ownership transferred. 
(5)  After the investigation, the animal control authority shall make an initial determination as to whether there is sufficient cause to classify the dog as dangerous, and, if sufficient cause is found, as to the appropriate statutory penalty, either: (1) classification of the dog as dangerous subject to the applicable dangerous dog requirements including, but not limited to, secure confinement by the owner; or (2) expeditious and humane destruction of the dog if the dog caused severe injury to a human being and constitutes a likely future threat to the public safety, health, and welfare. The animal control authority shall classify any dog as a dangerous dog in the event he/she determines that the dog meets the requirements for a dangerous dog as defined in section 8-28, of this article. 
(6)  A dog may not be declared dangerous if: 
a.  The threat, injury, or damage was sustained by a person who, at the time, was unlawfully on the property or who, while lawfully on the property, was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or its owner or the owner's family member; or 
b.  The dog was protecting or defending a human being within the immediate vicinity of the dog from an unjustified attack or assault. 
(7)  The animal control authority shall provide written notification of the initial sufficient cause determination and proposed penalty to the owner by registered mail, certified hand delivery, or service in conformance with the provisions of F.S. ch. 48, relating to service of process. The written notice of initial determination shall include the basis for declaring the dog dangerous, a description of the dog, and the responsibility of the owner to maintain and confine the dog. 
(8)  The owner may file a written request for a hearing regarding the dangerous dog classification, penalty, or both, within seven calendar days after receipt of the initial determination. The written request for a hearing shall be mailed to the address provided by the animal control authority in the notice of initial determination. 
(9)  If a hearing is not timely requested regarding the dangerous dog classification or proposed penalty, the initial determination of the animal control authority as to such matter shall become final and the animal control authority shall send the owner a final written order of determination by registered mail, certified hand delivery, or service in conformance with the provisions of F.S. ch. 48, relating to service of process. The owner may appeal the classification, penalty, or both, to the circuit court in accordance with the Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure, upon receipt of the final order of determination. 
(10)  If the dog is not held by the animal control authority, the owner must continue to confine the dog in a securely fenced or enclosed area pending resolution of any appeal. If the dog is held by the animal control authority, the dog shall remain in the custody of the animal control authority pending resolution of any appeal. The owner shall be responsible for payment of all boarding costs or other fees as may be required to humanely and safely keep the dog pending any hearing or appeal. 
(11)  If the animal control authority finds no sufficient cause for classifying the dog dangerous, a written notification of insufficient cause shall be provided to the owner by registered mail or certified hand delivery. If the dog is being held by the animal control authority, custody of the dog shall be returned to the owner. 
(b)  Destruction. If a dog is classified as a dangerous dog due to an incident that causes severe injury to a human being, based upon the nature and circumstances of the injury and the likelihood of a future threat to the public safety, health, and welfare, the dog may be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. A dog may not be destroyed for 30 calendar days after receipt of the final order of determination by the animal control authority or hearing officer, unless the owner waives the right to appeal to the circuit court in writing. If the owner files a timely written appeal to the circuit court, the dog may not be destroyed while the appeal is pending. 
(c)  Procedures for dangerous dog hearing. 
(1)  If the owner requests a hearing, the hearing shall be held before an appointed hearing officer as soon as possible, but not later than 21 calendar days and not sooner than five calendar days from the date the animal control authority receives the appeal request from the owner. 
(2)  A notice of hearing shall be sent to the owner by registered mail, or certified hand delivery at the address included on the written request for appeal. A hearing shall not be postponed or continued unless a request for continuance, showing good cause for such continuance, is received by the animal control authority at least five calendar days prior to the date set for the hearing. Upon proper notice to the owner, failure of the owner to appear personally or through legal counsel at the hearing shall result in an order affirming the initial determination. 
(3)  All hearings shall be open to the public. At the hearing, the owner or his or her representative and any other interested persons may present any evidence relevant to a determination of whether said animal is dangerous. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply but fundamental due process shall be observed and shall govern all proceedings. 
(4)  The hearing officer shall hear and consider the evidence presented at said hearing and make a determination as to whether or not to uphold the determination of the animal control authority regarding classification, penalty, or both, in accordance with the provisions herein and F.S. § 767.12. 
(5)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue findings of fact, based on evidence of record, and conclusions of law in an order affording the proper relief, said findings and relief being consistent with local and State law. The written order shall be filed with the animal control authority and the City Clerk promptly after issuance and shall be deemed entered upon the date of said filing. The animal control authority shall provide a copy of the written order to the owner or the owner's legal counsel by certified mail, return receipt requested, certified hand delivery, or service in conformance with the provisions of F.S. ch. 48, relating to service of process. 
(6)  The owner may appeal the hearing officer's written order relating to the classification, penalty, or both to the circuit court in accordance with the Florida Rules of Appellate Procedure. Each party shall be responsible for its own fees and costs associated with the appeal. If an appeal is not timely filed, the written order of the hearing officer shall become final. 
(d)  Final disposition of dog. 
(1)  Upon the issuance of a final order of determination by the animal control authority or hearing officer, or the conclusion of any appeal proceedings affirming such order, the dog shall be disposed of in accordance with the final order. 
(2)  If the dog is not to be destroyed, custody of the dog shall be returned to the owner upon the owner's compliance with the requirements of section 8-43 and payment of all boarding and other costs and fees required to humanely and safely keep the dog impounded. Custody of the dog shall not be released until the owner complies with the requirements of section 8-43. If the owner fails to make payment of all boarding costs and fees or obtain a dangerous dog registration as required herein within 14 days of the completion of all hearings and appeals, the dog shall be considered abandoned by the owner and thereafter destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(e)  Violations. Any order, providing for an animal's release to its owner or otherwise, shall be subject to such conditions as the animal control authority or hearing officer shall impose. Violation of any condition of the order shall constitute a violation of this Code and be punishable as such. An animal control officer may immediately impound a dangerous dog if the owner fails to comply with any of the requirements of the order or any of the requirements of section 8-43, and after written notification to the owner in accordance with section 8-40(a)(7), the dog may be euthanized, at the owner's expense, in an expeditious and humane manner, unless the owner requests a hearing pursuant to section 8-40(a)(8). The owner shall be responsible for payment of all boarding costs and other fees as may be required to humanely and safely keep the dog during any appeal procedure. If the owner files a written appeal, the dog must be held and may not be destroyed while the appeal is pending. 
(f)  Exemptions. 
(1)  Any dog that is owned, or the service of which is employed, by a law enforcement agency, is exempt from this section. 
(2)  Hunting dogs are exempt from this section when engaged in any legal hunt or training procedure. Dogs engaged in training or exhibiting in legal sports such as obedience trials, conformation shows, field trials, hunting/retrieving trials, and herding trials are exempt from this section when engaged in any legal procedures. However, such dogs at all other times in all other respects are subject to this section. Dogs that have been classified as dangerous may not be used for hunting purposes. 
(3)  Any dog used as a service dog for blind, hearing impaired, or disabled persons that bites another animal or a human is exempt from any quarantine requirement following such bite if the dog has a current rabies vaccination that was administered by a licensed veterinarian. 
( Ord. No. 2017-4 , § 5, 4-18-2017)  
Sec. 8-41. - Attack or bite by dangerous dog. 
Any dog previously classified as dangerous that attacks or bites a person or a domestic animal without provocation shall be immediately confiscated by an animal control officer. The dog shall be placed in quarantine, if necessary, for the proper length of time in accordance with state law, or impounded and held for ten business days after the owner is given written notification of the impoundment and penalty in accordance with the notice provisions of section 8-40(a)(7), and thereafter destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. The ten-day time period shall allow for the owner to request a hearing pursuant to section 8-40(a)(8). The owner shall be responsible for payment of all boarding costs and other fees as may be required to humanely and safely keep the dog during any appeal procedure. If the owner files a written appeal, the dog must be held by the animal control authority, or its designee, and may not be destroyed while the appeal is pending. 
( Ord. No. 2017-4 , § 6, 4-18-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-4 , § 6, adopted Apr. 18, 2017, amended § 8-41 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 8-41 pertained to confinement of dangerous animals/attack dogs and derived from Ord. No. 2010-10, § 16, adopted July 20, 2010.  
Sec. 8-42. - Death of a human by dog. 
Any dog, regardless of a previous dangerous dog classification, that attacks and causes the death of a human, shall immediately be confiscated by an animal control officer. The dog shall be placed in quarantine, if necessary, for the proper length of time, or impounded and held for ten business days after the owner is given written notification of the impoundment and penalty in accordance with the notice provisions of section 8-40(a)(7), and thereafter destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. The ten-day time period shall allow for the owner to request a hearing pursuant to section 8-40(a)(8). The owner shall be responsible for payment of all boarding costs and other fees as may be required to humanely and safely keep the dog during any appeal procedure. If the owner files a written appeal, the dog must be held by the animal control authority, or its designee, and may not be destroyed while the appeal is pending. 
( Ord. No. 2017-4 , § 7, 4-18-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-4 , § 7, adopted Apr. 18, 2017, amended § 8-42 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 8-42 pertained to disposition of dangerous animals found at large and derived from Ord. No. 2010-10, § 17, adopted July 20, 2010.  
Sec. 8-43. - Dangerous dog requirements. 
(a)  Registration. Within 14 days after issuance of a final order of determination by the animal control authority or hearing officer, or the conclusion of any appeal that affirms such order, or the relocation of a classified dangerous dog to the city limits, the owner of such dangerous dog shall obtain a certificate of registration for the dangerous dog prior to the dog being released to the owner's custody. The owner shall renew the certificate annually. Certificates of registration and annual renewals may be issued only to persons who are at least 18 years of age and who present to the animal control authority sufficient evidence of: 
(1)  A current certificate of rabies vaccination, current animal license tag, and proof of sterilization from a certified veterinarian licensed in any state; 
(2)  Permanent identification, such as a tattoo on the inside thigh or electronic implantation. 
(3)  A proper enclosure to confine the dangerous dog in accordance with subsection (d), and the posting of the premises with a clearly visible warning sign at all points of entry of the premises which informs both children and adults of the presence of a dangerous dog on the property; 
(4)  Proof that the owner is the fee simple owner of the property upon which the proper enclosure is located; or alternatively, proof of permission from the fee simple owner of the property upon which the proper enclosure is located; 
(5)  Proof that the owner has obtained insurance as required by this article. 
(b)  Notification. The owner of a dangerous dog shall immediately notify the animal control officer if: 
(1)  The dog becomes loose or unconfined; 
(2)  The dog attacks a human being or another animal; 
(3)  The dog dies; 
(4)  The owner moves to another address with the dangerous dog. If the owner moves to a different jurisdiction, then the owner shall notify the enforcement officer of the new jurisdiction that the dog has been classified as dangerous; 
(5)  The owner intends to sell or give away the dog. Prior to the dog being sold or given away, the owner shall provide the name, address and telephone number of the proposed new owner to the animal control officer. The new owner of a dog classified as dangerous must comply with all of the requirements of this article and F.S. §§ 767.10 through 767.15, even if the dog is merely moved from one local jurisdiction to another within the state. The enforcement officer of the new jurisdiction must be notified by the owner of a dog classified as dangerous that the dog is in its jurisdiction. 
(c)  Insurance. In order to protect the public and to afford relief from the severe harm and injury that is likely to result from a dangerous dog attack, the owner of a dangerous dog shall obtain and maintain insurance in the amount of $100,000.00 for each individual dangerous dog owned to provide liability insurance for damage to persons and property caused by the dangerous dog(s). The insurance shall be provided by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Florida, and the owner shall provide the animal control authority evidence of a certificate of insurance and a copy of the endorsement. Annual registration shall be denied any owner not in compliance with this section. If, at any time, the liability insurance is cancelled or lapses, the animal control authority shall have the authority to impound the dangerous dog. If the owner does not re-insure the animal within 14 days of the impoundment, ownership of the dog shall revert to the City and the dog may be euthanized in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(d)  Confinement of dangerous dogs. 
(1)  All dangerous dogs that are not humanely destroyed shall be kept in a proper enclosure for a dangerous dog either (1) securely confined inside the owner's residence; or (2) in a securely enclosed locked pen or structure constructed on the owner's property according to the following specifications: 
a.  The floor shall consist of a concrete pad, no less than four feet wide by eight feet long. 
b.  The sides shall consist of chain link six feet in height. 
c.  The top shall be enclosed and provide adequate shade and protection from the elements. 
d.  The structure shall have secure sides, top and flooring to prevent the dog from escaping over, under or through the structure. 
e.  The gate shall be lockable and remain locked when the dog is penned, shall be suitable to prevent the entry or partial entry of children, and be designed to prevent the dog from escaping; provided, however, that before the release of the dog from the animal control officer's custody, the pen must be completely constructed, inspected and approved by the animal control officer. The owner shall have the sole responsibility to contact the animal control officer to arrange for the inspection. 
f.  A perimeter fence shall be installed around the dog's pen by the owner to prevent direct contact with dog. 
(2)  The dog shall be kept in a locked pen or inside the owner's residence when the owner is not present on the property. If the dog is kept inside the owner's residence, all windows and doors shall be closed and maintained to ensure that the dog remains inside the residence. 
(3)  The dog shall not be let outside the residence or pen unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and under the control of a competent person. If the dog is of a breed that cannot be muzzled, the owner can apply to the animal control officer for an exemption to this requirement. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration, but shall prevent it from biting any person or animal. The owner may exercise the dog in a securely fenced or enclosed area without a muzzle or leash if the animal remains within sight of the owner and only adult members of the owner's immediate household or persons 18 years of age or older are allowed in the enclosure when the dog is present. 
(4)  The premises at which the dog is located shall be posted by the owner with a clearly visible warning sign at all entry points and all sides of the fence that informs both children and adults of the presence of a dangerous dog on the property. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of a dangerous dog to maintain such dog upon any premises that does not have a proper enclosure in which to confine the dog. 
(6)  Once a dog has been declared dangerous and registered in accordance with this section, any animal control officer shall, at any reasonable hour, have the right to inspect the owner's premises to determine compliance with the requirements of F.S. ch. 767, and the conditions of this section. It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to deny the animal control authority access to inspect the owner's premises to determine compliance as provided in this section. 
(7)  When being transported, the owner shall ensure that the dog is muzzled and safely and securely restrained within a motor vehicle. If the dog is of a breed that cannot be muzzled, the owner can apply to the animal control officer for an exemption to this requirement. 
( Ord. No. 2017-4 , § 8, 4-18-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-4 , § 8, adopted Apr. 18, 2017, amended § 8-43 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 8-43 pertained to disposition of dangerous animals not found at large and derived from Ord. No. 2010-10, § 18, adopted July 20, 2010.  
Sec. 8-44. - Confinement and possession of dangerous animals and attack dogs. 
(a)  It is prohibited and unlawful for an owner of any dangerous animal to fail to confine said animal within a building, cage or other secure enclosure. 
(b)  It is prohibited and unlawful for the owner of any dangerous animal to take the animal from the building, cage or secure enclosure in which the animal is required to be confined unless said animal is securely leashed, tethered, chained, muzzled, anesthetized and/or otherwise restrained so as to protect persons and other animals; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to law enforcement or rescue animals actually engaged in law enforcement or rescue operations. 
(c)  Animals of a wild or exotic nature, classified by the appropriate governmental agencies as requiring a specific pen or enclosure, shall be caged in accordance with all applicable regulations and possess proper state licensing and/or permits. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, maintain, or have custody or control of any wild animal, bird, freshwater organism, marine life, fur-bearing animal, or reptile without first complying with the provisions of F.S. ch. 379, and all regulations promulgated by the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission. 
(d)  Any outside enclosure housing an attack dog must be completely surrounded by an approved fence or other wall six feet in height and have an anti-climbing device. All gates and entrances thereto must be kept closed and locked by means of a secure padlock, and all fences or walls must be maintained escape-proof. 
(e)  It is prohibited and unlawful for an owner of an attack dog to fail to adhere to the requirements of this section. 
( Ord. No. 2017-4 , § 9, 4-18-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-4 , § 9, adopted Apr. 18, 2017, amended § 8-44 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 8-44 pertained to procedure for dangerous animal hearing and derived from Ord. No. 2010-10, § 19, adopted July 20, 2010.  
Sec. 8-45. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-4 , § 10, adopted Apr. 18, 2017, repealed § 8-45, which pertained to confinement of animals declared dangerous by the animal control officer or hearing officer and derived from Ord. No. 2010-10, § 20, adopted July 20, 2010.  
Sec. 8-46. - Reporting animal bites—Veterinarians. 
It shall be the duty of every attending practitioner licensed to practice medicine, osteopathic medicine, or veterinary medicine or any other person knowing of or in attendance on a case to promptly report to the Flagler County Health Department every instance in which a person is bitten by an animal within the City of Palm Coast. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 21, 7-20-10)  
Sec. 8-47. - Capture, impoundment, etc., of animals which bite people. 
(a)  Any rabies susceptible animal which is reported to have bitten a person shall be captured alive, if possible, and taken into custody pursuant to this Code. If the animal is subject to the jurisdiction of the State, it shall be placed under the surveillance of the Flagler County Health Department or its authorized representative, and shall be handled pursuant to State law and State rules and regulations. If not subject to State jurisdiction, such animal shall be impounded and quarantined by the animal control officer while the applicable procedures are followed to determine whether the animal is a dangerous animal. 
(b)  In the event the animal is destroyed, a report of the conditions and reasons for killing the same shall be filed by the animal control officer with the Flagler County Health Department or other appropriate entity in accordance with the requirements of State law. 
(c)  If the animal is deemed abandoned, it shall either be quarantined for a period of time necessary to determine if it has rabies, or be immediately destroyed in a humane fashion, and its head detached without mutilation. The head shall immediately be submitted to the nearest appropriate State laboratory. 
(d)  If the animal is claimed by its owner, the animal shall not be released until it has been quarantined for a period of ten days, or such longer period as the animal control officer determines is reasonably necessary to suspect the presence of rabies. In the event there is no licensed vaccine available for the species of animal being held and the necessary incubation period would, in the opinion of the animal control officer, unnecessarily jeopardize the health or life of the bite victim, then the animal shall be immediately destroyed and the head shall immediately be submitted to the nearest appropriate State laboratory. If, at any time during the period the animal is impounded, it is determined by the animal control officer that the animal has rabies, the animal shall immediately be destroyed. The owner shall be notified of the provisions of this Section at the time the animal is claimed. Failure to provide this notice shall not impose any civil or criminal liability upon the City, its agents or employees. Animals shall be released to owners only upon presentation of proof of ownership and after proper inoculation, licensing, and payment of all impounding fees, fines for any violation of this article, and such other fees as the City Council shall establish from time-to-time by resolution. 
(e)  Refusal to surrender any animal believed to have inflicted a bite on a person upon lawful demand shall be in violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 22, 7-20-10)  
Sec. 8-48. - Disposition of dead animals; required procedure. 
When any animal dies on public or private property, it shall be the duty of the owner of said animal or the owner of said private property to remove and dispose of said animal immediately. Should the owner not be aware of the animal's presence, the following procedures shall be followed: 
(1)  When any dead animal is found upon public property, the owner of the animal shall remove and dispose of said animal upon notification by the animal control officer, code enforcement officer, or any law enforcement officer to ensure that a public nuisance is not created. If the owner fails to do so within a reasonable time, the City shall remove and dispose of the animal and charge the cost of said removal and disposal and of all fines resulting from any violation of the Code to the owner of the animal if known. 
(2)  When any dead animal is found upon private property, the owner of the animal and the property owner shall have the joint and several duty to remove and dispose of the animal, upon notification by the animal control officer, code enforcement officer, or any law enforcement officer, to ensure that a public nuisance does not result. If the owner or the property owner fails to do so within a reasonable time, the City shall remove and dispose of said animal and charge the cost of said removal and disposal to the owner of said animal if known, and if not known, then to the property owner. 
(3)  Any person who knows that he or she has struck an animal with a vehicle shall immediately notify either the owner of the animal, a law enforcement officer, code enforcement officer, or an animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 23, 7-20-10)  
Sec. 8-49. - Impounding, disposing of, and redeeming animals. 
(a)  When any rabies-susceptible animal is found without a current tag, or when any animal is found in violation of any provision of this Code, said animal may be taken into custody by the animal control officer and disposed of as follows: 
(1)  Where such animal bears no indicia of ownership, said animal shall be confined by the animal control officer at an impounding or holding facility or animal shelter for five days, excluding the date said animal is taken into custody. At the expiration of said five days, if no owner has appeared to claim said animal, said animal shall be deemed abandoned and may be destroyed in a humane fashion or otherwise adopted, rescued, or fostered out alive. 
(2)  Where such animal bears an indicia of ownership, the animal control officer shall make a good faith effort to notify the owner of the animal's impoundment. Said animal shall be confined by the animal control officer for five days. At the expiration of said five days, if no owner has appeared to claim said animal, said animal shall be deemed abandoned and may be destroyed in a humane fashion or otherwise adopted, rescued, or fostered out alive. 
(b)  Live animals shall not be disposed of by any City employee by providing the animals to any medical school, college, university, person, firm, association or corporation, for experimentation or vivisection purposes, or to any person providing, selling or supplying dogs and cats and other animals to any medical school, college, university, person, firm, association or corporation for experimentation or vivisection purposes. 
(c)  Live animals that are found by the animal control officer or a licensed veterinarian to be ill or injured so seriously that medical treatment would needlessly prolong the animal's life, may be euthanized, providing that the animal bears no indicia of ownership. 
(d)  Animals shall be released to owners only upon presentation of proof of ownership and after proper inoculation, licensing, and payment of all impounding fees, fines for any violation of this article, and such other fees as the City Council shall establish from time-to-time by resolution. 
(e)  At the discretion of the animal control officer, animals may be disposed of by adoption. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 24, 7-20-10)  
Sec. 8-50. - Animals exempt from ordinance. 
(a)  The licensing provision of this Code shall not apply to greyhounds kept, maintained or brought into City for the purpose of racing at licensed greyhound tracks; animals used as part of entertainment acts when properly controlled; nor shall said provisions apply to animals remaining in the City for a period of less than 30 days; or to livestock, or to purebreds kept, maintained or brought into the City for the purpose of training; provided, however, that nothing in this Section shall prohibit the demand for proof of vaccination done in another state, and failure to provide said proof upon demand shall require said animal to be vaccinated under the provisions of this Code upon order of the animal control officer. 
(b)  During legally declared hunting seasons, as the same shall be designated from year to year in accordance with state law, hunting dogs shall not be deemed to be at large when engaged in a hunt or at large as a result of a hunt. Dogs declared to be dangerous as defined in section 8-28 shall not be used as hunting dogs. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 25, 7-20-10)  
Sec. 8-51. - License tag required/other pets. 
(a)  Every person owning, keeping, harboring or controlling any rabies-susceptible animal within the City, or bringing any rabies-susceptible animal, except livestock, into the City, shall within 30 days of bringing such animal into the City, register said rabies-susceptible animal, except livestock, with the City and obtain a license tag number. 
(b)  The required license tag shall be worn by the rabies-susceptible animal at all times unless a licensed veterinarian or the animal control officer shall certify that the wearing of a tag is impossible, impractical or dangerous to the particular type of animal involved. 
(c)  The City Council may assess fees for the purpose of administering the provisions of this Code by adopting a resolution establishing said fees. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall be in compliance with the requirements of F.S. § 828.28. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 26, 7-20-10)  
Sec. 8-52. - Impoundment, quarantine, etc., when suspected of having rabies. 
(a)  Any rabies-susceptible animal suspected of having rabies shall be impounded at the owner's expense at a place designated by the animal control officer. 
(b)  Any rabies-susceptible animal bitten by a known rabid animal shall be placed under the surveillance of an animal control officer or the Flagler County Health Department, as appropriate, and shall be processed pursuant to State Law. 
(c)  It is prohibited and unlawful for any person to fail to surrender any animal that is not vaccinated for rabies for quarantine as required herein when demand is made thereof by the Flagler County Health Department or an animal control officer of the City of Palm Coast. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 27, 7-20-10)  
Sec. 8-53. - Business tax receipt required. 
It is prohibited and unlawful for any person owning or operating a commercial kennel within the City to fail to register said kennel with the animal control officer and obtain a business tax receipt license with the City of Palm Coast. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 28, 7-20-10)  
Sec. 8-54. - Noncommercial kennels exempt. 
Noncommercial kennels shall be exempt from the business tax receipt requirements of this Code; provided, however, that it is prohibited and unlawful for the owner or operator of any noncommercial kennel to allow said kennel to become a public nuisance A hobby breeder shall be deemed a noncommercial kennel for the purposes of this Code, however, said breeder is subject to the City licensing requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 29, 7-20-10)  
Sec. 8-55. - Housing for business entities. 
(a)  Housing facilities for animals shall be structurally sound and shall be maintained in good repair, to protect the animals from injury, and to contain and restrict the entrance of other animals. 
(b)  Any bedding utilized shall be clean and dry. All animal rooms, cages, kennels, shipping containers, and runs shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate and proper accommodations and protection from the weather for the animals kept within. 
(c)  All cages shall be constructed of a nonabsorbent porous material. All cages, except bird cages, shall have floors of either solid construction or woven or wire mesh construction or any combination thereof. Cages having woven or wire mesh floors may be used to confine animals provided that the spaces between the wire mesh or weave are smaller than the pads of the feet of the animals confined therein. Cages having wire construction shall be constructed of wire which is of sufficient thickness so as to preclude injury to the animals confined therein. Cages shall be of sufficient height to permit every animal confined therein to stand, turn and to lie down flat. It is prohibited and unlawful to entirely enclose cages with solid walls. Stacked cages shall have solid floors. 
(d)  Animals of different species, except fish, may not be confined or displayed in the same cage. All animals which are natural enemies, temperamentally unsuited, or otherwise incompatible shall not be quartered together or so near each other as to cause injury, fear or torment. If it is determined by clear and convincing evidence that two or more animals are so trained or inclined by nature that they can be placed together and do not attack each other or perform or attempt any hostile act to the others, such animals shall be deemed not to be natural enemies and shall not be required to be kept in separate runs or accommodations or otherwise segregated. 
(e)  All areas in which animals are confined shall be connected to an outside ventilating system or some other appropriate means of ventilation and air filtration shall be provided. The area shall be illuminated during the daylight hours but not directly into cages. 
(f)  Whenever an animal is left unattended at a commercial animal facility, the name and telephone number of the responsible person shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the front of the property, visible from outside the facility. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 30, 7-20-10)  
Sec. 8-56. - Standards for care for commercial entities. 
(a)  Every facility in possession of a business tax receipt shall keep a permanent record of the deaths of any warm-blooded animals, excluding rodents, under its control. Such record shall state the species of the deceased animal and the date and the cause of death, if known. These records shall be open to inspection by the City of Palm Coast Animal Control Officers. 
(b)  Any animal which exhibits symptoms of disease or illness shall be separated to the greatest extent possible from other healthy animals. It is prohibited and unlawful to expose or offer for sale to the public any animal which is known to have, or may reasonably be suspected of having, a disease contagious or communicable to humans or other animals. 
(c)  Fresh water shall be continuously available to all animals and replaced whenever necessary during each and every day. 
(d)  All animals requiring the daily intake of food shall be fed at least once each and every 24-hour period. The type of food provided shall be appropriate for each particular species and shall be of sufficient nutritive content for the health and well-being of the species. 
(e)  All areas of confinement, display and sales and storage areas shall be maintained in a healthful and sanitary condition. These areas shall be cleaned and disinfected regularly as conditions warrant. Feed and water dishes shall be emptied and cleaned at least once each and every day. 
(f)  All animals exhibiting symptoms of illness or disease shall be treated by a licensed veterinarian. If required, diseased animals shall be humanely destroyed under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian or animal control officer. 
(g)  It is prohibited and unlawful to transport any animal by private or public means in an open vehicle, unless short or double tethered or housed in a container designed for that purpose, including provisions for adequate ventilation and food and water. If a container is used, the container shall have an open grill at one end, have a solid top and bottom, and a minimum of 15 percent of the total accumulated side and end area shall incorporate an open grill for air circulation. 
(h)  Every facility in possession of a business tax receipt shall keep on record a medical statement from or notation of consultation with a licensed veterinarian, if for any reason an animal in its care would need to be exempted from any requirement of this section. 
(i)  Dogs which have been weaned shall be taken from cages and allowed to exercise at least three times per day, including Sunday and holidays. 
(j)  Dogs and cats under six months of age shall be fed at least twice each 24 hours, including Sundays and holidays. 
(k)  Cats, if crated, shall have a minimum area of floor space of 576 square inches, and a height of 24 inches, and the crate shall contain a litter pan. Replacement crates and new crates shall have 672 square inches of floor area. 
(l)  All cages in which simians are confined shall be at least twice the height of the tallest simian confined therein. 
(m)  Each bird cage shall contain at least two horizontal perches and provide sufficient perch space for every bird confined therein. Perches shall not be aligned vertically. 
(n)  In addition to birdseed and water, each bird cage shall contain an amount of fresh gravel needed for digestion sufficient for the number of birds confined therein. 
(o)  Parrots and other large birds shall not be confined in a cage with smaller birds, or in a cage smaller than their wing span. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 31, 7-20-10)  
Sec. 8-57. - Methods of enforcement; procedures; investigations. 
(a)  An animal control officer who has probable cause to believe that a person has committed an act in violation of this Code shall accomplish one or more of the following: 
(1)  Complainants must execute an affidavit when making a complaint; 
(2)  Issue a courtesy notice; and/or 
(3)  Issue a notice of violation (warning notice); and/or 
(4)  Impound the animal involved. Such animal may be redeemed as provided for in this Code; and/or 
(5)  Issue a civil citation to the person who is in violation of this article. The civil penalty shall not exceed $500.00. Such citation may be contested to the City's Hearing Officer. 
The citation shall contain: 
i.  The date and time of issuance. 
ii.  The name and address of the person. 
c.  The date and time the civil infraction was committed. 
d.  The facts constituting probable cause. 
e.  The ordinance violated. 
f.  The name and authority of the officer. 
g.  The procedure for the person to follow in order to pay the civil penalty or to contest the citation or to appear before the hearing officer. 
h.  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects to contest the citation. 
i.  The applicable civil penalty if the person elects not to contest the citation. 
j.  A conspicuous statement that if the person fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed, or fails to appear before the hearing officer to contest the citation, he/she shall be deemed to have waived his right to contest the citation and that, in such case, judgment may be entered against the person for an amount up to the maximum civil penalty. 
k.  A conspicuous statement that a person required to appear before the hearing officer as ordered does not have the option of paying a fine in lieu of appearing before the hearing officer. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the county or state from pursuing alternate legal remedies, including seeking to enjoin an existing or ongoing violation of this article, referring the matter to the Palm Coast City Code Enforcement Board in an appropriate case, or pursuing criminal prosecution pursuant to F.S. § 125.69(1). 
(c)  Failure to provide a Notice of Violation shall not impose any civil or criminal liability upon the City, its agents or employees. 
(d)  Aggravated violations of this Code which result in the unprovoked biting, attacking or wounding of a domestic animal; violations resulting in the destruction or loss of personal property; second or subsequent violations of local animal cruelty laws; or violations resulting in the issuance of a third or subsequent citation to a person will require a mandatory court appearance. The citation must clearly inform the person of the mandatory court appearance. 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 32, 7-20-10)  
Sec. 8-58. - Options of persons cited/citation procedures. 
(a)  Any person cited for an infraction under this article may: 
(1)  Sign and accept a citation indicating a promise to appear; or 
(2)  Post a bond in an amount equal to the applicable civil penalty hereinafter provided for. 
(b)  Any person who willfully refuses to post a bond or accept and sign the citation shall be in violation of this Code and shall be punished in accordance with F.S. ch. 166, and F.S. § 775.083, or their successor provision(s). 
(c)  Any person cited with a violation of this article may: 
(1)  Pay the civil penalty established herein within ten days of the date of receiving the citation; or 
(2)  If he or she has posted bond, forfeit bond by not appearing at the designated time and location. 
(3)  If the person cited follows either of the above procedures, he or she shall be deemed to have admitted the infraction and to have waived his or her right to a hearing on the issue of commission of the infraction. 
(d)  Any person electing to appear or who is required to so appear and does not appear shall be deemed to have waived his or her right to contest the civil penalty being assessed and shall be subject to the penalties allowed by F.S. ch. 166 (except for incarceration), and F.S. § 775.083, or their successor provision(s). 
(Ord. No. 2010-10, § 33, 7-20-10)  
Chapter 15 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 15-1. - Florida Building Code. 
Section 15.1. Florida Building Code. The Florida Building Code is adopted by reference. 
Section 15.2. Permit Fees by Resolution. The City Council may approve and establish building and permit fees by resolution. 
Section 15.3. Wind-borne Demarcation Line. The City Council hereby recognizes the 120 m.p.h. wind-borne demarcation line beginning at the South end of Palm Coast East of U.S. Hwy 1 South to Belle Terre Parkway; East of Belle Terre Parkway to Matanzas Woods Parkway; North of Matanzas Parkway to U.S. Hwy 1; and East of U.S. Hwy 1 North; as depicted on the attached Map referred to as Exhibit 'A'. 
(Ord. No. 08-14, § 4, 7-15-08)  
Secs. 15-2—15-27. - Reserved.  
Sec. 15-28. - Technical amendments to the Florida Building Code, Building. 
In Section 202, Definitions, modify as follows: 
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. The term also includes flood-related damage sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event on average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a building or structure taking place during a 10-year period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the building or structure before the improvement or repair is started. The period of accumulation begins when the first improvement or repair of each building is permitted subsequent to August 19, 2008. If the structure has incurred "substantial damage," any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
In Section 1612, Flood Loads, add as follows: 
1612.4.2 Elevation requirements. The minimum elevation requirements for coastal high hazard areas (Zone V) and Coastal A Zones shall be as specified in ASCE 24 or the base flood elevation plus 2 feet (610 mm), whichever is higher. 
1612.4.3 Additional requirements for enclosed areas. In addition to the requirements of ASCE 24, enclosed areas below the design flood elevation shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms except for stairwells, ramps, and elevators. 
(Ord. No. 2018-11 , § 2, 4-17-18)  
Sec. 15-29. - technical amendments to the Florida Building Code, Existing Building. 
In Section 202, Definitions, modify as follows: 
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. The term also includes flood-related damage sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a building or structure taking place during a 10-year period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the building or structure before the improvement or repair is started. The period of accumulation begins when the first improvement or repair of each building is permitted subsequent to August 19, 2008. If the structure has incurred "substantial damage," any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
(Ord. No. 2018-11 , § 2, 4-17-18)  
Sec. 15-30. - Technical amendments to the Florida Building Code, Residential. 
In Section R322, modify as follows: 
R322.2.2 Enclosed areas below design flood elevation. Enclosed areas, including crawl spaces, that are below the design flood elevation shall: 
1.  Be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage. The interior portion of such enclosed areas shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms except for stairwells, ramps, and elevators, unless a partition is required by the fire code. The limitation on partitions does not apply to load bearing walls interior to perimeter wall (crawlspace) foundations. Access to enclosed areas shall be the minimum necessary to allow for the parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the building (stairway or elevator). 
Remainder unchanged 
R322.3.2 Elevation requirements. 
1.  Buildings and structures erected within coastal high-hazard areas and Coastal A Zones, shall be elevated so that the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure members supporting the lowest floor, with the exception of pilings, pile caps, columns, grade beams and bracing, is elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 2 feet or the design flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
2.  Basement floors that are below grade on all sides are prohibited. 
3.  The use of fill for structural support is prohibited. 
4.  Minor grading, and the placement of minor quantities of fill, shall be permitted for landscaping and for drainage purposes under and around buildings and for support of parking slabs, pool decks, patios and walkways. 
5.  Walls and partitions enclosing areas below the design flood elevation shall meet the requirements of Sections R322.3.4 and R322.3.5. 
R322.3.4 Walls below design flood elevation. Walls are permitted below the elevated floor, provided that such walls are not part of the structural support of the building or structure and: 
1.  Electrical, mechanical, and plumbing system components are not to be mounted on or penetrate through walls that are designed to break away under flood loads; and 
2.  Are constructed with insect screening or open lattice; or 
3.  Are designed to break away or collapse without causing collapse, displacement or other structural damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. Such walls, framing and connections shall have a design safe loading resistance of not less than 10 (470 Pa) and no more than 20 pounds per square foot (958 Pa); or 
4.  Where wind loading values of this code exceed 20 pounds per square foot (958 Pa), the construction documents shall include documentation prepared and sealed by a registered design professional that: 
4.1.  The walls below the design flood elevation have been designed to collapse from a water load less than that which would occur during the design flood. 
4.2.  The elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation system have been designed to withstand the effects of wind and flood loads acting simultaneously on all building components (structural and nonstructural). Water loading values used shall be those associated with the design flood. Wind loading values used shall be those required by this code. 
R322.3.5 Enclosed areas below the design flood elevation. Enclosed areas below the design flood elevation shall be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage. The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms except for stairwells, ramps, and elevators, unless a partition is required by the fire code. Access to enclosed areas shall be the minimum necessary to allow for the parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the building (stairway or elevator). 
(Ord. No. 2018-11 , § 2, 4-17-18)  
ARTICLE II. - GREEN DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-14, § 3, adopted July 15, 2008, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 15-31 and 15-32 in its entirety, which pertained to the building code and derived from Ord. No. 01-43, § 1, adopted December 18, 2001. For current provisions pertaining to the building code, the user's attention is directed to § 15-1.  Subsequently, Ord. No. 09-22, §§ 1—11, adopted Oct. 20, 2009, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as a new Art. II, §§ 15-31—15-41, was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 15; community development, ch. 17; environment, ch. 24; Land Development Code. 
 
Sec. 15-31. - Legislative findings and intent. 
(a)  The provisions set forth in the above recitals to this article (whereas clauses) are hereby adopted by the City Council of the City of Palm Coast as the legislative findings and intent pertaining to this article. 
(b)  That the City will encourage voluntary green building through innovative "Green" programs to include, but not [be] limited [to] the Green Development Program detailed herein. 
(c)  That the City will establish goals, programs, and procedures that will further enhance the City Council sustainable community vision. 
(d)  That a voluntary Green Development Program shall be created that recognizes and awards participants with incentive-based initiatives. 
(e)  That the Program will be voluntary for participants in order to effectively encourage the enhancement of sustainable and environmentally-friendly practices within and beyond the City of Palm Coast. 
(Ord. No. 09-22, § 1, 10-20-09)  
Sec. 15-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant. An owner of real property or authorized agent including, but not limited to, developers, an authorized developer of real property, or an apparently authorized person, contractor, or other legal entity including, but not limited to agents, employees, independent contractors, or others in privity with any of the above. 
City. The City of Palm Coast, Florida. 
City Council. The City Council of the City of Palm Coast, Florida. 
Construction. Any project associated with the creation, development, rehabilitation, or erection of any building eligible for the program. 
Environmental Management System (EMS). A planning and management tool which serves to establish, implement, maintain, and improve an environmentally based management plan. An EMS demonstrates an organization's conformity with stated environmental policies and aspects that it can control and those which it may influence. 
FGBC Local Government Designation. A designation given by FGBC to a City or County that achieves the requirement of their local government rating system that examines environmental best practices for all local government functions. Levels of platinum, gold, silver, and certified can be achieved. 
Florida-Friendly Community. An annual award for those communities that have Florida-Friendly Landscaping throughout both the home sites and common areas. 
Florida-Friendly Landscaping. Nine principles to guide Florida Yard and Neighborhood programs. The nine principles are to locate the right plant in the right place, water efficiently, fertilize appropriately, mulch, attract wildlife, manage pests responsibly, recycle, reduce stormwater runoff, and protect the waterfront. 
Florida Green Building Coalition, Inc. (FGBC). A 501(c)3 not-for-profit corporation whose mission is to establish and maintain a Florida system of statewide green building standards and third party certification programs with environmental and economic benefits. 
Florida Green Lodging. A program by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection to designate lodging establishments as "green" for following environmentally sensitive operating procedures. 
Florida Water Star. A water conservation certification program by the St. Johns River Water Management District for new and existing residential homes and commercial and community developments. Program standards and guidelines for water efficiency include indoor appliances and fixtures, irrigation systems and landscapes. 
Green Building. A designation given to buildings that have achieved the requirements of the green building rating system defined in this green building program. 
Green Building Initiative (GBI). A not-for-profit organization whose mission is to accelerate the adoption of building practices that result in energy efficient, healthier, and environmentally sustainable buildings by promoting credible and practical green building approaches for residential and commercial construction. 
Green Development. A development approach that goes beyond conventional development practice by integrating the following elements: Environmental stewardship, responsiveness, resource efficiency, sensitivity to existing and past culture, and community. Bringing these elements together through the green development approach provides numerous environmental and economic benefits by capitalizing on the interconnections. 
Green Development Program. The program outlined in this article for obtaining incentives for green buildings and developments. 
Green Home Standard (GHDS). A designation given by Florida Green Building Coalition to a existing or new Florida home that achieves an energy-efficient home that incorporates multiple environmental, ecological and sustainability features that materially enhance the built environment. Levels of platinum, gold, silver, and bronze can be achieved. 
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED). A rating system of the U.S. Green Building Council which serves to encourage and provide performance criteria structures and operations for existing and new construction including Homes, Commercial Interiors, Core and Shell, Schools, Healthcare, and Retail. 
Master Planned Development District (MPD). The purpose of the Master Planned Development District is to provide opportunities for innovative planning and design. Although greater flexibility is given within this district, procedures are established through the City of Palm Coast Unified Land Development Code to ensure that master planned developments are consistent with sound and generally accepted land development practices and that added benefit is accrued to the community. 
Program Certification. The final designation awarded to a program participant for satisfying all requirements associated with the program for a particular project. 
Program Participant. Any person or entity seeking program certification for a particular project. 
Project. Any construction associated with the creation, development, or erection of any building eligible for the program. 
Sustainable Construction. The process of environmentally sensitive, resource efficient site selection, preparation, design, construction, and operation of buildings. 
United States Green Building Council (USGBC). A non-profit organization whose mission is to transform the way buildings and communities are designed, built and operated, enabling an environmentally and socially responsible, healthy, and prosperous environment that improves the quality of life. 
(Ord. No. 09-22, § 2, 10-20-09; Ord. No. 2011-22, § 3, 12-20-11)  
Sec. 15-33. - Government leadership. 
With the achievement of the FGBC Green Local Government Designation, the City is recognized for innovative practices and programs within City facilities and the community. To further demonstrate the City's commitment to sustain and enhance effective operations and programs, the City shall: 
(1)  Create an Environmental Management System (EMS) for all City facilities and practices. The EMS will evaluate internal City operations to continually improve environmental performance measures with a systematic and multi-department management approach. 
(2)  The City will release an annual report that outlines EMS established goals and methodologies which serves to track resource consumption for potential reductions in the subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. 09-22, § 3, 10-20-09)  
Sec. 15-34. - Designation of responsibility for administration and implementation. 
This Program shall be administered by the City Manager, or designee, which shall be responsible for: 
(1)  Marketing the program to the community by any reasonably effective means including, but not limited to, press releases, television advertising, or advertising in electronic or printed methods; 
(2)  Developing any appropriate or necessary application procedures including, but not limited to, eligibility, fast tracking, and program compliance; 
(3)  Maintaining staff certification to effectively provide no-cost certification services to an Applicant; 
(4)  Coordinating at least one training workshop per year for the purpose of educating City staff and current and potential participants in the Green Development Program on the program and its benefits and requirements. 
(Ord. No. 09-22, § 4, 10-20-09)  
Sec. 15-35. - Green development program applicability. 
The program shall be voluntary and comprised of the following types of private construction activities: 
(1)  New residential construction; 
(2)  Residential retrofitting/remodeling; 
(3)  New commercial/non-residential construction; 
(4)  Existing commercial/non-residential construction; and 
(5)  Land development. 
(Ord. No. 09-22, § 5, 10-20-09)  
Sec. 15-36. - Standard. 
In addition to the Florida Building Code's minimum standards and the Unified Land Development Code (Ordinance No. 2008-16), the program shall be administered using the published LEED standards of the USGBC, GBI's Green Globes rating system, Green Lodging, FGBC Green Building Standard, FGBC Green Development Standard, Florida Friendly Landscaping, Florida Water Star or standards or elements thereof. In the event that these standards are no longer effective, an alternative sustainable building certification system may also be developed to measure compliance in the Green Development Program. 
(Ord. No. 09-22, § 6, 10-20-09; Ord. No. 2011-22, § 4, 12-20-11)  
Sec. 15-37. - Construction based incentives. 
For any participant seeking Green Development Program certification, incentives shall be provided, but not limited to the following to generate a net reduction of project costs by a minimum of $300.00 for new residential construction and residential retrofitting/remodeling; and $1,000.00 for new commercial construction and commercial retrofitting/remodeling. 
(1)  Permit Fee: To effectively encourage participation and establish sustainable building within Palm Coast, the Building Division shall reduce through Resolution 09-182, Administrative, Plan Review fees for Applicants participating within the Green Development Program. Fee reduction shall not apply to re-inspection fees. 
(2)  Fast track development review: 
a.  [Development services:] Development services, including site plan review, submitted or resubmitted for review, for Green Development Program projects shall be given priority over projects which are not Green Development projects by all City departments reviewing such applications. 
b.  [Priority status:] Applicants who obtain priority status pursuant to this section shall provide proof of sustainable building certification to the City within 180 days of construction completion, as defined by Certificate of Occupancy issue date. Application forms for sustainable building certification and agreements with property owners or developers seeking priority status may provide that property owners or developers who obtain priority status but fail to obtain sustainable building certification may be denied future priority status by the City Manager, or designee. 
c.  Florida Green Building Coalition Certification: As part of a "Building Final" inspection services, the City will provide one optional and no-cost certification service per applicant specific to the FGBC standards for a new home and new commercial building. By utilizing this optional service, the program participant shall utilize the completed assessment in pursuit of project certification with FGBC. Proof of FGBC application submittal shall be submitted to the City within 180 days of inspection completion. 
d.  Designation: The City shall coordinate a program of recognition, on the City website or by other additional means, identifying permitted construction as a green development project with benefits to the community and the environment. 
(Ord. No. 09-22, § 7, 10-20-09)  
Sec. 15-38. - Planned development incentives. 
For any participant seeking Green Development Program certification, incentives shall be provided, but not limited to the following to generate a net reduction of project costs by a minimum of $2,500.00. 
(1)  Fast track development review: 
a.  Planning services, including site plan review, submitted or resubmitted for review, for Green Development Program projects shall be given priority over projects which are not Green Development projects by all City departments reviewing such applications. 
b.  Applicants who obtain priority status pursuant to this section shall process approvals through a Master Plan Development application process at which time the Applicant shall provide proof of pursuing a Green Development certification through LEED, FGBC or equivalent standard for sustainable building. 
(2)  Designation: The City shall coordinate a program of recognition, on the City website or by other additional means, identifying permitted construction as a green development project with benefits to the community and the environment. 
(Ord. No. 09-22, § 8, 10-20-09)  
Sec. 15-39. - Certification. 
The Green Development Program elements shall be subject to certification by a qualified third party who has been trained and certified as a green agent by the overseeing organization including, but not limited to, U.S. Green Building Council and Florida Green Building Coalition. For the purpose of this section of the program, "third party" means any person or entity authorized and qualified to perform the certification processes. 
(Ord. No. 09-22, § 9, 10-20-09)  
Sec. 15-40. - Ongoing review. 
The City is directed to maintain a continuing review of local, state, and national green building and development programs and make recommendations to the Council for any changes to this Chapter as a result of changes in laws, practices, or technologies concerning green building programs. 
(Ord. No. 09-22, § 10, 10-20-09)  
Sec. 15-41. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 2013-13, adopted Dec. 3, 2013, repealed § 15-41, which pertained to the sunset of the Green Development Program, and derived from Ord. No. 09-22, § 11, adopted Oct. 20, 2009 and Ord. No. 2011-22, § 5, adopted Dec. 20, 2011.  
ARTICLE III. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-14, § 3, adopted July 15, 2008, repealed the former article III, § 15-56 in its entirety, which pertained to associated codes and standards and derived from Ord. No. 01-2, § 7, adopted February 6, 2001, and Ord. No. 01-43, § 2, adopted December 18, 2001.  Subsequently, section 2 of Ord. No. 2010-02, adopted March 2, 2010, set out provisions designated as art. II, §§ 15-101—15-137. Inasmuch as art. II already exists, to avoid duplication and at the editor's discretion, said provisions have been redesignated as art. III, §§ 15-101—15-137. 
 
Sec. 15-101. - General. 
(a)  Title. These regulations shall constitute and be cited as the "Property Maintenance Code of the City of Palm Coast" hereinafter the "Maintenance Code." 
(b)  Scope. The provisions of this Maintenance Code shall apply to all existing residential and nonresidential structures and all existing premises and constitute minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners, operators and occupants; the occupancy of existing structures and premises, and for administration, enforcement and penalties. 
(c)  Intent. This Code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to ensure public health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises. Existing structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health and safety as required herein. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-102. - Applicability. 
(a)  General. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall govern. Where differences occur between provisions of this Maintenance Code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this Maintenance Code shall apply. Where, in a specific case, different sections of this Maintenance Code specify different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. 
(b)  Maintenance. Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by this Maintenance Code or a previous regulation or code under which the structure or premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this section to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except for such temporary interruption as necessary where repairs or alterations are in progress. The requirements of this Maintenance Code are not intended to provide the basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and devices in existing structures. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner or the owner's designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, and premises. 
(c)  Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the Florida Building Code and other applicable codes. Nothing in this Maintenance Code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision of the Florida Building Code or other applicable codes or F.S. [ch.] 162. 
(d)  Existing remedies. The provisions in this Maintenance Code shall not be construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure which is dangerous, unsafe and unsanitary. 
(e)  Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this Maintenance Code or any applicable technical code, shall be executed and installed in a professional and workmanlike manner. All installations of equipment devises and safeguards shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. 
(f)  Historic buildings. The provisions of this Maintenance Code shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures officially designated as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the City Manager or designee to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare. 
(g)  Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this Maintenance Code shall be considered part of the requirements of this Maintenance Code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this Maintenance Code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this Maintenance Code shall apply. 
Exception: Where enforcement of a Maintenance Code provision would violate the conditions of the listing of the equipment or appliance, the conditions of the listing shall apply. 
(h)  Requirements not covered by Maintenance Code. Requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing fixture, structure or equipment, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this Maintenance Code, shall be determined by the City Manager or designee, pursuant to the other applicable regulations, codes and standards. 
(i)  Application of references. References to chapter or section numbers, or to provisions not specifically identified by number, shall be construed to refer to such chapter, section or provision of this Maintenance Code. 
(j)  Licenses and permits. All licenses and permits shall be issued or renewed only upon compliance with this Maintenance Code, if applicable, as well as compliance with all applicable provisions of state law, and technical codes under which such licenses and permits are granted. 
(k)  Other laws. No license or permit or other certification of compliance with this Maintenance Code shall constitute a defense to a violation of any other ordinance of the City or state law, or technical code applicable to any structure or premises, nor shall any provision in this Maintenance Code relieve any owner, operator, tenant, or occupant from complying with any such other provision or prevent any official of the City, county, or state from enforcing any such other provision. 
(l)  Violations; enforcement. Each violation of this Maintenance Code shall be deemed a strict liability offense. Any person who violates a provision of this Maintenance Code, or fails to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, may be prosecuted by any means provided by this Maintenance Code or by general law. The provisions of this Maintenance Code may be enforced and correction of a continuing violation may be obtained by any means provided by this Maintenance Code and by any other legal or equitable means available to the City. 
(m)  Conflict and severability as to this Maintenance Code. When, in a specific case, different sections of this Maintenance Code specify different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. In any case where the provisions of this Maintenance Code impose a higher standard than set forth in any applicable ordinance of the county, state law, or technical code, then the standards as set forth in this Maintenance Code shall govern, but if the provisions of this Maintenance Code impose a lower standard than set forth in any applicable ordinance of the county, state law, or technical code, then the higher standard shall govern. If any provision of this article is held to be invalid, unconstitutional, or unenforceable for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article, which shall be deemed separate, distinct, and independent provisions enforceable to the fullest extent possible. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-103. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purposes of this Maintenance Code, have the meanings shown in this Maintenance Code. Words stated in the present tense include the future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular. Where terms are not defined in this Maintenance Code and are defined in the Florida Building Code and other applicable codes, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as stated in those codes. Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies. Whenever the words "dwelling unit, "dwelling," "premises," "building," "rooming house," "rooming unit," "housekeeping unit" or "story" are stated in this Maintenance Code, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
Aisle. A space for walking, a clear path through rows; i.e., supermarket, theater, auditorium, church. 
Anchored. Secured in a manner that provides positive connection. 
Approved. Approved by the City Manager or designee. 
ASME. American Society of Mechanical Engineers. 
Basement. That portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade. 
Bathroom. A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower. 
Bedroom. Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes in either a dwelling or sleeping unit. 
Condemn. To adjudge unfit for occupancy. 
Detached. When a structural element is physically disconnected from another and that connection is necessary to provide a positive connection. 
Deterioration. The condition or appearance of a structure, or parts thereof, characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting or other evidence of physical decay or neglect, excessive use, or lack of maintenance. 
Dwelling unit. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Easement. That portion of land or property reserved or dedicated for present or future use by a person, agency or entity other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above a said lot or lots. 
Equipment support. Those structural members or assemblies of members or manufactured elements, including braces, frames, lugs, snuggers, hangers or saddles, that transmit gravity load, lateral load and operating load between the equipment and the structure. 
Exterior property. The open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such premises. 
Extermination means the control and eradication of insects, rats or other pests by eliminating their harborage places, by removing or making inaccessible materials which serve as their food, or by spraying or placing poison, fumigating, trapping, or by any other approved pest elimination methods. 
Garbage. The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Guard. A building component or a system of building components located at or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level. 
Habitable space. Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces. 
Hotel. An establishment that provides lodging/meals for a fee. 
Housekeeping unit. A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable space equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating which does not contain, within such a unit, a toilet, lavatory and bathtub or shower. 
Imminent danger. A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time. 
Infestation. The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or premises of insects, rats, vermin or other pests. 
Inoperable motor vehicle. A vehicle which cannot be driven upon the public streets for reasons including, but not limited to, being unlicensed, wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved under its own power. 
Labeled. Equipment, materials or products to which have been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the production of the above-labeled items and whose labeling indicates either that the equipment, material or product meets identified standards or has been tested and found suitable for a specified purpose. 
Let for occupancy or let. To permit, provide or offer possession or occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premises or structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land. 
Neglect. The lack of proper maintenance for a building or structure. 
NFPA. National Fire Protection Association. 
Occupancy. The purpose for which a structure, premises or building or portion thereof is utilized or occupied. 
Occupant. Any individual living or sleeping in a structure, premises or building, or having possession of a space within same. 
Openable area. That part of a window, skylight or door which is available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors. 
Operator. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy. 
Owner. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court. 
Person. A natural person, corporation, partnership, firm, company, agency, association, and any other legal entity or any other group acting as a unit. 
Pest elimination. The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that serve as t heir food or water; by other approved pest elimination methods. 
Premises. Any real property, lot, plot, parcel or tract of land, easement or right-of-way, including any structures and equipment thereon. 
Public way. Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use. 
Rooming house. A structure arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling. 
Rooming unit. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for cooking purposes. 
Rubbish. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, charcoal and other combustible materials, paper, cardboard, clothing, canvas and other textiles, rags, cartons, boxes, plastics, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, and cuttings, yard and landscape cuttings, trimmings, aluminum cans, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials. 
Sleeping unit. A room or space in which people sleep, which can also include permanent provisions for living, eating and either sanitation or kitchen facilities, but not both. Such rooms and spaces that are also part of a dwelling unit are not sleeping units. 
Stagnant water means, but is not limited to, any swimming pool, pond, cesspool, well, cistern, rain barrel or other receptacle containing water or accumulation of water that is not moving or flowing, may become foul smelling, contain growth of various flora, become coated with scum and in such a condition that mosquitoes may breed therein or may injure health or cause offense to other person. 
Strict liability offense. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal or administrative proceeding is not required to provide criminal or other intent as a part of its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited, or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do. 
Structure. That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof, including buildings of all kinds. 
Tenant. A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for sale or other agreement with the premises owner. 
Toilet room. A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or shower. 
Ultimate deformation. The deformation at which failure occurs and which shall be deemed to occur if the sustainable load reduces to 80 percent or less of the maximum strength. 
Ventilation. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space. 
Workmanlike. Executed or performed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work. 
Yard. An open space on the same lot with a structure. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-104. - General requirements. 
(a)  Scope. 
(1)  Scope and application. The provisions of this Maintenance Code shall govern the responsibilities of persons for the maintenance and occupancy of real property within the corporate limits of the City and shall apply to all existing residential and nonresidential structures and premises except as otherwise provided in this Maintenance Code. The provisions of this Maintenance Code shall constitute the minimum requirements and standards for structures, premises, equipment, and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance. Existing structures and premises that do not comply with the provisions of this Maintenance Code shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of protection for health and safety as required herein. Compliance with the provisions of this Maintenance Code shall be the responsibility of the owners, operators, tenants, and occupants of the real property. 
(2)  Provisions supplemental. The provisions of this Maintenance Code shall be cumulative to all others available to the City and shall not be construed to abolish or impair any other remedy of the City or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure which is dangerous, unsafe, or unsanitary, or to abate any other public nuisance existing on any premises. 
(b)  Responsibility. All owners and other persons with any legal, equitable, or possessory interest in any premises located within the City, whether developed or undeveloped and whether vacant or occupied, shall maintain or cause to be maintained such premises and all structures and equipment located thereon in a safe, clean, secure, sanitary, and presentable condition and in compliance with the provisions of this Maintenance Code and all other applicable codes, ordinances, laws, and regulations. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which are not in a sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with the requirements of this Maintenance Code. Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit are responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit or premises which they occupy and control, and using such premises in legal conformance with the provisions of this Maintenance Code and all other applicable codes, ordinances, laws, and regulations. No person shall maintain on the premises any noxious substances or materials which present a fire, health, or safety hazard including, but not limited to, garbage, trash, weeds, junk, debris, unserviceable or unlicensed vehicles, or any other offensive material. 
(c)  Vacant structures and land. All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public health or safety. 
(d)  Maintenance of equipment and systems. Equipment, systems, devices, and safeguards required by this Maintenance Code, any applicable technical code, law, or regulation, or a previous regulation or code under which the structure was constructed, altered, or repaired, or under which the premises were developed, shall be maintained in good working order. No owner, operator, manager, tenant, or occupant shall cause any required service, facility, equipment, system, device, safeguard, or utility to be removed from, shut off from, or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except for such temporary interruption as necessary while repairs or alterations are in progress. The requirements of this Maintenance Code shall not provide a basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and devices in existing structures. Except as otherwise specified in this Maintenance Code, the premises owner or the owner's designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of all required equipment, systems, devices and safeguards. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-105. - Unsafe structures and equipment. 
(a)  General. When a structure or equipment is found by the City Manager or designee to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful, such structure shall be condemned pursuant to the provisions of this Maintenance Code. The provisions of this Article shall govern the condemnation of any dwelling unit, structure, or equipment found to be unsafe and any dwelling unit or structure found to be unfit for human habitation and occupancy or otherwise unlawful, such that it is a threat to the health, safety, or general welfare of the occupants of such dwelling unit or structure, the public, or adjacent premises or structures. 
(1)  Unsafe structures. An unsafe structure is one that is found to be dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or warn occupant in the event of fire, or because such structure contains unsafe equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or complete collapse is possible. 
(2)  Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the structure which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or structure. 
(3)  Structure unfit for human occupancy. A structure is unfit for human occupancy whenever the City Manager or designee finds that such structure is unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to which the structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is unsanitary, vermin or rat infested, contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by this Maintenance Code, or because the location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the structure or to the public. 
(4)  Unlawful structure. An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in part, that was erected, altered or occupied contrary to law. 
(5)  Dangerous structure or premises. For the purpose of this Maintenance Code, any structure or premises that has any or all of the conditions or defects described below shall be considered dangerous: 
a.  Any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or other means of egress that does not conform to the approved building or fire code of the jurisdiction as to not provide safe and adequate means of egress. 
b.  The walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or other means of egress is so warped, worn loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of egress. 
c.  Any portion of a building, structure or appurtenance that has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, deterioration, neglect, abandonment, vandalism or by any other cause to such an extent that it is likely to partially or completely collapse, or to become detached or dislodged. 
d.  Any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof that is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting natural or imposed loads. 
e.  The building or structure, or part of the building or structure, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the support, or for any other reason, is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning of the building or structure is likely to fail or give way. 
f.  The building or structure, or any portion thereof, is clearly unsafe for its use and occupancy. 
g.  The building or structure is neglected, damaged, dilapidated, unsecured or abandoned so as to become an attractive nuisance to children who might play in the building or structure to their danger, becomes a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons, or enables persons to resort to the building or structure for committing a nuisance or an unlawful act. 
h.  Any building or structure that has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the approved building or fire code of the jurisdiction, or of any law or ordinance to such an extent as to present either a substantial risk of fire, building collapse or any other threat to life and safety. 
i.  A building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, ventilation, mechanical or plumbing system, or otherwise, is determined by the City Manager or designee to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease. 
j.  Any building or structure, because of a lack of sufficient or proper fire-resistance-rated construction, fire protection systems, electrical system, fuel connections, mechanical system, plumbing system or other cause, is determined by the City Manager or designee to be a threat to life or health. 
k.  Any portion of a building that remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned so as to constitute an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public. 
(6)  Duties and authority of City Manager or designee. 
a.  Generally. The City Manager or designee shall have the duty and authority to enforce the provisions of this article in addition to all other duties and authority the City Manager or designee may have by law. 
b.  Inspections. The City Manager or designee shall make all required inspections or may accept reports of inspection by agencies or individuals approved by the City Manager or designee. All reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The City Manager or designee is authorized to consult such other agencies and engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon technical issues that arise. 
c.  Entry to premises. The City Manager or designee is authorized to enter premises at reasonable times to inspect, subject to federal and state constitutional restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures. If entry to any premises is refused or not voluntarily obtained, the City Manager or designee is authorized to obtain access as provided by law. 
d.  Identification. The City Manager or designee and his duly authorized representatives, inspectors, and officers shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under this article and present such identification upon request. 
e.  Notices and orders. The City Manager or designee shall issue all necessary notices and orders specified in the provisions of this article. 
f.  Department records. The City Manager or designee shall keep the official records of all business and activities of the City Manager or designee specified in the provisions of this article. Such records shall be retained as long as the structure to which such records relate remains in existence, unless otherwise provided for by other regulations or law. 
g.  Coordination of inspections. Whenever in the enforcement of this Maintenance Code or any other code or ordinance, the responsibility of more than one official having jurisdiction is involved, it shall be the duty of the officials involved to coordinate their inspections and administrative orders as fully as practicable so that the owners and occupants of the structure or premises shall not be subjected to visits by numerous inspectors or officials or multiple or conflicting orders. Whenever an inspector or official from any agency or department observes an apparent or actual violation of some provision of any law, ordinance or code not within the inspector's or official's authority to enforce, the inspector or official shall report the findings to the official having jurisdiction. 
(7)  Condemnation of unsafe structures and equipment. 
a.  Condemnation in general. When, in consultation with professional staff's opinion, the City Manager or designee, based on reasonable grounds determines that any structure or equipment is found to be defective or unsafe or any structure is found to be unfit for human habitation and occupancy or otherwise unlawful, such that it is a threat to the health, safety, or general welfare of the occupants of such structure, the public, or adjacent premises or structures, the City Manager or designee shall condemn such structure or equipment as provided in this section. 
b.  Condemnation notice. Whenever the City Manager or designee condemns a structure or equipment, a condemnation notice shall be posted on a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice and shall be served, in any manner provided by this Maintenance Code for service of a code enforcement citation, on the owner and all other persons responsible for the structure or equipment and all occupants and other persons with any interest in the premises. If the notice pertains to equipment, it shall also be placed on the condemned equipment. 
c.  Contents of notice. The condemnation notice shall be in writing and include the following: 
1.  Description of the real property sufficient for identification. 
2.  Brief factual description of the nature of the defect or defects and why the notice is being issued. 
3.  An order to vacate and secure the dwelling unit, structure or premises when deemed necessary and appropriate by the City Manager or designee under the existing conditions and circumstances. 
4.  Notice to repair or demolish the condemned structure, allowing a reasonable time to make the repairs, corrections, and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or structure into compliance with the provisions of this Maintenance Code and the applicable provisions of all other codes, regulations, and laws. In the case of condemned equipment, an order to repair, replace, or remove such equipment, allowing a reasonable time therefor. 
5.  Notice that if the defects are not corrected pursuant to the correction order or a hearing is not requested within the time allowed, the City may cause correction of the defects and charge the reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the City for such corrections against the property to include and not be limited as a special assessment lien and a property lien. 
6.  Date of issuance. 
7.  Name of the City Manager or designee issuing the notice and order. 
8.  Instructions and due date for filing an appeal of the notice and correction order. 
9.  Notice that the costs of the administrative hearing may be assessed against the appellant if the notice and determination of the City Manager or designee are upheld after the hearing. 
10.  Notice that failure to file an appeal within ten days after service of the notice or order, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, shall constitute a waiver of the right to an administrative hearing on the determination of the City Manager or designee. 
d.  Placarding. In addition to posting and serving the condemnation notice, the City Manager or designee shall cause the posting of a placard of condemnation at each entrance to the condemned structure. A placard that pertains to defective or unsafe equipment shall also be placed on the condemned equipment. The placard shall read substantially as follows or in words of similar affect, to the extent applicable: 
"CONDEMNED 
This Structure is Unsafe and Unfit for Human Habitation 
And Must Be Vacated And Secured By: [DATE]. 
Occupancy of This Structure After Such Date 
(or Operation of Condemned Equipment) is Unlawful. 
The Unlawful Occupation of this Structure (or Operation of the Condemned Equipment) and/or the Removal, Obstruction, or Defacement of this Placard is Punishable by a Fine of Up to $500.00 and/or 60 Days Imprisonment. 
e.  Placard removal. The City Manager or designee shall cause removal of the condemnation placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, obstruct, or deface a condemnation placard without the approval of the City Manager or designee. A violation of this section may be prosecuted in any manner provided by law. 
f.  Occupancy prohibited. Any occupied structure condemned and placarded by the City Manager or designee shall be vacated and secured when so ordered. It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy a placarded premises or structure or operate placarded equipment, and for any owner or any other person responsible for the premises or structure to suffer or permit any person to occupy such placarded premises or structure or operate placarded equipment. 
g.  Failure to secure. It shall be unlawful for any owner or other person responsible for the premises or structure to fail to vacate and close up the condemned structure within the time specified in the condemnation order. The City Manager or designee upon report of such failure may take all actions necessary to cause the premises or structure to be closed and secured through any available City department or by contract or arrangement with a private contractor pursuant to City purchasing provisions. Such action shall be in addition to any prosecution brought for violation of this section or any other provision of this Maintenance Code. All costs for such work, together with all administrative and legal costs, shall be charged against the real property upon which structure is located and shall be a special assessment lien against the property. 
(8)  Securing of vacant structures. If the structure is vacant and unfit for human habitation and occupancy, and is not in danger of structural collapse, the City Manager or designee is authorized to post a placard of condemnation on the premises and order the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time specified in the order, the City Manager or designee shall cause the premises to be closed and secured through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate. 
(9)  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The City Manager or designee shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by this Maintenance Code and the referenced codes and standards set forth in the Florida Building Code or other applicable codes, or F.S. ch. 162, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property or when such utility connection has been made without approval. The City Manager or designee shall notify the serving utility and, whenever possible, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnection the owner or occupant of the building structure or service system shall be notified in writing as soon as practical thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-106. - Emergency measures. 
(a)  Imminent danger. When, in the opinion of the City Manager or designee, there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the City Manager or designee is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The City Manager or designee shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: "This Structure Is Unsafe and Its Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by the City Manager or designee." It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous condition or of demolishing the same. 
(b)  Temporary safeguards. Notwithstanding other provisions of this Maintenance Code, whenever, in the opinion of the City Manager or designee, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition, the City Manager or designee shall order the necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as the City Manager or designee deems necessary to meet such emergency. 
(c)  Closing streets. When necessary for public safety, the City Manager or designee shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized. 
(d)  Emergency repairs. For the purposes of this section, the City Manager or designee shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible. 
(e)  Costs of emergency repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by the jurisdiction, but shall be the responsibility of the owner, and shall become a lien on the real property. The legal counsel of the jurisdiction shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs. 
(f)  Hearing. Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon petition directed to the Code Board/Hearing Officer be afforded a hearing as described in this Maintenance Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-107. - Demolition. 
(a)  Demolition of dangerous, unsafe, or unsanitary structures. 
(1)  In general. The City Manager or designee shall order the owner of any premises upon which is located any structure which, in the City Manager or designee's professional judgment in consultation with professional staff's opinion based on reasonable grounds determined by personal investigation: 
a.  Is so old and dilapidated, or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and remove such structure; or 
b.  If such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary or to demolish and remove at the owner's option; or 
c.  Where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any structure, including any addition or other modification to a structure, for a period of more than one year since the expiration of the permit, to demolish and remove such structure, addition, or other modification, or to repair or demolish within a prescribed time period. 
(2)  Failure to comply with order. If the owner of a premises fails to comply with an order to repair or demolition order within the time prescribed, the City Manager or designee may, pursuant to the City purchasing procedures, cause the structure to be demolished and removed, either through a City department or by contract or arrangement with a private contractor, and all costs and expenses of the City for such demolition and removal shall be charged as a special assessment lien against the real property upon which the structure is located. 
(3)  Salvage materials. When any structure has been ordered demolished and removed, the City Manager or designee under said contract or arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell the salvage and valuable materials, if any, at the highest price obtainable. The net proceeds of such sale, after deducting the expenses of such demolition and removal, shall be promptly remitted with a report of such sale or transaction, including the items of expense and the amounts deducted, for the person who is entitled thereto, subject to any order of a court. If such a surplus does not remain to be turned over, the report shall so state. 
(b)  Rights of owners and other persons responsible. An owner or other person legally responsible for the structure or equipment, or other person with a legally recognized interest therein, that has been served with the condemnation notice and order shall elect either to: 
(1)  Within the time specified in the condemnation notice and applicable order: 
a.  Vacate and secure the condemned structure in the manner specified. In the case of condemned equipment, cease the use or operation of such equipment; and 
b.  Repair or demolish the condemned structure in the manner specified. In the case of condemned equipment, repair, remove, or replace such equipment; or: 
(2)  Appeal the issuance of the condemnation notice and order to the Code Board/Hearing Officer by filing a written request for a hearing with the City Clerk no later than ten days after service of the condemnation notice and order, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays. Failure to appeal within the prescribed time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to an administrative hearing and the validity and effectiveness of the condemnation notice and order shall be deemed established. 
(c)  Appeal; scheduling and conduct of hearing. 
(1)  Scheduling of hearing. Upon receipt of a timely request for an administrative hearing to contest the issuance of the condemnation notice and order, the City Clerk shall set and notice the matter for hearing before the Code Board/Hearing Officer at its next regularly scheduled meeting or as soon thereafter as possible. The Clerk shall return an untimely request for a hearing to the person filing such request with a written explanation for its return. 
(2)  Notice of hearing. At least ten days before the hearing, the City Clerk shall send a notice of hearing to the person requesting the hearing and provide a copy to the City Manager or designee. 
(3)  Code Board/Hearing Officer action. The Code Board/Hearing Officer shall make findings of fact based on the evidence of record upon conclusion of the hearing. In the event the appeal is heard by the Code Board, all findings and determinations made by the Code Board shall be by motion approved by a majority of those members present and voting, except that at least four members of the Code Board must vote in order for the action to be official. After the hearing, the Code Board/Hearing Officer may affirm, affirm with appropriate modifications and safeguards as are in conformity with the intent and purpose of this Maintenance Code, reverse, or modify the determination of the City Manager or designee. 
(4)  Appeal of Code Board action. Appeal of Code Board/Hearing Officer action shall be to the Circuit Court of local jurisdiction no later than ten days after the board decision, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays. Failure to appeal within the prescribed time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to appeal and the board decision shall be deemed final. 
(d)  Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any premises, dwelling unit, or structure upon whom a condemnation notice and order has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such premises, dwelling unit, or structure to another until the provisions of the condemnation notice and order have been complied with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of the condemnation notice and order issued by the City Manager or designee and shall furnish to the City Manager or designee a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such condemnation notice and order and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs required. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-108. - Exterior property areas. 
(a)  Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(b)  Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any structure located thereon. 
Exception: Approved retention areas and reservoirs. 
(c)  Sidewalks and driveways. All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions. 
(d)  Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from excessive weeds or plant growth. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens. 
Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and destroy weeds after service of a notice of violation, they shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with City codes. Upon failure to comply with the notice of violation, any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be paid by the owner or agent responsible for the property, or shall constitute a lien on real property. 
(e)  Rodent harborage. All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent reinfestation. 
(f)  Exhaust vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private property or that of another tenant. 
(g)  Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached garages, utility or storage structures, fences and walls, shall be maintained in compliance with this and all other applicable codes, ordinances, and regulations, structurally sound and in good repair and appearance. 
(h)  Motor vehicles. Except as provided for in other regulations, no inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises, and no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled. Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray booth. 
Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul, including body work, provided that such work is performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed and approved for such purpose. 
(i)  Defacement of property. No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure, building, fence, wall, gate, bench, sidewalk, sign, street, tree or other improvement on any private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti. 
It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-109. - Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs. 
(a)  Swimming pools. Swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and in a state of good repair, and operating condition at all times. The water shall not be in a stagnant condition. 
(b)  Enclosures. 
(1)  Nonresidential use. Public swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs, containing water more than 24 inches in depth shall be completely surrounded by a fence or barrier at least 48 inches in height above the finished ground level measured on the side of the barrier away from the pool. Gates and doors in such barriers shall be self-closing and self-latching. Where the self-latching device is less than 54 inches above the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate. Self-closing and self-latching gates shall be maintained such that the gate will positively close and latch when released from an open position of six inches from the gatepost. No existing pool enclosure shall be removed, replaced or changed in a manner that reduces its effectiveness as a safety barrier. 
(2)  Residential use. As per the requirements of F.S. § 515.29, the Residential Swimming Pool Act. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-110. - Exterior structure. 
(a)  General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound, sanitary and in compliance with the provisions of this Maintenance Code and all other applicable codes, laws and regulations so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(1)  Unsafe conditions. The following conditions shall be determined as unsafe and shall be repaired or replaced to comply with the Florida Building Code as required for existing buildings: 
a.  The nominal strength of any structural member is exceeded by nominal loads, the load effects or the required strength; 
b.  The anchorage of the floor or roof to walls or columns, and of walls and columns to foundations is not capable of resisting all nominal loads or load effects; 
c.  Structures or components thereof that have reached their limit state; 
d.  Siding and masonry joints including joints between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors and skylights are not maintained, weather-resistant or watertight; 
e.  Structural members that have evidence of deterioration or that are not capable of safely supporting all nominal loads and load effects; 
f.  Foundation systems that are not firmly supported by footings, are not plumb and free from open cracks and breaks, are not properly anchored or are not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects; 
g.  Exterior walls that are not anchored to supporting and supported elements or are not plumb and free of holes, cracks or breaks and loose or rotting materials, are not property anchored or are not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects; 
h.  Roofing or roofing components that have defects that admit rain, roof surfaces with inadequate drainage, or any portion of the roof framing that is not in good repair with signs of deterioration, fatigue or without proper anchorage and incapable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects; 
i.  Flooring and flooring components with defects that affect serviceability or flooring components that show signs of deterioration or fatigue, are not properly anchored or are incapable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects; 
j.  Veneer, cornices, belt course, corbels, trim, wall facings and similar decorative features not properly anchored or that are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects; 
k.  Overhang extensions or projections including, but not limited to, trash chutes, canopies, marquees, ducts not properly anchored or that are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects; 
l.  Exterior stairs, decks, porches, balconies and all similar appurtenances attached thereto, including guards and handrails, are not structurally sound, not properly anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects; or 
m.  Chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks and similar appurtenances not structurally sound or not properly anchored, or that are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects. 
Exceptions: 
1.  When substantiated otherwise by an approved method. 
2.  Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted pursuant to an approved demolition permit. 
(2)  Protective treatment. All exterior surfaces including, but not limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences, shall be maintained in good and serviceable condition. Exterior wood and masonry surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints, as well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors and skylights, shall be maintained weather resistant and water tight. All metal surfaces subject to rust, corrosion, oxidation or other decay shall be coated to inhibit such rust, corrosion, oxidation and other decay, and all surfaces with rust, corrosion, oxidation or other decay shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust, corrosion, oxidation or other decay. Oxidation, mineral, mold, mildew and all other stains and discoloration stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement. 
(3)  Premises identification. Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property and/or salt water canal. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of four inches high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch except where facing a salt water canal which shall be a minimum of two inches high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch. 
(4)  Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads. 
(5)  Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from holes, open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the entry of rodents and other pests. All ventilation and other openings below elevated floors shall be screened or otherwise secured against entry or rodents, vermin, insects and other pests. 
(6)  Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated where required to prevent deterioration, and entry of rodents, vermin, insects and other pests. 
(7)  Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance. 
(8)  Decorative features. All decorative features including, but not limited to, cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition. 
(9)  Overhang extensions. All overhang extensions including, but not limited to, canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. 
(10)  Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads. 
(11)  Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, flag poles, antennas and related towers and masts and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in good repair properly anchored and capable of supporting the imposed loads. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment. 
(12)  Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition. 
(13)  Window, skylight and door frames. Every window, skylight, door and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weathertight. 
(14)  Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes. 
(15)  Openable windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be easily operable and capable of being held in position by window hardware. 
(16)  Insect screens. Every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm) and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed. 
(17)  Doors. All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units and sleeping units shall tightly secure the door. Locks on means of egress doors shall be in accordance with other applicable codes and the Florida Building Code. 
(18)  Basement hatchways. Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water. 
(19)  Guards for basement windows. Every basement window that is openable shall be supplied with rodent shields, storm windows or other approved protection against the entry of rodents. 
(20)  Building security. Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units, room units or housekeeping units shall be provided with devices designed to provide security for the occupants and property within. 
a.  Doors. Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping units that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock designed to be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort and shall have a lock throw of not less than one inch (25 mm). Such deadbolt locks shall be installed according to the manufacturer's specifications and maintained in good working order. For the purpose of this section, a sliding bolt shall not be considered an acceptable deadbolt lock. 
b.  Windows. Operable windows located in whole or in part within six feet (1,828 mm) above ground level or a walking surface below that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a window sash locking device. 
c.  Basement hatchways. Basement hatchways that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with devices that secure the units from unauthorized entry. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-111. - Interior structures. 
(a)  General. The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition, and in compliance with the provisions of this Maintenance Code and all other applicable codes, laws, and regulations. Occupants shall keep that part of the structure which they occupy or control in a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a structure containing a rooming house, housekeeping units, a hotel, a dormitory, two or more dwelling units or two or more nonresidential occupancies, shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of the structure and exterior property. 
(1)  Unsafe conditions. The following conditions shall be determined as unsafe and shall be repaired or replaced to comply with the Florida Building Code and other applicable codes as required for existing buildings: 
a.  The nominal strength of any structural member is exceeded by nominal loads, the load effects or the required strength; 
b.  The anchorage of the floor or roof to walls or columns, and of walls and columns to foundations is not capable of resisting all nominal loads or load effects; 
c.  Structures or components thereof that have reached their limit state; 
d.  Structural members are incapable of supporting nominal loads and load effects; 
e.  Stairs, landings, balconies and all similar walking surfaces, including guards and handrails, are not structurally sound, not properly anchored or are anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects; 
f.  Foundation systems that are not firmly supported by footings are not plumb and free from open cracks and breaks, are not properly anchored or are not capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects. 
Exceptions: 
1.  When substantiated otherwise by an approved method. 
2.  Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted pursuant to an approved demolition permit. 
(b)  Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained structurally sound, and be capable of supporting the imposed loads. 
(c)  Interior surfaces. All interior surfaces, including windows and doors, shall be maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or covered. Cracked or loose plaster, perforated walls or doors, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall be corrected. 
(d)  Stairs and walking surfaces. Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony, porch, deck or other walking surface shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair. 
(e)  Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition. 
(f)  Interior doors. Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame and shall be capable of being opened and closed by being properly and securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the manufacturer of the attachment hardware. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-112. - Component serviceability. 
(a)  General. The components of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition. 
(1)  Unsafe conditions. Where any of the following conditions cause the component or system to be beyond its limit state, the component or system shall be determined as unsafe and shall be repaired or replaced to comply with the Florida Building Code and other applicable codes as required for existing buildings: 
a.  Soils that have been subjected to any of the following conditions: 
1.  Collapse of footing or foundation system; 
2.  Damage to footing, foundation, concrete or other structural element due to soil expansion; 
3.  Adverse effects to the design strength of footing, foundation, concrete or other structural element due to a chemical reaction from the soil; 
4.  Inadequate soil as determined by a geotechnical investigation; 
5.  Where the allowable bearing capacity of the soil is in doubt; or 
6.  Adverse effects to the footing, foundation, concrete or other structural element due to the ground water table. 
b.  Concrete that has been subjected to any of the following conditions: 
1.  Deterioration; 
2.  Ultimate deformation; 
3.  Fractures; 
4.  Fissures; 
5.  Spalling; 
6.  Exposed reinforcement; or 
7.  Detached, dislodged or failing connections. 
c.  Aluminum that has been subjected to any of the following conditions: 
1.  Deterioration; 
2.  Corrosion; 
3.  Elastic deformation; 
4.  Ultimate deformation; 
5.  Stress or strain cracks; 
6.  Joint fatigue; or 
7.  Detached, dislodged or failing connections. 
d.  Masonry that has been subjected to any of the following conditions: 
1.  Deterioration; 
2.  Ultimate deformation; 
3.  Fractures in masonry or mortar joints; 
4.  Fissures in masonry or mortar joints; 
5.  Spalling; 
6.  Exposed reinforcement; or 
7.  Detached, dislodged or failing connections. 
e.  Steel that has been subjected to any of the following conditions: 
1.  Deterioration; 
2.  Elastic deformation; 
3.  Ultimate deformation; 
4.  Metal fatigue; or 
5.  Detached, dislodged or failing connections. 
f.  Wood that has been subjected to any of the following conditions: 
1.  Ultimate deformation; 
2.  Deterioration; 
3.  Damage from insects, rodents and other vermin; 
4.  Fire damage beyond charring; 
5.  Significant splits and checks; 
6.  Horizontal shear cracks; 
7.  Vertical shear cracks; 
8.  Inadequate support; 
9.  Detached, dislodged or failing connections; or 
10.  Excessive cutting and notching. 
Exceptions: 
1.  When substantiated otherwise by an approved method. 
2.  Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted pursuant to an approved demolition permit. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-113. - Handrails and guardrails. 
General. Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more than four risers shall have a handrail on one side of the stair and every open portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface which is more than 30 inches above the floor or grade below shall have guards. Handrails shall not be less than 34 inches high or more than 38 inches high measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor of the landing or walking surfaces. Guards shall not be less than 36 inches high for residential and 42 inches high for nonresidential above the floor of the landing, balcony, porch, deck, or ramp or other walking surface. 
Exception: Guards shall not be required where exempted by the adopted building code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-114. - Rubbish and garbage. 
(a)  Accumulation of rubbish or garbage. All exterior property and premises, and the interior of every structure, whether vacant or occupied, shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage. 
(b)  Disposal of rubbish. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in approved containers. 
(1)  Rubbish storage facilities. The owner of every occupied premises shall supply approved covered containers for rubbish and the owner of the premises shall be responsible for the removal of rubbish. 
(2)  Refrigerators. Refrigerators and similar equipment not in operation shall not be discarded, abandoned or stored on premises without first removing the doors. 
(c)  Disposal of garbage. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved garbage disposal facility or approved garbage containers. 
(1)  Garbage facilities. The owner of every dwelling shall supply one of the following: an approved mechanical food waste grinder in each dwelling unit; an approved incinerator unit in the structure available to the occupants in each dwelling unit; or an approved leakproof, covered, outside garbage container. 
(2)  Containers. The operator of every establishment producing garbage shall provide, and at all times cause to be utilized, approved leakproof containers provided with close-fitting covers for the storage of such materials until removed from the premises for disposal. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-115. - Pest elimination. 
(a)  Infestation. All premises, including all structures thereon and the exterior of the premises shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate such harborage and to prevent reinfestation. 
(b)  Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for extermination within the structure prior to renting or leasing the structure. 
(c)  Single occupant. The occupant of a one-family dwelling or of a single-tenant nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination on the premises. 
(d)  Multiple occupancy. The owner of a structure containing two or more dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, a rooming house or a nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination in the public or shared areas of the structure and exterior property. If infestation is caused by failure of an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area occupied, the occupant and owner shall be responsible for extermination. 
(e)  Occupant. The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the continued rodent and pest-free condition of the structure. 
Exception: Where the infestations are caused by defects in the structure, the owner shall be responsible for extermination. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-116. - Light, ventilation and occupancy limitations; general. 
(a)  Scope. The provisions of this Maintenance Code shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for light, ventilation and space for occupying a structure. 
(b)  Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain light, ventilation and space conditions in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant, or permit another person to occupy, any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this Maintenance Code. 
(c)  Alternative devices. In lieu of the means for natural light and ventilation herein prescribed, artificial light or mechanical ventilation complying with the Florida Building Code and other applicable codes shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-117. - Light. 
(a)  Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total glazed area for every habitable space shall be eight percent of the floor area of such room. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any room and such obstructions are located less than three feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area for the room. 
Exception: Where natural light for rooms or spaces without exterior glazing areas is provided through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least eight percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than 25 square feet. The exterior glazing area shall be based on the total floor area being served. 
(b)  Common halls and stairways. Every common hall and stairway in all occupied residential dwelling units, other than in one-and-two family dwellings, shall be lighted at all times, with at least a 60-watt standard incandescent light bulb for each 200 square feet of floor area or equivalent illumination, provided that the spacing between lights shall not be greater than 30 feet. In other than residential occupancies, means of egress, including exterior means of egress, stairways shall be illuminated at all times with a minimum of one footcandle at floors, landings, and treads. 
(c)  Other spaces. All other spaces shall be provided with natural or artificial light sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions, and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the appliances, equipment and fixtures. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-118. - Ventilation. 
(a)  Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one openable window. The total openable area of the window in every room shall be equal to at lest 45 percent of the minimum glazed area required in subsection 117(a). 
Exception: Where rooms and spaces without openings to the outdoors are ventilated through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least eight percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than 25 square feet. The ventilation openings to the outdoors shall be based on a total floor area being ventilated. 
(b)  Bathrooms and toilet rooms. Every bathroom and toilet room shall have a window with a minimum of three square feet openable area, except that a window shall not be required in such spaces equipped with a mechanical ventilation system. Air exhausted by a mechanical ventilation system from a bathroom or toilet room shall discharge to the outdoors and shall not be recirculated. 
(c)  Cooking facilities. Unless approved through the certificate of occupancy, cooking shall not be permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory unit, and a cooking facility or appliance shall not be permitted to be present in the rooming unit or dormitory unit. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Where specifically approved in writing by the City Manager or designee. 
(2)  Devices such as coffee pots and microwave ovens shall not be considered cooking appliances. 
(d)  Process ventilation. Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious fumes, gases, dusts or mists are generated, a local exhaust ventilation system shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent at the source. Air shall be exhausted to the exterior and not be recirculated to any space. 
(e)  Clothes dryer exhaust. Clothes dryer exhaust systems shall be independent of all other systems and shall be exhausted outside the structure in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
Exception: Listed and labeled condensing (ductless) clothes dryers. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-119. - Occupancy limitations. 
(a)  Privacy. Dwelling units, hotel units, housekeeping units, rooming units and dormitory units shall be arranged to provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining spaces. 
(b)  Minimum room widths. A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall not be less than seven feet in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a clear passageway of not less than three feet between counterfronts and appliances or counterfronts and walls. 
(c)  Minimum ceiling heights. Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms and habitable basement areas shall have a clear ceiling height of not less than seven feet. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced not less than four feet on center and projecting not more than six inches below the required ceiling height. 
(2)  Basement rooms in one- and two-family dwellings occupied exclusively for laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a ceiling height of not less than six feet eight inches with not less than six feet four inches of clear height under beams, girders, ducts and similar obstructions. 
(3)  Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar purposes and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a clear ceiling height of at least seven feet over not less than one-third of the required minimum floor area. In calculating the floor area of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area with a clear ceiling height of five feet or more shall be included. 
(d)  Bedroom and living room requirements. Every bedroom and living room shall comply with the requirements of subsections (d)(1) through (d)(5). 
(1)  Room area. Every living room shall contain at least 120 square feet and every bedroom shall contain at least 70 square feet. 
(2)  Access from bedroom. Bedrooms shall not constitute the only means of access to other bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall not serve as the only means of egress from other habitable spaces 
Exception: Units that contain fewer than two bedrooms. 
(3)  Water closet accessibility. Every bedroom shall have access to at least one water closet and one lavatory without passing through another bedroom. Every bedroom in a dwelling unit shall have access to at least one water closet and lavatory located in the same story as the bedroom or an adjacent story. 
(4)  Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens and uninhabitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping purposes. 
(5)  Other requirements. Bedrooms shall comply with the applicable provisions of this Maintenance Code including, but not limited to, the light, ventilation, room area, ceiling height and room width requirements of this Maintenance Code; the plumbing facilities and water heating facilities requirements; the heating facilities and electrical receptacle requirements; and the smoke detector and emergency escape requirements. 
(e)  Food preparation. All spaces to be used for food preparation purposes shall contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for temporary storage. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-120. - Plumbing facilities and fixture requirements; general. 
(a)  Scope. The provisions of this Maintenance Code shall govern the minimum plumbing systems, facilities and plumbing fixtures to be provided. 
(b)  Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain such plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with these requirements, and all other applicable codes, laws and regulations. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any structure or premises, which does not comply with the requirements of this Maintenance Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-121. - Required facilities. 
(a)  Dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub or shower, lavatory, water closet and kitchen sink which shall be maintained in a sanitary, safe working condition. The lavatory shall be placed in the same room as the water closet or located in close proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which such water closet is located. A kitchen sink shall not be used as a substitute for the required lavatory. 
(b)  Rooming house. Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not provided, one water closet, one lavatory and one bathtub or shower having access from a public hallway shall be provided for each ten occupants. 
(c)  Hotels. At least one water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower shall be supplied for each unit. 
(d)  Employees' facilities. A minimum of one water closet, one lavatory and one drinking facility shall be available to employees. 
(e)  Drinking facilities. Drinking facilities shall be a drinking fountain, water cooler, bottled water cooler, or water dispenser. Drinking facilities shall not be located in toilet rooms or bathrooms. 
(f)  Public toilet facilities. Public toilet facilities shall be maintained in a safe sanitary and working condition in accordance with the Florida Building Code and other applicable codes. Except for periodic maintenance or cleaning, public access and use shall be provided to the toilet facilities at all times during occupancy of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-122. - Toilet rooms. 
(a)  Privacy. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall not constitute the only passageway to a hall or other space, or to the exterior. A door and interior locking device shall be provided for all common or shared bathrooms and toilet rooms in a multiple dwelling. 
(b)  Location. Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving, rooming units or dormitory units or housekeeping units, shall have access by traversing not more than one flight of stairs and shall have access from a common hall or passageway. 
(c)  Location of employee toilet facilities. Toilet facilities shall have access from within the employees' working area. The required toilet facilities shall be located not more than one story above or below the employees' working area and the path of travel to such facilities shall not exceed a distance of 500 feet. Employee facilities shall either be separate facilities or combined employee and public facilities. 
Exception: Facilities that are required for employees in storage structures or kiosks, which are located in adjacent structures under the same ownership, lease or control, shall not exceed a travel distance of 500 feet from the employees' regular working area to the facilities. 
(d)  Floor surface. In other than dwelling units, every toilet room floor shall be maintained to be a smooth, hard, nonabsorbent surface to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-123. - Plumbing systems and fixtures. 
(a)  General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and maintained in working order, and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and be capable of performing the function for which such plumbing fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and functional condition. 
(b)  Fixture clearance. Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearances for usage and cleaning. 
(c)  Plumbing system hazards. Where it is found that a plumbing system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, inadequate venting, cross connection, backsiphonage, improper installation, deterioration or damage or for similar reasons, the City Manager or designee shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-124. - Water system. 
(a)  General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the Florida Building Code and other applicable codes. 
(b)  Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from contamination, and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the flood-level rim of the fixture. Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sink faucets and other hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are attached and left in place, shall be protected by an approved atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an approved permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker. 
(c)  Supply. The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable the fixture to function properly, safely, and free from defects and leaks. 
(d)  Water heating facilities. Water heating facilities shall be properly installed, maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a temperature of not less than 110 degrees F (43 degrees C). A gas-burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room, bedroom or other occupied room normally kept closed, unless adequate combustion air is provided. An approved combination temperature and pressure-relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on water heaters. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-125. - Sanitary drainage system. 
(a)  General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system. 
(b)  Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects. 
(c)  Grease interceptors. Where it has been determined that a grease interceptor is not being maintained and serviced as intended by this Maintenance Code and the manufacturer's instructions, an approved interceptor monitoring system shall be provided or a maintenance program shall be established with documentation submitted to the City Manager or designee. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-126. - Mechanical and electrical requirements; general. 
(a)  Scope. The provisions of this Maintenance Code shall govern the minimum mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment to be provided. 
(b)  Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements, and all other applicable codes, laws and regulations. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises which does not comply with the requirements of this Maintenance Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-127. - Heating facilities. 
(a)  Facilities required. Heating facilities shall be provided in structures as required by this section. 
(b)  Residential occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68 degrees F (20 degrees C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms based on the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality indicated in the Florida Building Code. Cooking appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to meet the requirements of this section. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be required provided that the heating system is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature is 32 degrees F (0 degrees C) for Palm Coast, Flagler County, Florida. 
(c)  Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 65 degrees F (18 degrees C) during the period the spaces are occupied. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions. 
(2)  Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities. 
(d)  Room temperature measurement. The required room temperatures shall be measured three feet above the floor near the center of the room and two feet inward from the center of each exterior wall. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-128. - Mechanical equipment. 
(a)  Mechanical appliances. All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solid fuel-burning appliances, cooking appliances and water heating appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended function. 
(b)  Removal of combustion products. All fuel-burning equipment and appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney or vent. 
Exception: Fuel-burning equipment and appliances which are designed and labeled for unvented operation. 
(c)  Clearances. All required clearances to combustible materials shall be maintained. 
(d)  Safety controls. All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall be maintained in effective operation. 
(e)  Combustion air. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and for ventilation of the space containing the fuel-burning equipment shall be provided for the fuel-burning equipment. 
(f)  Energy conservation devices. Devices intended to reduce fuel consumption by attachment to a fuel-burning appliance, to the fuel supply line thereto, or to the vent outlet or vent piping therefrom, shall not be installed unless designed and labeled for such purpose and the installation is specifically approved. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-129. - Electrical facilities. 
(a)  Facilities required. Every occupied building shall be provided with an electrical system in compliance with the requirements of this section, and all other applicable codes, laws and regulations. 
(b)  Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with NFPA 70, as may be amended from time to time. Dwelling units shall be served by a three-wire, 120/240 volt, single-phase electrical service having a rating of not less than 60 amperes. 
(c)  Electrical system hazards. Where it is found that the electrical system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient receptacle and lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the City Manager or designee shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard. 
(1)  Abatement of electrical hazards associated with water exposure. The provisions of this section shall govern the repair and replacement of electrical systems and equipment that have been exposed to water. 
(2)  Electrical equipment. Electrical distribution equipment, motor circuits, power equipment, transformers, wire, cable, flexible cords, wiring devices, ground fault circuit interrupters, surge protectors, molded case circuit breakers, low-voltage fuses, luminaires, ballasts, motors and electronic control, signaling and communication equipment that have been exposed to water shall be replaced in accordance with the provisions of the Florida Building Code and other applicable codes. 
Exception: The following equipment shall be allowed to be repaired where an inspection report from the equipment manufacturer or approved manufacturer's representative indicates that the equipment has not sustained damage that requires replacement: 
a.  Enclosed switches, rated 600 volts or less; 
b.  Busway, rated 600 volts or less; 
c.  Panelboards, rated 600 volts or less; 
d.  Switchboards, rated 600 volts or less; 
e.  Fire pump controllers; rates 600 volts or less; 
f.  Manual and magnetic motor controllers; 
g.  Motor control centers; 
h.  Alternating current high-voltage circuit breakers; 
i.  Low-voltage power circuit breakers; 
j.  Protective relays, meters and current transformers; 
k.  Low-and medium-voltage switchgear; 
l.  Liquid-filled transformers; 
m.  Cast-resin transformers; 
n.  Wire or cable that is suitable for wet locations and whose ends have not been exposed to water; 
o.  Wire or cable, not containing fillers, that is suitable for wet locations and who ends have not been exposed to water; 
p.  Luminaires that are listed as submersible; 
q.  Motors; 
r.  Electronic control, signaling and communication equipment. 
(3)  Abatement of electrical hazards associated with fire exposure. The provisions of this section shall govern the repair and replacement of electrical systems and equipment that have been exposed to fire. 
(4)  Electrical equipment. Electrical switches, receptacles and fixtures, including furnace, water heating, security system and power distribution circuits, that have been exposed to fire, shall be replaced in accordance with the provisions of the Florida Building Code and other applicable codes. 
Exception: Electrical switches, receptacles and fixtures that shall be allowed to be repaired where an inspection report from the equipment manufacturer or approved manufacturer's representative indicates that the equipment has not sustained damage that requires replacement. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-130. - Electrical equipment. 
(a)  Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner, consistent with all applicable provisions of this Maintenance Code and all applicable codes, laws and regulations. 
(b)  Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at least two separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall contain at least one grounded-type receptacle or a receptacle with a ground fault circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain at least one receptacle. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection. 
(c)  Luminaries. Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room, kitchen, bathroom, laundry room, boiler room and furnace room shall contain at least one electric luminaire. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-131. - Elevators, escalators and dumbwaiters. 
(a)  General. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained in compliance with ASME A17.1. The most current certificate of inspection shall be on display at all times within the elevator or attached to the escalator or dumbwaiter, be available for public inspection in the office of the building operator or be posted in a publicly conspicuous location approved by the City Manager or designee. The inspection and tests shall be performed at not less than the periodic intervals listed in ASME A17.1, Appendix N, as may be amended from time to time, except where otherwise specified by the authority having jurisdiction. 
(b)  Elevators. In structures equipped with passenger elevators, at least one elevator shall be maintained in operation at all times when the building is occupied. 
Exception: Structures equipped with only one elevator shall be permitted to have the elevator temporarily out of service for testing or servicing. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-132. - Duct systems. 
General. Duct systems shall be maintained free of obstructions and shall be capable of performing the required function. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-133. - Fire safety requirements; general. 
(a)  Scope. The provisions of this Maintenance Code shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for fire safety relating to structures and exterior premises, including fire safety facilities and equipment to be provided. 
(b)  Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall provide and maintain such fire safety facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this Maintenance Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-134. - Means of egress. 
(a)  General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of egress shall comply with the Florida Building Code and other applicable codes. 
(b)  Aisles. The required width of aisles in accordance with the Florida Building Code and other applicable codes shall be unobstructed. 
(c)  Locked doors. All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort, except where the door hardware conforms to that permitted by the Florida Building Code. 
(d)  Emergency escape openings. Required emergency escape openings shall be maintained in accordance with the Building Code in effect at the time of construction, and the following. Required emergency escape and rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys or tools. Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are permitted to be placed over emergency escape and rescue openings provided the minimum net clear opening size complies with the Building Code that was in effect at the time of construction and such devices shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool or force greater than that which is required for normal operation of the escape and rescue opening. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-135. - Fire-resistance ratings. 
(a)  Fire-resistance-rated assemblies. The required fire resistance rating of fire-resistance-rated walls, fire stops, shaft enclosures, partitions and floors shall be maintained. 
(b)  Opening protectives. Required opening protectives shall be maintained in an operative condition. All fire and smokestop doors shall be maintained in operable condition. Fire doors and smoke barrier doors shall not be blocked or obstructed or otherwise made inoperable. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-136. - Fire protection systems. 
(a)  General. All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance with the Florida Building Code and other applicable codes. 
(1)  Automatic sprinkler systems. Inspection, testing and maintenance of automatic sprinkler systems shall be in accordance with NFPA 25. 
(b)  Smoke alarms. Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed and maintained in Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated in Group R occupancies, regardless of occupant load at all of the following locations: 
(1)  On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of bedrooms. 
(2)  In each room used for sleeping purposes. 
(3)  In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements and cellars but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the upper level. 
Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in other groups in accordance with the Florida Building Code. 
(c)  Carbon Monoxide detectors. Carbon Monoxide (CO) detectors shall be provided for residential occupancies, which were constructed after July 1, 2008, when fossil fuel burning appliances are installed or structures with garages attached: 
(1)  Carbon Monoxide (CO) detectors shall be installed with in ten feet of sleeping room. 
(2)  Carbon Monoxide detectors may be smoke detector/Carbon Monoxide detector combination units. 
(d)  Power source. In Group R occupancies and in dwellings not regulated as Group R occupancies, single-station smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from the building wiring provided that such wiring is served from a commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery backup. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than as required for overcurrent protection. 
Exception: Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in buildings where no construction is taking place, buildings that are not served from a commercial poser source and in existing areas of buildings undergoing alterations or repairs that do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for building wiring without the removal of interior finishes. 
(e)  Interconnection. Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be installed within an individual dwelling unit in Group R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated as Group R occupancies, the smoke alarms shall be interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one alarm will activate all of the alarms in the individual unit. The alarm shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening doors closed. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Interconnection is not required in buildings which are not undergoing alterations, repairs or construction of any kind. 
(2)  Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to be interconnected where alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for interconnection without the removal of interior finishes. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 15-137. - Boarding standard. 
(a)  General. All windows and doors shall be boarded in an approved manner to prevent entry by unauthorized persons and shall be painted to correspond to the color of the existing structure. No structure is to remain boarded more than 60 days. 
(b)  Materials. 
(1)  Boarding sheet material. Boarding sheet material shall be minimum one-half-inch thick wood structural panels complying with the Florida Building Code and other applicable codes. 
(2)  Boarding framing material. Boarding framing material shall be minimum nominal two-inch by four-inch solid sawn lumber complying with the Florida Building Code and other applicable codes. 
(3)  Boarding fasteners. Boarding fasteners shall be minimum three-eighths-inch diameter carriage bolts of such a length as required to penetrate the assembly and as required to adequately attach the washers and nuts. Washers and nuts shall comply with applicable codes. 
(c)  Installation. 
(1)  Boarding installation. The boarding installation shall be in accordance with figures, as shown in Exhibit A. 
(2)  Boarding sheet material. The boarding sheet material shall be cut to fit the door or window opening neatly or shall be cut to provide an equal overlap at the perimeter of the door or window. 
(3)  Windows. The window shall be opened to allow the carriage bolt to pass through or the window sash shall be removed and stored. The two-inch by four-inch strong back framing material shall be cut minimum two inches wider than the window opening and shall be placed on the inside of the window opening six inches minimum above the bottom and below the top of the window opening. The framing and boarding shall be predrilled. The assembly shall be aligned and the bolts, washers and nuts shall be installed and secured. 
(d)  Door walls. The door opening shall be framed with minimum two-inch by four-inch framing material secured at the entire perimeter and vertical members at not more than 24 inches on center. Blocking shall also be secured at not more than 48 inches on center vertically. Boarding sheet material shall be secured with screws and nails alternating every six inches on center. 
(e)  Doors. Doors shall be secured by the same method as for windows or door openings. One door to the structure shall be available for authorized entry and shall be secured and locked in an approved manner. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 3-2-10) 
  
Chapter 16 - BUSINESSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Administration, ch. 2; alcoholic beverages, ch. 7; animals, ch. 8; buildings and building regulations, ch. 15; community development, ch. 17; emergency services, ch. 23; environment, ch. 24; fire prevention and protection, ch. 25; floods, ch. 26; franchise regulations, ch. 27; health and sanitation, ch. 28; impact fees, ch. 29; nuisances, offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 35; personnel, ch. 36; solid waste, ch. 41; streets, roads, bridges and other public places, ch. 42; taxation, ch. 43; traffic and vehicles, ch. 44; utilities, ch. 49, land development code, app. A. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Excise or license tax on property insurers. 
(a)  Assessment. There is hereby assessed, imposed and levied on every insurance company, corporation or other insurer now engaging in or carrying on, or which shall hereafter engage in or carry on the business of insuring with respect to property insurance, as shown by the records of the Department of Insurance, an excise or license tax in addition to any license tax or excise now levied by the City of Palm Coast, which said tax shall be in the amount of one and eighty-five one-hundredths percent of the gross amount of receipts of premiums from policy holders on all premiums collected on property insurance policies, covering property within the corporate limits of the City. 
(b)  Payment. The license of excise tax herein levied shall be due and payable annually on the first day of July on each year hereafter. 
(Ord. No. 02-15, §§ 1, 2, 7-2-02)  
ARTICLE II. - LOCAL BUSINESS TAX RECEIPTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— At the request of the City, the phrase "occupational license tax" was changed to "local business tax receipts" throughout Article II. Prior to said changes, Article II was entitled "Occupational License Tax." 
 
Sec. 16-31. - Purpose of article. 
The purposes of this article shall be to provide a method of regulating businesses within the City, to provide the means for issuing local business tax receipts these businesses, and to provide additional revenue for all municipal services. 
(Ord. No. 00-43, § 3, 8-1-00)  
Sec. 16-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Business means any activity, enterprise, profession, joint venture or occupation, whether or not for profit, conducted within the City, of such a nature that it provides either a product or a service to patrons, clients or customers. 
Employee means a worker or workers in a business location and shall include all full and part time personnel, including employees, independent contractors, principals and partners working for the business. 
Inventory means the total amount of goods, wares, and merchandise for sale as reported annually to the federal, state or local government for the purpose of determining property taxes and/or corporate income taxes. 
Number of employees means whenever the amount of a local business tax receipt is based, wholly or in part, on the number of persons employed, the number to be used in calculating the amount of the business tax receipt shall be the average number of persons employed during the preceding business tax receipt year or business operating period, or the average number of persons reasonably expected to be employed during the period for which the local business tax receipt is to be issued, whichever number shall be greater. A new business shall be based on a reasonable estimate of the number of the employees as of opening day. 
(Ord. No. 00-43, § 1, 8-1-00)  
Sec. 16-33. - Enforcement of article; authority to prescribe additional regulations. 
It shall be the duty of the City Manager to enforce each and every provision of this article. The City Manager or designee is authorized to prescribe reasonable rules and regulations and make interpretive rulings as necessary to effectuate the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-43, § 4, 8-1-00)  
Sec. 16-34. - Responsibility of review of licenses. 
(a)  City Manager or designee. City Manager or designee shall be responsible for investigation of business practices and the approval or denial of a local business tax receipt. The City Manager or designee shall have the power to investigate improper or unethical business practices on their own initiative or on a complaint basis. The City Manager or designee shall have the power to impose reasonable conditions and safeguards upon local business tax receipts under review. The conditions and safeguards may regulate business practices, advertising practices, litter control or noise abatement and control, and the City Manager or designee may establish other conditions and safeguards deemed proper. In addition, the City Manager or designee may recommend to the City Council the revocation of business tax receipts. 
(b)  Appeals. The local business tax receipt holder may appeal the decision of the City Manager or designee to the City Council, whose decision shall be final. The appeal must be filed within ten working days of the date of the rendition of the City Manager or designee's decision, and be accompanied by an appeal fee of $15.00. In the case of a recommended revocation, there shall be no appeal fee required from the business tax receipt. 
(Ord. No. 00-43, § 4, 8-1-00; Ord. No. 08-19, § 2, 9-16-08)  
Sec. 16-35. - Right of entry. 
Representatives of the City authorized by the City Manager shall have the power and authority to enter, free of charge, during business hours, any place of business for inspection in connection with a business tax receipt required by this article and demand exhibition of the required license certificate. It shall be unlawful for any person having a business tax receipt in their possession or under their control to fail or refuse to exhibit the business tax receipt on demand as required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 00-43, § 5, 8-1-00)  
Sec. 16-36. - Determination of classification of business. 
If an applicant for a local business tax receipt under this article disputes the classification assigned to their business, the City Manager shall decide the proper classification, reserving to the applicant the right to appeal the decision of the City Manager to the City Council. The decision of the City Council as to proper classification shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 00-43, § 6, 8-1-00)  
Sec. 16-37. - Local business tax receipt levied; applicability of tax. 
(a)  There is levied a local business tax receipt in the amounts set out in section 16-51 for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business, profession or occupation within the City limits on the following persons: 
(1)  Any person who maintains a permanent business location or branch office within the City, for the privilege of engaging in or managing any business within its jurisdiction. 
(2)  Any person who maintains a permanent business location or branch office within the City, for the privilege of engaging in or managing any profession or occupation within its jurisdiction, and any insurance company writing any class of insurance upon any person or property residing or located within the City. 
(3)  Any person who does not qualify under the provisions of subsection (a)(1) or (2) of this section and who transacts any business or engages in any occupation or profession in interstate commerce, where such a license tax is not prohibited by Article 1, Section 8, of the United States Constitution. 
(b)  Local business tax receipts required by this article shall not be construed to exempt from other forms of taxation the property used in the licensed business. 
(Ord. No. 00-43, § 7, 8-1-00)  
Sec. 16-38. - License required. 
No person shall engage in or manage any business, occupation or profession for which there is a local business tax receipt required by this article or any other ordinance of the City, unless that person procures a business tax receipt from the City to conduct the business. This includes every business operation advertised at an address within the City by sign, newspaper or otherwise, and any sign, newspaper, magazine or other advertisement shall be considered evidence of conducting the business advertised and be sufficient for prosecution in accordance with the terms of this article. Regulatory licenses shall issue even in those cases where fees are not required by the City. It shall be unnecessary for the City to send out notices to persons engaged in business in the City with respect to obtaining, renewing or transferring business tax receipts. 
(Ord. No. 00-43, § 8, 8-1-00)  
Sec. 16-39. - Registration required. 
(a)  Persons or businesses not located within the City limits, unless exempted by provisions of F.S. § 205.065, whether or not possessing a local business tax receipt from another City or County shall not provide products or services within the City without first having registered with the City. 
(b)  There shall be a fee of $45.00 paid at time of registration, and annually thereafter on or before October 1. 
(Ord. No. 00-43, § 9, 8-1-00)  
Sec. 16-40. - Application for a local business tax receipt. 
(a)  Before engaging in or operating a business in the City, every person shall file an application, on the prescribed form, with the City, signed by an officer, partner or owner of the business, giving the real name of the applicant. In cases where the applicant has qualified under the laws of the state for the use of a fictitious name, the business tax receipt, if issued, shall show the real name as well as the fictitious name of the applicant. In the application, the applicant shall set forth: 
(1)  The name of the owner, and, if a firm, the name of principal members of the firm, and, if a corporation, the name of its local manager and address of the main corporate office; 
(2)  The location of the business and the nature of the business; 
(3)  The classification which the business tax receipt fee is based upon; and 
(4)  Other pertinent information that may be prescribed by the City. 
(b)  No business tax receipt shall be issued except upon certification of the applicant providing information required by the City. The application and affidavit required by this section shall be retained as a part of the records of the City. 
(Ord. No. 00-43, § 10, 8-1-00)  
Sec. 16-41. - Misrepresentation of facts in obtaining a business tax receipt. 
Any business tax receipt obtained under the provisions of the article upon the misrepresentation of a material fact shall be deemed null and void. Any business tax receipt recipient who has thereafter engaged in any business under such a business tax receipt shall be subject to prosecution for doing business without a business tax receipt, to the same extent and degree as though no business tax receipt had been issued. 
(Ord. No. 00-43, § 11, 8-1-00)  
Sec. 16-42. - Prerequisites for issuance of local business tax receipt. 
(a)  Generally. No local business tax receipt shall be issued to any person otherwise required by this Code or other ordinances of the City or laws of the state to have a certificate of competency, to have a permit, to have passed an examination before engaging in a business, or to have deposited a bond in the City, until the person has exhibited to the City proof of having the certificate or permit, having passed the examination or having filed the required bond. 
(b)  Certificate of occupancy. No business tax receipt shall be issued for any business until the location thereof has been approved by the Development Services Director of the City and a certificate of occupancy issued. There are no exemptions from the required certificate of occupancy for new business tax receipts or new business locations. 
(c)  No local business tax receipt shall be issued to any applicant giving an address that does not comply with the applicable chapters of the City of Palm Coast Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 00-43, § 12, 8-1-00; Ord. No. 08-19, § 2, 9-16-08)  
Sec. 16-43. - Separate business tax receipts required for each location and business. 
Each business tax receipt issued under this article shall be issued for and apply to only one place of business within the City. If a person operates a business at more than one location, a separate license shall be required for each business location. Any person operating two or more unrelated businesses at a single location shall be required to have a separate business tax receipt for each individual business. 
(Ord. No. 00-43, § 13, 8-1-00)  
Sec. 16-44. - Display of license; identification stickers. 
(a)  Every person engaged in a business which is conducted from a fixed place shall keep the business tax receipt issued under this article therefore posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises. 
(b)  Every person engaged in a business but not operating from a fixed place of business shall keep the business tax receipt issued therefor upon their person at all times while engaging in the business for which it is issued, and shall display it on demand. 
(c)  Where identifying stickers or symbols have been issued for each vehicle, device, machine or other piece of equipment included in this article, the sticker or symbol shall be firmly affixed to each vehicle, device, machine or piece of equipment and shall not be removed during the period for which it has been issued, nor shall it be given away, sold or transferred to another person, nor shall its use be permitted by another person. 
(Ord. No. 00-43, § 14, 8-1-00)  
Sec. 16-45. - Transfer of license. 
All business tax receipts, except for those in the "Amusements—Transient" and "Seasonal—Special events" categories of business, issued under this article may be transferred to a new owner, when there is a bona fide sale of the business, upon payment of a transfer fee equal to ten percent of the annual license fee, not to exceed $25.00. 
(Ord. No. 00-43, § 15, 8-1-00; Ord. No. 01-17, § 1, 8-21-01)  
Sec. 16-46. - Replacement of business tax receipt. 
For the purpose of replacing any mutilated, destroyed or lost business tax receipt granted by the City under this article, an appropriate duplicate business tax receipt shall be issued upon submission of satisfactory evidence that the original business tax receipt was mutilated, destroyed or lost, upon the holder of the business tax receipt furnishing indemnity satisfactory to the City and upon payment of the sum of $10.00 to the City by the holder for each duplicate business tax receipt executed and delivered. 
(Ord. No. 00-43, § 16, 8-1-00)  
Sec. 16-47. - Term of business tax receipt. 
(a)  No business tax receipt issued under this article shall be issued for longer than one year. All business tax receipts shall expire on September 30, and business tax receipt fees shall be payable on or before October 1, unless otherwise specifically provided by this article; provided, however, that business tax receipts for the categories "Amusements—Transient" and "Seasonal—Special events" shall be valid for a maximum time period of ten successive days which must commence within seven days from the date of the issuance of the business tax receipt. 
(b)  Half-year business tax receipts may be issued by the City under the provisions of this article for the period from April 1 to September 30, upon payment of one-half of the tax fixed as the amount of that license fee for one year. No quarter-year business tax receipts shall be issued. 
(Ord. No. 00-43, § 17, 8-1-00; Ord. No. 01-17, § 2, 8-21-01)  
Sec. 16-48. - Illegal businesses. 
No business tax receipt issued under the provisions of this article and no payment of any business tax receipt fee required, imposed or levied under this article shall be construed as authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal business or any business that may now or hereafter be prohibited by this Code, other ordinances of the City, or state law, or the operation of a legal business in any illegal manner. 
(Ord. No. 00-43, § 18, 8-1-00)  
Sec. 16-49. - Exemptions. 
(a)  No local business tax receipt shall be required by any charitable, religious, fraternal, youth, civic, service or other such organization when the organization makes occasional sales or engages in fund raising projects when the projects are performed exclusively by the members thereof and when the proceeds derived from the activities are used exclusively in the charitable, religious, fraternal, youth, civic and service activities of the organization or any religious faith. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to require a business tax receipt for practicing the religious tenets of any church. 
(c)  Disabled veterans of any war or their unremarried spouses as defined in F.S. § 205.171 qualify for exemptions as described therein. 
(d)  Disabled persons, the aged, and widows with minor dependents as defined in F.S. § 205.162 qualify for exemptions as described therein. 
(e)  Pursuant to F.S. § 205.064, no local business tax receipt shall be required of any natural person engaging in the selling of farm, agricultural, grove, horticultural, tropical pisciculture or tropical fish products, or products manufactured therefrom, excluding intoxicating liquors, wine or beer, when such products were grown or produced by such natural person in the state. 
(Ord. No. 00-43, § 19, 8-1-00)  
Sec. 16-50. - Delinquency; penalty for failure to obtain local business tax receipt. 
(a)  Those local business tax receipts required by this article not renewed by October 1 of each year shall be considered delinquent and subject to a delinquency penalty as defined in this section. 
(b)  Any person engaging in or managing any business, occupation or profession without first obtaining a local business tax receipt, if required, shall be subject to a penalty of 25 percent of the business tax receipt determined to be due, in addition to any other penalty provided by this article, other ordinance or state law. It shall be no defense of nonpayment of any business tax receipt required by this article that the licensee did not receive any bill or notice that the tax was due from the City. 
(c)  Any local business tax receipt not received when due and payable shall be considered delinquent and subject to a delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount due for the month of October, plus an additional penalty of five percent of the amount due for each month of delinquency thereafter until paid. However, the total delinquency penalty shall not exceed 25 percent of the full local business tax receipt fee. 
(Ord. No. 00-43, § 20, 8-1-00)  
Sec. 16-51. - Fee schedule. 
The amount of fees imposed and levied by this article and other prohibitions and requirements pertaining thereto, shall be as provided in this section. Where a business is not specifically listed, the business shall be classified according to the fee schedule below using the Standard Industrial Classification Code (SIC Code) contained in the most recent edition of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, published by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget. 
CONSTRUCTION (C) 
(SIC 16—17) 
	Scaled Fee—No. of employees 	
	1—5 employees 	$100.00 
	6—10 employees 	200.00 
	11—20 employees 	300.00 
	21—30 employees 	400.00 
	Over 30 employees 	500.00 
MANUFACTURING (M) 
(SIC 20—39) 	
	Scaled Fee—No. of employees 	
	1—5 employees 	100.00 
	6—10 employees 	200.00 
	11—20 employees 	300.00 
	21—30 employees 	400.00 
	Over 30 employees 	500.00 
TRANSPORTATION, COMMUNICATIONS, ELECTRIC, GAS AND SANITARY SERVICES (T) 
(SIC 40—49) 
	Each business       Flat Fee 	200.00 
	Taxicab (per cab)       Flat Fee 	50.00 
	Utility       Flat Fee 	2,500.00 
RETAIL AND WHOLESALE TRADE (RW) 
(SIC 50—59) 
	General Retail and Wholesale (for inventory value less 
than $100,000.00) 
	Scaled Fee—No. of employees 	
	1—5 employees 	50.00 
	6—10 employees 	100.00 
	11—20 employees 	250.00 
	21—30 employees 	400.00 
	Over 30 employees 	500.00 
	General Retail and Wholesale (for inventory value 
equal to or greater than $100,000.00) 
500.00 plus $3.00 per $1,000.00 
of inventory value, or portion thereof. 
SERVICES (S) 
(SIC 70—89) 
	School/Day Care       Scaled Fee—Rated capacity 
	1—11 students/residents 	50.00 
	12—25 students/residents 	75.00 
	26—50 students/residents 	100.00 
	51—75 students/residents 	150.00 
	Over 75 students/residents 	200.00 
	Group Home/Adult Care       Scaled Fee—Rated capacity 
	1—11 students/residents 	100.00 
	12—25 students/residents 	150.00 
	26—50 students/residents 	200.00 
	51—75 students/residents 	300.00 
	Over 75 students/residents 	400.00 
	Warehouse Rentals       Scaled fee per 1,000 sq. ft. 
	First 5,000 sq. ft. 	50.00 
	Each add'l. 1,000 sq. ft. 	10.00 
	Rentals       Scaled Fee—Per unit 
	First Unit 	50.00 
	Each Add'l. Unit 	5.00 
	Personal Services       Scaled Fee—No. of employees 
	Business Services       1—5 employees 	70.00 
	Health Services       6—10 employees 	100.00 
	Repair Services       11—20 employees 	125.00 
	      21—30 employees 	150.00 
	      Over 30 employees 	175.00 
NON CLASSIFIABLE ESTABLISHMENTS (N) 
(SIC 99) 
	Adult Entertainment 
      Flat Fee—Each business 
	Each business 	1,750.00 
	Amusements—Permanent 	Flat Fee 
	Each Business 	200.00 
	Amusements—Transient       Scaled Fee—Number of days 
	Each event 	100.00 
	Bar       Scaled Fee—Seating Capacity 
	No Seats 	100.00 
	Seating 1—15 	100.00 
	Seating 16—40 	150.00 
	Seating 41—60 	200.00 
	Seating over 60 	250.00 
	Restaurants—With Alcoholic Beverages       Scaled Fee—Seating Capacity 
	Seating 1—15 	100.00 
	Seating 16—40 	150.00 
	Seating 41—60 	200.00 
	Seating over 60 	250.00 
	Restaurants—No Alcoholic Beverages       Scaled Fee—Seating Capacity 
	Seating 1—15 	50.00 
	Seating 16—40 	75.00 
	Seating 41—60 	100.00 
	Seating over 60 	125.00 
	Seasonal—Special Events       Each event 
		100.00 
	Shows and Exhibits       Scaled Fee—No. of booths 
	Exhibitors—Not for Sale 	
	1—25 booths 	50.00 
	26—50 booths 	100.00 
	Over 50 booths 	175.00 
	Exhibitors Retail/Service Sales 	
	1—25 booths 	50.00 
	26—50 booths 	100.00 
	Over 50 booths 	175.00 
FINANCE INSURANCE, PROFESSIONAL OFFICE AND REAL ESTATE (F) 
(SIC 60-62) 
	Finance, Real Estate, Insurance And Professional Offices 	
	Scaled Fee—No. of employees 	
	1—5 employees 	100.00 
	6—10 employees 	125.00 
	11—20 employees 	150.00 
	21—30 employees 	175.00 
	Over 30 employees 	250.00 
	Home Occupations       Flat Fee—Each business 
	Each business 	50.00 
	Machines and Devices       Flat Fee—Each machine 
	 Automated Teller Machines       Each machine 	100.00 
	 Vending Machines 	
	Amusement Vending Machine       Each machine 	50.00 
	Product Vending Machine (Including credit card/sensor 
operated) gas pumps       Each machine 	25.00 
	Civic Sports Complex & Amphitheaters       Flat Fee—Each business 
	Each business 	1,000.00 
	Automobile—New or Used, Agency or Dealer       Flat Fee—Each business 
	Each business 	400.00 
	Dating or Escort Service       Flat Fee—Each business 
	Each business 	400.00 
	Junk or Salvage Dealer       Flat Fee—Each business 
	Each business 	500.00 
	Telephone Solicitation       Flat Fee—Each business 
	Each business 	400.00 
 
(Ord. No. 00-43, § 21, 8-1-00; Ord. No. 01-5, § 1, 2-6-01; Ord. No. 01-17, § 3, 8-21-01; Ord. No. 08-19, § 2, 9-16-08)  
ARTICLE III. - ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Nudity prohibited upon alcohol licensed premises and bottle clubs, § 7-26. 
 
Sec. 16-76. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Palm Coast Sexually Oriented Business and Adult Entertainment Establishment Ordinance". 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 1, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-77. - Purpose, findings and intent and incorporation of whereas clauses. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments in order to promote and protect the public health, safety, good order, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the City, to establish reasonable and uniform regulations of adult entertainment establishments and sexually oriented businesses within the City. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing an unreasonable limitation or unreasonable restriction on the content of any lawful communicative materials including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to unreasonably restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment protected by the First Amendment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene or otherwise illegal material. 
(b)  Findings. Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses on the community presented in hearings and in reports made available to the Council, and on findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theaters, 426 U.S. 50 (1976); Barnes v. Glen Theater, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), on materials made of record relating to the St. Johns County Public Nudity Ordinance, and on the substance of and findings made or incorporated in studies accomplished in other communities and ordinances enacted in other communities, including, but not limited to, New York, New York; City of Houston Ordinance Number 97-75; Senate Bill Number 232, as passed by the Kansas State Legislature; Phoenix; Arizona; Tucson, Arizona; St. Paul, Minnesota; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Austin, Texas; Macon-Bibb County, Georgia; Palm Beach County, Florida; Manatee County, Florida; the findings of the Attorney General of the State of Minnesota; the report of United States Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986); Jacksonville, Florida; Detroit, Michigan; and "A Summary of a National Survey of Real Estate Appraisers Regarding the Effect of Adult Bookstores on Property Values", conducted by the Division of Planning, Department of Metropolitan Development, Indianapolis, January 1984; the publication entitled "Protecting Communities From Sexually Oriented Businesses" (Southwest Legal Press, Inc.); the publication entitled "Local Regulation of Adult Businesses" (Clark, Boardman and Callaghan); publications prepared by the Florida Family Association, Inc. (Tampa, Florida) relating to the regulation of sexually oriented businesses and adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses; the "Report to: The American Center for Law and Justice on the Secondary Impacts of Sex Oriented Businesses", Peter R. Hecht, Ph.D. (1996); and the findings of fact relating to the Adult Entertainment Code of Orange County, Florida, a County in Central Florida, matters and materials submitted at the public hearings relating to this article and other matters and documents relating to all of the above; the City Council finds: 
(1)  Sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled or not adequately controlled by the operators of the establishments or businesses. Further, there are presently no mechanisms or inadequate mechanisms to make the owners of these businesses or establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their premises. 
(2)  Certain workers of certain sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments defined in this article engage in a higher incidence of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than workers of other business establishments. 
(3)  Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments, especially those which provide private or semi-private areas, booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, live sex shows and those having physical interaction between workers and customers. 
(4)  Offering and providing such private spaces encourages such previously mentioned activities, which create unhealthy conditions. 
(5)  Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of such businesses and establishments. 
(6)  At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments, including, but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non A, Non B amebiasis, salmonella infections and shigella infections. 
(7)  Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an increasing cumulative number of reported cases of AIDS caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in the United States—600 in 1982, 2,200 in 1983, 4,600 in 1984, 8,555 in 1985 and 253,448 through December 31, 1992. 
(8)  As of December 31, 1995, there have been 51,838 reported cases of AIDS in the State of Florida. 
(9)  From 1981 to June 1996, the number of living persons testing positive for the HIV antibody with AIDs symptoms has risen to 73,217 in the 28 states having confidential reporting requirements. 
(10)  The number of cases of early (less that one year) syphilis in the United States reported annually has risen, with 33,613 cases reported in 1982 and 45,200 through November of 1990. 
(11)  The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported annually remains in a high level, with over one-half million cases being reported in 1990. 
(12)  The surgeon general of the United States, in his report of October 22, 1986, has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her newborn. 
(13)  According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts. 
(14)  Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of owners and operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities. 
(15)  Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in the areas of sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments where persons view "adult" oriented films. 
(16)  The findings noted in subsections (b)(1) through (15) and as set forth hereinafter raise substantial governmental concerns. 
(17)  Sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments have operational characteristics which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns. 
(18)  A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of the sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments. Further, such a licensing procedure will place a heretofore nonexistent incentive on the operators to see that the business or establishment is run in a manner consistent with the good order, health, safety and welfare of its patrons and works, as well as the citizens of the City. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the business or establishment, fully in possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein. 
(19)  Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult theaters. 
(20)  Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments to keep information regarding current workers and certain past workers will help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from working at such businesses and establishments. 
(21)  The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented business and adult entertainment establishments, where such information is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases. 
(22)  It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain workers who may engage in the conduct with this article is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to such activity. 
(23)  The fact that an applicant for an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business license has been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this article. 
(24)  Commercial establishments exist or may exist within the City and other nearby cities and counties in Central Florida where adult entertainment material is possessed, displayed, exhibited, distributed and/or sold for commercial purposes in the form of books, magazines, periodicals or other printed material, or photographs, films, motion pictures, prints, videotapes, slides, computer digital graphic recordings or other visual representations or recordings, or recordings or other audio matter, or instruments, novelties, devices, or paraphernalia which depict, illustrate, describe or relate to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(25)  Commercial establishments exist or may exist within the City and other nearby cities or counties in Central Florida where adult entertainment and sexually oriented commercial activities in the form of nude, semi-nude, or topless dancers, entertainers, performers, or other individuals, who, for commercial gain, perform or are presented while displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas; or engage in straddle dancing or touching with customers. 
(26)  Commercial sexually oriented businesses exist or operate or may exist or operate within the City or other nearby cities or counties in Central Florida where sexually oriented services are offered for commercial or pecuniary gain in the form of commercial physical contact, escort services and other services providing sexual encounters. The workers of such sexually oriented businesses operating in Central Florida engage in physical contact or touching with customers including, but not limited to, acts of prostitution or encourage or entice the customers to engage in lewdness. 
(27)  The activities occurring at sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments occur at establishments and businesses which operate primarily for the purpose of making a profit and, as such, are subject to regulation by the City in the interest of the good order, health, safety, economy, property values, morals and general welfare of the people, businesses and industries of the City. A major industry which is important to the community's economic welfare is tourism by persons seeking to bring their families to visit our community and who wish to stay in a community with a family atmosphere not dominated by commercialized sexual themes. 
(28)  When the activities occurring at sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments are present in establishments and businesses, other activities which are illegal, unsafe, or unhealthful tend to accompany them, concentrate around them, and be aggravated by them. Such other activities include, but are not limited to, prostitution, pandering, solicitation for prostitution, lewd and lascivious behavior, exposing minors to harmful materials, possession, distribution and transportation of obscene materials, sale or possession of controlled substances, and violent crimes against persons and property. 
(29)  When the activities occurring at sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments are competitively exploited in establishments and businesses, they tend to attract an undesirable number of transients, blight neighborhoods, adversely affect neighboring businesses, lower real property values, promote the particular crimes described above and, ultimately, lead residents and businesses to move to other locations. 
(30)  Sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments often have exterior signs or exterior appearance that lower the surrounding property values and contribute to urban decline. 
(31)  The activities occurring at sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments sometimes occur in establishments and businesses concurrent with the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages which concurrence leads to a further increase in criminal activity, unsafe activity, and disturbances of the peace and order of the surrounding community and creates additional hazards to the health and safety of customers and workers and further depreciates the value of adjoining real property harming the economic welfare of the surrounding community and adversely affecting the quality of life, commerce, and community environment. 
(32)  Physical contact or touching within sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments between workers exhibiting specified anatomical areas and customers poses a threat to the health of both and promotes the spread of communicable and social diseases. 
(33)  In order to preserve and safeguard the good order, health, morals, safety, and general welfare of the people of the City it is necessary and advisable for the City to regulate the conduct of owners, managers, operators, agents, workers, entertainers, performers, and customers at sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments. 
(34)  The potential dangers to the good order, morals, health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the City posed by permitting a sexually oriented business or adult entertainment establishment to operate without first meeting the requirements for obtaining a license under this article are so great as to require the licensure of such establishments prior to their being permitted to operate. 
(35)  Requiring operators of sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments to keep records of information concerning workers and certain recent past workers as well as customer contracts and other matters and materials will help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by making it difficult for minors to work at or be customers in such establishments. 
(36)  Prohibiting sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments from operating within set distances of educational institutions, religious institutions, residences, areas zoned or designated for residential use, and parks at which minors are customarily found, will serve to protect minors from the adverse affects of the activities that accompany such establishments and businesses. 
(37)  Straddle dancing, unregulated private performances, and enclosed adult booths in sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments have resulted in indiscriminate commercial sex between strangers and poses a threat to the health of the participants and promotes the spread of communicable sexually transmitted diseases. Straddle dancing is primarily conduct rather than communication or expression. 
(38)  Workers at sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments engage in a higher incidence of certain types of unhealthy or criminal behavior than workers of other establishments and businesses including, but not limited to, a very high incidence of illegal prostitution or engaging in lewdness in violation of F.S. ch. 796, operation without occupational licenses and illegal and unlicensed massage. 
(39)  Physical contact or touching between workers of sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments and customers poses a threat to the health of both and promotes the spread of communicable and sexually transmissible diseases. 
(40)  The practice of not paying workers at sexually oriented businesses and requiring them to earn their entire income from tips or gratuities from their customers who are predisposed to want sexually activity has resulted in a high incidence of prostitution and crimes related to lewdness by workers. 
(41)  Sexually oriented businesses involve activities that are pure conduct engaged in for the purpose of making a profit, rather than speech or expressive activity and, therefore, are subject to and require increased regulation to protect the health, good order, morals, welfare and safety of the community. 
(42)  Requiring sexually oriented businesses to post a listing of services provided and restrict services to those listed as well as maintaining a customer contract and transaction record in a daily register will discourage incidents of criminal behavior such as lewdness and prostitution thereby further safeguarding the health of both workers and customers and will assist facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects if criminal acts do occur. 
(43)  The general welfare, health, good order, morals and safety of the citizens of the City will be promoted by the enactment of this article. 
(c)  Intent. It is the intent of this article to protect and preserve the good order, health, peace, morals, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City. This article regulates conduct and is not an ordinance that affects the use of land as contemplated by F.S. § 166.041 (2001). 
(d)  Authority. This article is enacted under the constitutionally derived home rule power of the City in the interest of the good order, health, morals, peace, safety, and general welfare of the people of the City. 
(e)  "Whereas" clauses. It is the City Council's further intention to accomplish those intents and purposes expressed by the City Council in the recital ("whereas" clauses) of this article, each of which are incorporated by reference into this section. 
(f)  Speech protection. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit constitutionally protected expression or speech. This article is intended to reasonably regulate the adult entertainment industry and sexually oriented businesses which engage in commercial activities involving acts or services of a sexually explicit nature or which involve acts or services involving matters which are sexual in nature. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 2, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-78. - Construction. 
(a)  This article shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose of reasonably regulating sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment establishments in order to reduce or eliminate adverse secondary effects of such businesses and establishments. Barnes v. Glen Theater, Inc., 510 U.S. 560, 111 S. Ct. 2456, 115 L. Ed. 2d 504 (1991), and the litigation in St. Johns County (See Cafe 207, Inc. v. St. Johns County, 856 F. Supp. 641 (M.D. Fla. 1994); affirmed, Cafe 207, Inc. v. St. Johns County, 66 F.3d 272 (11th Cir. 1995); cert. denied, 134 L Ed. 2d. 647 (U.S. April 22, 1996). This article shall not be construed to authorize any illegal act under federal law, state law or City ordinance. This article is intended to reasonably regulate such matters in order to reduce or eliminate the adverse secondary effects of commercial establishments and businesses. The regulation of alcoholic beverage establishments is also addressed in the City code and other provisions of law. 
(b)  Unless otherwise indicated, all provisions of this article shall apply equally to all persons, regardless of sex. Masculine pronouns, such as "he", "his", and "him", as employed in this article, shall also be construed to apply to feminine pronouns and neutral pronouns, unless the context suggests otherwise. Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, unless the context suggests otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 3, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-79. - Obscenity/indecent exposure unlawful. 
As a matter of state and federal law, obscenity is unlawful in the City. Likewise, state law prohibits indecent exposure. Nothing in this article shall be construed to allow or permit the possession, distribution and transportation of obscene materials, to authorize the exposing of persons under 18 years of age to motion pictures, exhibitions, shows, representations and presentations of specified sexual activities or persons displaying or exhibiting specified anatomical areas; or the indecent exposure of a person as prohibited by state law. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 4, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-80. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases defined in this section and used in this article shall have the meaning herein prescribed, unless the context clearly suggests otherwise. 
Adult bookstore/adult video store means: 
(1)  An establishment which, as its principal business purpose, sells or rents adult material or which offers adult materials for sale or rent as a significant portion of its stock and trade. 
(2)  Any establishment in which any one or more the following five elements occur shall be presumed to be an adult bookstore/adult video store: 
a.  That the adult material is accessible to customers; "accessible to customers" means that the item can be physically touched, picked up, handled by a customer before being transferred from the control of a worker, or is visually displayed so that an adult or child present in the store can view substantially more than its name alone; or 
b.  That the individual items of adult material offered for sale and/or rental comprise more than 25 percent of the unused individual items publicly displayed at the establishment as stock in trade in the following categories: Books, magazines, periodicals, other printed matter, slides, photographs, films, motion pictures, videotapes, compact disks, computer digital graphic recordings, other visual representations, audio recording and other audio matter, and more than 25 percent of the total used items publicly displayed at the establishments as stock in trade in each of the same categories set out above; or 
c.  The gross income each month from the sale and rental of adult material comprises more than ten percent of that month's gross income from the sale and rental of the goods and material at the establishment; or 
d.  The floor area used to display adult material comprises more than ten percent of the floor area used from display of all goods and material at the establishment; or 
e.  The establishment uses any of the following terms in advertisements or any other promotional activities relating to the adult material: "XXX", "XX", "X", or any series of the letter "X" whether or not interspersed with other letters, figures or characters; "erotic" or deviations of that word; "adult entertainment", "adult books", "adult videos" or similar phrases; "sexual acts" or similar phrases; "nude" or "nudies" of similar phrases which letters, words or phrases a reasonable person would believe to be promotional of the purchase or rental of adult material. 
(3)  In recognition of the provisions of F.S. §§ 847.013 and 847.0133, which protects minors from exposure to obscene material, any business which is an adult bookstore/adult video store shall have in place at each entrance to such business a sign, no greater than one square foot in size, stating "Persons under 18 years of age not permitted". 
Adult booth means a separate booth inside an adult entertainment establishment accessible to any person, regardless of whether a fee is charged for access. The term "adult booth" includes, but is not limited to, a "peep show" booth or arcade, or other booth used to view "adult material". The term "adult booth" does not include a foyer through which any person can enter or exit the establishment or a rest room. 
Adult entertainment means: 
(1)  The display or exposure of any specified anatomical area by a worker to a customer regardless of whether the worker actually engages in performing or dancing or where workers wear or display to a customer any covering, tape, pastie, or other device which simulates or otherwise gives the appearance of the display or exposure of any specified anatomical areas regardless of whether the worker actually engages in performing or dancing. 
(2)  Providing adult material for commercial or pecuniary gain. 
(3)  The offering, soliciting or contracting to dance or perform by a worker with or for a customer with the acceptance of any consideration, tip, remuneration or compensation from or on behalf of that customer. 
(4)  The dancing or performing by a worker with or within three feet of a customer with the acceptance of any consideration, tip, remuneration, or compensation from or on behalf of that customer. 
Adult entertainment establishment means an adult performance establishment, adult bookstore/adult video store, adult motel, or adult theater as those terms are defined herein, which is operated for commercial or pecuniary gain. An establishment with an adult entertainment license shall be presumed to be an adult entertainment establishment. 
Adult material means one or more of the following, regardless of whether it is new or used: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, photographs, films, motion pictures, videotapes, video cassettes, slides, computer digital graphic recordings, or other visual representations, tape recordings, disks or other audio matter, which have as their primary or dominant theme matters depicting, illustrating, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Instruments, novelties, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities, excluding bona fide birth control devices. 
Adult model means any person who, for commercial or pecuniary gain, offers, suggests, or agrees to engage in a private performance, modeling or display of male or female lingerie, bathing suits, under garments, or specified anatomical areas to the view of a customer. 
Adult motel means any motel, hotel, boardinghouse, rooming house or similar commercial establishment which offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration whose advertisements or business name includes the word "adult" or which advertises to the public outside of the premises of the establishment and visible from a public right-of-way the presentation of closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video tapes, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions, which have as their primary or dominant theme matters depicting, illustrating or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. The term "adult motel" is included within the definition of "adult theater". 
Adult performance establishment means: 
(1)  Any establishment where any worker: 
a.  Engages in a private performance, acts as an adult model, or displays or exposes any specified anatomical areas to a customer, regardless of whether the worker engages in dancing or any particular activity; or 
b.  Wears and displays to a customer any covering, tape, pastie, or other device when simulates or otherwise gives the appearance of the display or exposure of any specified anatomical areas, regardless of whether the worker actually engages in performing or dancing; or 
c.  Offers, solicits, or contracts to dance or perform with or for a customer and accepts any consideration, tip, remuneration or compensation from or on behalf of that customer; or 
d.  Dances or performs with or within three feet of a customer and accepts any consideration, tip, remuneration, or compensation from or on behalf of that customer. 
(2)  A bona fide private club whose membership as a whole engages in social nudism or naturalism as in a nudist resort or camp and at which specified sexual activities do not occur shall be presumed not to be an adult performance establishment. 
(3)  It is an affirmative defense to an alleged violation of this Code regarding operating an adult performance establishment without a license if the alleged violator demonstrates that the predominant business or attraction of the establishment is not offering to customers of entertainment which is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and the establishment and its advertising is not distinguished by an emphasis on or the promotion of matters or persons depicting, describing, displaying, exposing, simulating or relating to specified sexual activities of specified anatomical areas. 
Adult theater means an establishment which consists of an enclosed building, or a portion or part of an enclosed building, or an open-air area used for viewing by persons of films, motion pictures, video cassettes, video tapes, slides, computer digital graphic recordings, or other photographic reproductions which have as their primary or dominant theme, matters depicting, illustrating or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. "Adult motels", and "adult booths" are included within the definition of "adult theater". 
Adult video store. See "adult bookstore". 
Alcoholic beverages means all distilled spirits and all beverages containing one-half of one percent (0.005) or more alcohol by volume. It shall be prima facie evidence that a beverage is an alcoholic beverage if there is proof that the beverage in question was or is known as beer, wine, whiskey, moonshine whiskey, moonshine, shine, rum, gin, tequila, bourbon, vodka, scotch, scotch whiskey, brandy, malt liquor, or by any other similar name or names, or was contained in a bottle or can labeled as any of the above names, or a name similar thereto, and the bottle or can bears the manufacturer's insignia, name, or trademark. Any person who, by experience in the handling of alcoholic beverages, or who by taste, smell, or drinking of such alcoholic beverages has knowledge of the alcoholic nature thereof, may testify as to his opinion about whether such beverage is an alcoholic beverage. 
City Council member means the City Council members of the City of Palm Coast, Florida. 
Commercial bodily contact means: 
(1)  The manipulation of, washing, scrubbing, stroking, or touching, for commercial or pecuniary gain, the body of another person directly, or indirectly through a medium or using any object, instrument, substance, or device between worker and a customer. 
(2)  The following persons engaged in the bona fide performance of the following activities shall not be deemed to be engaging in commercial bodily contact for the purposes of this article when they are engaged in the bona fide practice of their occupation or possession: 
a.  Persons licensed as a massage therapist or apprentice massage therapist pursuant to F.S. ch. 480, when providing massage services in an establishment licensed under F.S. ch. 480. 
b.  Persons licensed under the laws of the State of Florida to practice medicine, surgery, osteopathy, chiropody, naturopathy, or podiatry. 
c.  Persons licensed under the laws of the State of Florida as a physician's assistant or nurse. 
d.  Persons holding a drugless practitioner's certificate under the laws of the State of Florida. 
e.  Persons licensed as barbers or cosmetologists under the laws of the State of Florida. 
f.  Persons performing authorized services in a hospital, nursing home, sanitarium, adult congregate living facility, group home, day care center, or similar place of business when owned and operated in accordance with the laws of the State of Florida. 
g.  Persons who are instructors, coaches, or athletic trainers employed by, or on behalf of, any professional, amateur, Olympic, or similar athletic team engaging in bona fide athletic events, or when employed by a governmental entity or a bona fide educational institution. 
h.  Persons licensed as physical therapists under the laws of the State of Florida. 
Commercial bodily contact establishments means any establishment, business, place operated for commercial or pecuniary gain or where for any form of consideration workers or customers engage in commercial bodily contact or any establishment, business or place any portion of which is set aside, advertised, promoted or used as a place where commercial bodily contact occurs or which is described or depicted as a "body scrub salon", "body wash salon", "body relaxation salon". 
Commercial or pecuniary gain means operated for commercial or pecuniary gain shall be presumed for any establishment which has received an occupational license. For the purposes of this article, operation for commercial or pecuniary gain shall not depend on actual profit or loss. An establishment which has an occupational license or an establishment which advertises itself as a type of adult entertainment establishment shall be presumed to be "operated for commercial or pecuniary gain". 
Commercial establishment means any business, location, or place which conducts or allows to be conducted on its premises any activity for commercial or pecuniary gain. 
Conviction means a determination of guilt resulting from plea or trial, regardless of whether adjudication was withheld or whether imposition of sentence was suspended. 
Customer means: 
(1)  Any person present at an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business, other than operators or workers, regardless of whether the person has given or paid any consideration to be present at the adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business and regardless of whether the person has paid any money for goods or services at or to the adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business. 
(2)  Any person, excluding a worker or operator, who has paid, or has offered, agreed, been solicited, or had someone else offer or agree on that person's behalf to pay any consideration, fee, or tip to an operator or worker of an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business. 
Educational institution means a premises or site upon which there is an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, which conducts regular classes and/or courses of study required for eligibility to certification by, accreditation to, or membership in the State Department of Education of Florida, Southern Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, or the Florida Council of Dependent Schools. The term "educational institution" includes a premises or site upon which there is a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, junior high school, senior high school, or any special institution of learning, a vocational institution, professional institution, an institution of higher education, a community college, junior college, four-year college or university. 
Entity means any proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, business trust, joint venture, joint-stock company or other for profit and/not for profit organization by whatever name, title or description. 
Escort means any person who, for commercial or pecuniary gain, compensation or tips, agrees to, offers to go, or goes to any place, including, but not limited to, a business, hotel, motel, residence, boat, vessel, motor vehicle, or other mode of transportation to do any of the following acts: 
(1)  Act as a companion or date for, or converse with a customer; 
(2)  Engage in commercial bodily contact with another person; 
(3)  Engage in a private performance; 
(4)  Engage in adult modeling or act as an adult model; 
(5)  Display specified anatomical areas, strip naked, or go topless; or 
(6)  Engage in any specified sexual activity. 
Nothing in this definition shall be construed to legalize prostitution or other conduct prohibited by this Code or other law. Workers of a licensed adult performance establishment for whom worker records are maintained pursuant to this article are excluded from the definition of escort when engaged in the expressive display of specified anatomical areas at a licensed adult performance establishment. 
An escort who is a paid employee type worker of an escort service for whom taxes and social security payments are withheld and paid by the escort service, and who is not an independent contractor, is not required to obtain his or her own sexually oriented business license for activities conducted pursuant to employment with the escort service. 
Escort service means a person, business, establishment, or place operated for commercial or pecuniary gain, which advertises as an "escort", "escort service" or "escort agency" or otherwise offers or advertises that it can furnish escorts, a private performance, or adult models; or offers or actually provides, arranges, dispatches, or refers workers or themselves to act as an escort or engage in a private performance for a customer. Defense. A bona fide dating or matching service which arranges social matches or dates for two persons who each wish to meet a compatible companion when neither of said persons solicits, accepts, or receives any financial gain or any monetary tip, consideration, or compensation for the meeting or date is not an escort service. 
Establishment means any place, site, or premises, or portion thereof, upon which any person, corporation, or business conducts activities or operations for commercial or pecuniary gain including, but not limited to, any place, site or premises from where an escort service dispatches or refers workers to other locations or at which an escort service receives business calls from customers. 
Law enforcement officer means an officer who is on official duty for any law enforcement agency. 
Licensee means any person, corporation, partnership, or other entity whose application for an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business license has been granted and any person, corporation, partnership or other entity who owns or operates or controls the establishment or business. 
Operator means any person who engages in or performs any activity which is necessary to or which facilitates the operation of a sexually oriented business or an adult entertainment establishment including, but not limited to, the licensee, manager, owner, doorman, bouncer, bartender, disc jockey, sales clerk, ticket taker, movie projectionist, dispatcher, receptionist, attendant or supervisor. 
Park means a tract of land within any jurisdiction which is kept for ornament or recreation and which is maintained as public property including, but not limited to, a playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness areas or other similar public land. 
Person means and includes, but is not limited to, an individual, associations, joint ventures, partnerships, estates, trusts, business trusts, syndicates, fiduciaries, corporations, and any and all other similar entities and all officers, directors and principal stockholders of such associations, joint ventures, partnerships, estates, trusts, business trusts, syndicates, fiduciaries, corporations or other similar entities. 
Private performance means modeling, posing, or the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area by a worker to a customer while the customer is in an area not accessible during such display to all other persons in the establishment or, while the customer or worker is in an area which is not on the premises of the establishment, or in which the customer or worker is totally or partially screened or partitioned during such display from the view of persons outside of the area. 
Sexual encounter business means: 
(1)  Any person or entity which for any form of consideration or remuneration or which charges an admission fee and provides a place for the purpose of providing, encouraging or allowing three or more persons to engage in any specified sexual activity among themselves or with other persons. 
(2)  The following shall be presumed not to be a sexual encounter business: (1) A bona fide private club whose membership as a whole engages in social nudism or naturalism as in a nudist resort or camp and at which specified sexual activities do not occur, (2) a state licensed sexual therapist, and (3) a bona fide hotel or motel licensed by the state. 
Sexually oriented business means a commercial bodily contact establishment, escort service, or sexual encounter business. A business shall be asexually oriented business, whether services are provided on the premises of an establishment or on an out call basis at any other place and regardless of whether such business is licensed under this article. A business with a sexually oriented business license shall be presumed to be asexually oriented business. An individual operating asexually oriented business is subject to the provisions of this article notwithstanding the fact that services are being provided at or from a residence, motor vehicle, vessel or any other location and a license pursuant to this article is required unless the individual is a paid employee for whom taxes and social security payments are withdrawn and paid by the licensed establishment, worker records are maintained, and the individual is not an independent contractor. 
Sheriff means the Sheriff of Flagler County. 
Specified anatomical areas. (Editor's note: The source of the footnotes below is The New Webster's Medical Dictionary (Bolander, 1991). The definitions of terms set forth in the footnotes are a material part of this article and apply to the use of the term each time it is used in this article.) 
(1)  Any of the following in a state that is less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.  The male or female genitals 1 []; 
b.  The male or female pubic area 2 ; 
c.  The vulva 3 ; 
d.  The anus 4 ; 
e.  The penis 5 ; 
f.  The scrotum 6 ; 
g.  The cleavage of the buttocks; 
h.  The buttocks; 
i.  The anal ring 7 ; 
j.  The anal cleavage; 
k.  The areola 8 on the breast 9 of a female; 
l.  The nipple 10 on the breast of a female; 
m.  The female breast below a line immediately above the top of the areola said line running horizontal across the top of the entire breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage between the human female breasts typically exhibited by a dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing appeal; provided that the areola is not exposed; 
n.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(2)  Body paint, body dyes, tattoos, liquid latex whether wet or dried, dental floss, G-strings, thongs, and similar coverings shall not be considered an opaque covering. 
Specified criminal act means: 
(1)  A violation of this article; 
(2)  Any felony not otherwise specified in this definition; 
(3)  An offense under F.S. ch. 794, (Sexual battery); 
(4)  An offense under F.S. ch. 796, (Prostitution); 
(5)  An offense under F.S. ch. 800, (Lewdness; indecent exposure); 
(6)  An offense under F.S. ch. 826, (Bigamy; incest); 
(7)  An offense under F.S. ch. 847, (Obscene literature; profanity); or 
(8)  An offense against an analogous federal statute or the statutes of a state other than Florida, or an analogous ordinance of another county or city. 
Specified sexual activities. (Editors note: The sources for the footnotes below are (1) Taber's Cyclopedic Medical Dictionary, T.A. Davis Co., Philadelphia, 1997 (Ed. 18); (2) Oxford Dictionary of the English Language (multi-volume); (3) Florida Statutes. The definitions of terms set forth in the footnotes are a material part of this article and apply to the use of the term each time it is used.) 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
(2)  Acts of human anilingus 11 [], bestiality , buggery , cunnilingus , coprophagy , coprophilia , fellatio , flagellation , masochism , masturbation , necrophilia , pederasty , pedophilia , sadism , sadomasochism , sapphism , sexual intercourse , sodomy , urolagnia , or zooerasty ; or 
(3)  Fondling or other touching of human genitals, pubic region, any part of the buttocks, anus or female breast; or 
(4)  Oral, anal, or vaginal penetration by, or union with, the sexual organ or any other part of the body of another; 
(5)  Anal or vaginal penetration of another or oneself with any object; or 
(6)  The handling or fondling of the sexual organ of another for the purpose of masturbation directly or through a medium; or 
(7)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) through (6). 
Straddle dance means: 
(1)  The use by a worker of any part of his or her body to touch the genital or pubic area of another person, or the touching of the genital or pubic area of any worker by another person; or the straddling of the legs of a worker over any part of the body of a customer at the establishment, regardless of whether there is a touch or touching; or the use by a worker, of any part of his or her body to touch the genital, pubic region, buttock, anus or female breast of another person while at the establishment, or the touching of the genital, pubic region, buttock, anus or female breast of any worker by a customer while at the establishment. 
(2)  Conduct shall be a "straddle dance" regardless of whether the "touch" or "touching" occurs while the worker is displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area. 
(3)  Conduct shall also be a "straddle dance" regardless of whether the "touch" or "touching" is direct or through a medium. 
(4)  The terms "lap dance", "table dance", and "face dance" are included within the term "straddle dance". 
Worker means a person who works, performs, or provides services at an adult entertainment establishment or at or for a sexually oriented business, irrespective of whether said person is paid a salary or wage and shall include, but is not limited to, employees, independent contractors, subcontractors, lessees, or sub-lessees who work or perform at an adult entertainment establishment or at or for a sexually oriented business. An operator is a type of worker. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 5, 12-4-01) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
Genitals, genitalia—Organs of the reproductive system, especially the external organs. 2 Pubic area: (1) Pubes, the pubic region; the anterior region of the innominate bone covered with pubic hair; or pubis. (2) Pubic, pertaining to the pubes. (3) Pubes, pubic bone, or the innominate bone. 3 Vulva—External female genitalia, including the mons pubis, labia majora and minora, clitoris and vestibule of the vagina. 4 Penis—The male organ for urination and copulation, a pendulous structure that is suspended from the front and the sides of the pubic arch. 6 Scrotum—The external double pouch that contains the testicles. 7 Anal ring—A ring, pertaining to the rectal opening; near the anus. 8 Areola—The colored circle surrounding the nipple of the female breast. 9 Breasts—The upper anterior aspects of the chest of a woman; mammary glands. 10 Nipple—Mammilla papilla, a protuberance from the mammary gland from which the lactiferous ducts discharge milk in the female. 

--- () --- 
Anilingus—Oral stimulation of the anus by the use of the tongue or lips. 12 Bestiality—Use of animals for sexual enjoyment or any sexual act between a person and an animal involving the sex organ of the one and the mouth, anus, penis or vagina of the other. 13 Buggery—Sodomy. 14 Cunnilingus—Sexual activity in which the mouth and tongue are used to stimulate the female genitalia. 15 Coprophagy—The eating of feces. 16 Coprophilia—An abnormal interest in feces. 17 Fellatio—Oral stimulation of the penis. 18 Flagellation—Whipping or a massage by strokes which is a form of sexual aberration in which the libido is stimulated by whipping oneself, being whipped, or whipping someone else. 19 Masochism—Sexual excitement by being humiliated or hurt by another or a sexual perversion in which one takes delight in being dominated, even to the extent of violence or cruelty, by another person. 20 Masturbation—Stimulation of genitals or other erogenous areas by some means other than sexual intercourse, such as a hand or object. 21 Necrophilia—Sexual intercourse with a dead body. 22 Pederasty—Anal intercourse between a man and a young boy. 23 Pedophilia—Fondling of children or any other sexual relations with a child. 24 Sadism—Sexual pleasure derived from inflicting mental or physical pain on others. 25 Sadomasochism—Sexual pleasure related to sadism and masochism. 26 Sapphism—Lesbianism, i.e. the unnatural sexual relationship between women such as cunnilingus, anilingus, masturbation, etc. 27 Sexual intercourse—Sexual union between a man and a woman by insertion of the penis into the vagina. 28 Sodomy—Anal intercourse. 29 Urolagnia—Sexual excitement associated with urination (e.g., watching another person urinate or having another person urinate on one's own body). 30 Zooerasty—Bestiality. 
 
Sec. 16-81. - Notice. 
Any notice required under this article shall, unless otherwise provided in this article, be accomplished by posting upon the subject premises and sending a written notification by certified mail to the mailing address set forth on the application for the license or a permit. This mailing address shall be considered the correct mailing address unless the City Manager or designee has been otherwise notified in writing. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 6, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-82. - Penalties/remedies/relief. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be prosecuted in the same manner as misdemeanors are prosecuted. Such violations shall be prosecuted in the name of the State of Florida in a court having jurisdiction of misdemeanors by the prosecuting attorney thereof and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment in the County jail not to exceed 60 days or by both fine and imprisonment as provided in F.S. § 162.22, (2000). Each incident or separate occurrence of any act that violates this article shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition to the penalties provided under this section, violators of this article shall be subject to any other appropriate civil or criminal action provided by law in a court of competent jurisdiction, including, but not limited to, injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 7, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-83. - Zoning. 
All adult entertainment establishments within the City shall be limited to the industrial zoning district as designated by the official land use district map, and shall be subject to all restrictions enumerated herein. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 8, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-84. - Prohibited locations. 
No person shall cause or permit the establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of an adult entertainment establishment within 1,000 feet of any other adult entertainment establishment. Furthermore, no person shall cause or permit the establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of an adult entertainment establishment within 2,500 feet of any area zoned for residential use and/or designated by the official land use district map in a manner primarily intended for dwellings, or within 2,500 feet of any school, church, public park or any other semi-public or public uses, as well as lands designated PLI (public lands and institutions) zoning district. "Substantial enlargement" shall mean increasing the size of the permitted and/or licensed premises by more than ten percent of the original licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 9, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-85. - Measurement of distance. 
For the purposes of this article, distance measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest property line of the property used as an adult entertainment establishment to the nearest property line of the premises of a church, school, public park, or public recreation area or to the nearest boundary of any area legally zoned and/or designated by comprehensive plan in an manner primarily intended for dwellings without regard to municipal boundaries. A measurement of distance between adult entertainment establishments shall be from lot line to lot line at their nearest points. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 10, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-86. - Residential rezoning. 
In the event an area is zoned residential and/or designated by comprehensive plan in an manner primarily intended for dwellings for the first time; or an area zoned for residential use and/or redesignated by comprehensive plan in a manner primarily intended for dwellings and lies within 1,000 feet of an existing adult entertainment establishment, the adult entertainment establishment shall be considered an existing nonconforming use, as defined by the City, from the effective date of the rezoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 11, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-87. - License required. 
(a)  Requirement. It is unlawful for any person to operate or to be an operator of or worker at a sexually oriented business or an adult entertainment establishment which has not first obtained a license which is applicable for said establishment or business pursuant to this article; or to continue to operate or be an operator of or worker at a sexually oriented business or an adult entertainment establishment where that person knows or has reason to know that the license of the establishment or business is under suspension, has been revoked or has lapsed. The operation of a sexually oriented business or an adult entertainment establishment without a valid license, where applicable, is unlawful and shall be grounds for the closing of the establishment or business upon a finding of fact by a court or other body with proper jurisdiction that the establishment does not have a valid license. 
(b)  Licensing office. Unless the City Manager designates in writing an office to administer the provisions of this article, he shall serve as the licensing office. The City Manager may modify his designation from time to time in writing. When the phrase "City Manager or designee" is used in this article, the designee referred to shall be the office designated in writing pursuant to this subsection. 
(c)  Classifications. Adult entertainment establishment and sexually oriented business licenses referred to in this article shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Adult bookstore/adult video store; 
(2)  Adult performance establishment; 
(3)  Adult motel; 
(4)  Adult theater; 
(5)  Commercial bodily contact establishment; 
(6)  Escort service. 
(d)  Single license/single classification of license. Only one license may be issued for a location and only under a single classification. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 12, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-88. - Responsibilities of other offices and departments. 
The City Council is the legislative branch of the City government. Ultimate responsibility for the administration of this article is vested in the City Manager or designee as set forth in this article. Other departments having responsibility under this article are as follows: 
(1)  The development services department is responsible for granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending and canceling occupational licenses in accordance with state law. 
(2)  The Sheriff of Flagler County is responsible for verifying information contained on applications for inspecting proposed or existing adult entertainment establishments and sexually oriented businesses in order to ascertain compliance with applicable criminal statutes and ordinances including, but not limited to, those set forth in this article, for determining whether license applicants have been convicted of a felony or a specified criminal act within the previous five years and for enforcing applicable criminal statutes and ordinances including, but not limited to, those set forth in this article. 
(3)  The building official is responsible for inspecting establishments in order to ascertain compliance with all applicable building codes, statutes, ordinances and regulations. 
(4)  The fire chief is responsible for inspecting establishments and businesses in order to ascertain compliance with all applicable fire codes, statues, ordinances and regulations. 
(5)  The development services department is responsible for ascertaining whether the location of proposed sexually oriented businesses or adult entertainment establishments comply with all separation, distance, zoning and location requirements of the land development regulations of the City and whether compliance with all applicable zoning regulations and land use laws is maintained. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 13, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-89. - License application and application fee. 
Any person desiring to engage in the business of operating an adult entertainment establishment or a sexually oriented business shall file with the City Manager or designee a sworn application on forms supplied by the City. The application shall contain the information and documents as provided in this article and shall be accompanied by an application fee as established in this article. The application shall be signed by the applicant and verified by the applicant before an officer authorized to take oaths and acknowledgments. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 14, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-90. - Contents of application. 
(a)  The completed application, shall be accompanied by the following documents and shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee of $200.00 which shall be used to defray the costs of the application review process by various offices and departments; provided, however, that the fee shall be applied as a credit toward the annual license fee for licensing under this article: 
(b)  If the applicant is: 
(1)  An individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name to include any and all aliases, residential street address, residential telephone number, an address where all correspondence from the City should be mailed, and submit proof that he is 18 years of age by providing a copy of a valid driver's license, voter's registration card or another state issued identification card; or a certified copy of a birth certificate; or 
(2)  A partnership or trust, the partnership or trust shall state its complete name, and the names, residential street addresses, and telephone numbers of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited or trustees, the name and residential street address of at least one person authorized to accept service of process and, if in existence, a copy of the partnership agreement; or 
(3)  A corporation, the corporation shall provide a copy of its ordinances of incorporation stating its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing, the names, residential street addresses, telephone numbers and capacity of all officers, directors and principal stockholders, and, if applicable, the name of the registered corporate agent and the legal street address of the registered office for service of process. 
(4)  Any other entity, the entity shall state its complete name, the date of formation, the names, residential address, telephone numbers and capacity of all principal owners, and the name and residential street address of one person authorized to accept service of process. 
(c)  If the applicant intends to conduct activities in the establishment or business under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant shall state the establishment's or business' fictitious name or names and the County of registration under F.S. § 865.09, or its successor and all business names and telephone numbers to be used by the establishment or business. 
(d)  The applicant shall state whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed on the application has, within the five-year period immediately preceding the date of the application, been convicted of a specified criminal act, and, if so, the specified criminal act involved, the date of conviction and the place of conviction. 
(e)  The applicant shall state whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (b) has had a previous license under this article suspended or revoked including the name and location of the establishment for which the license was suspended or revoked, the date of the suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or any other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (b) has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation whose license under this article has previously been suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the establishment for which the license was suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the suspension or revocation. 
(f)  The applicant shall state whether the applicant or any other individuals listed pursuant to subsection (b) holds any other licenses under this article and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed establishments. 
(g)  The applicant shall state the single classification of license for which the applicant is filing. 
(h)  The applicant shall state the location of the proposed establishment or business including a street address, the name and address of the real property owner of the site, a notarized statement of consent from the real property owner authorizing a sexually oriented business or adult entertainment establishment on the site, and a legal description of the property on which the establishment is to be located. 
(i)  The applicant shall provide the names of the workers for the proposed establishment or business, if known, or, if presently unknown a statement to that effect. 
(j)  The applicant shall submit a plan drawn to appropriate scale of the proposed licensed premises indicating the areas to be covered by the license, all windows, doors, entrances and exits and the fixed structural features, walls, stages, partitions, projection booths, admission booths, adult booths, concession booths, stands, counters and similar structures of the establishment or business to which the proposed license pertains. The term "fixed structural features" shall include immovable partitions and counters and similar structures that are intended to be permanent. 
(k)  The applicant shall provide a mailing address, and, if different, a designated return address where all future correspondence from the City may be sent and the applicant's telephone number where communications and inquiries can be made. 
(l)  The applicant shall provide a recent color photograph of the applicant in passport size if an individual and of each officer, director and principal stockholder if a partnership, corporation or other similar entity. 
(m)  The applicant shall provide the weight, height, color of eyes, date of birth and gender of the applicant if an individual and of each officer, director and principal stockholder or owner if a partnership, corporation or other similar entity. 
(n)  The applicant shall provide the applicant's social security account number or employer's tax identification number and either the applicant's drivers license number or the number of a federal or state issued identification card if an individual and of each officer, director and principal stockholder or owner if a partnership, corporation or other similar entity. 
(o)  The applicant shall provide a complete set of the applicant's fingerprints if an individual and of each officer, director and principal stockholder or owner if a partnership, corporation or other similar entity. 
(p)  The applicant shall provide a copy of the most recent lease or deed of conveyance, whichever is applicable, indicating the applicant's interest in the proposed establishment. 
(q)  The applicant shall provide a statement of the hours of operations of the establishment or business. 
(r)  The applicant shall provide a notarized statement that the applicant has complied with the applicable laws of Florida relating to corporations, partnerships and fictitious names. 
(s)  It is unlawful for any person applying for an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business license to make a false statement which is intended to facilitate the issuance of a license or to provide false information which is intended to facilitate the issuance of a license. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 15, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-91. - Continuing duty/false or misleading information. 
(a)  Each applicant shall be under a continuing duty and obligation to disclose to the City Manager or designee any and all changes or alterations in the information or disclosures required by this article. It is the duty of each applicant to correct changed, false or erroneous information provided in an application. It is unlawful for an applicant to fail to disclose changes in information provided or to fail to correct false or erroneous information given in an application immediately upon the applicant knowing or being in such a position that he or she should have known that the information provided has changed or was false or erroneous when provided. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person applying for an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business license to make a false or misleading statement or provide false or misleading information which is intended to facilitate the issuance of a license. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 16, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-92. - Consent. 
By applying for a license under this article, the applicant shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 17, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-93. - Investigation of applicant. 
Upon receipt of an application properly filed with the City Manager or designee and upon payment of the non-refundable application fee, the application shall be time and date stamped and a copy of the application shall be forwarded to the sheriff, the fire chief, the building official, and the development services department. Each recipient entity shall promptly conduct an investigation of the applicant, application and the proposed establishment within 15 days from the date that the application was filed. At the conclusion of its investigation, each recipient entity shall indicate to the City Manager or designee its investigative findings relating to the application and the reasons therefore. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 18, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-94. - Issuance or denial of license. 
(a)  Upon the completion of the investigation and a review of the application as required; upon determination that the applicant meets the requirements of this article and upon payment of the appropriate license fee by the applicant, the City Manager or designee shall within 30 days of the application being filed issue the license. 
(b)  If after review and investigation as provided herein the City Manager or designee determines that one or more of the reasons for denial set forth in section 16-95 exist, the application shall be denied, within 30 days of the date that the application is filed, and the City Manager or designee shall issue a written and dated notice of the denial and the reasons therefore. A copy of the notice shall be sent to the applicant by certified mail to the designated return address on the application within five days of the date of denial. 
(c)  If an application has neither been affirmatively issued or denied within 30 days after the application was filed, the establishment or business shall be allowed to open and operate unless and until the application is denied by the City Manager or designee. 
(d)  The denial of an application shall be final. No further exhaustion of administrative remedies shall be necessary for judicial review of the administrative action. 
(e)  An applicant whose application is denied may immediately appeal as a matter of right to a court of competent jurisdiction, which court shall promptly review said application. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 20, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-95. - Reasons for denial of application of license. 
The application for a license shall be denied if one or more of the following reasons is found: 
(1)  The application does not comply with the requirements of this article. 
(2)  The application contains material false information. 
(3)  The applicant or any of the individuals stated in section 16-87 of this article has a license under this article which is under suspension. 
(4)  The applicant or any of the individuals stated in section 16-87 of this article is or was at the time of suspension an officer, director or principal stockholder in an entity who has a license under this article which is under suspension. 
(5)  The applicant or any of the individuals stated in section 16-87 of this article had a license under this article which had been revoked within the preceding two years. 
(6)  The applicant or any of the individuals stated in section 16-87 of this article is or was at the time of suspension an officer, director or principal stockholder in an entity who had a license under this article which had been revoked within the preceding two years. 
(7)  The granting of the application would violate a statute or ordinance or an order from a court of law which effectively prohibits the applicant from obtaining an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business license. 
(8)  The applicant has failed to comply with F.S. ch. 607, relating to corporations, F.S. ch. 620, relating to partnerships, or F.S. § 865.09, relating to fictitious names. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 20, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-96. - Reapplication after denial. 
The applicant may not reapply for a license for a period of nine months from the date of denial unless there has been an intervening change in the circumstances, which may lead to a different decision regarding the former reason(s) for denial. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 21, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-97. - Annual license fee. 
(a)  There shall be collected under this article annual license fees for the following classifications of adult entertainment establishments and sexually oriented businesses: 
(1)  Adult bookstore/adult video store—$750.00); 
(2)  Adult theater—$750.00; 
(3)  Adult performance establishments—$750.00; 
(4)  Adult motel—$750.00; 
(5)  Commercial bodily contact establishment—$750.00; and 
(6)  Escort service—$750.00. 
(b)  The annual license fees are declared regulatory in nature, collected for the purpose of examination and inspection of adult entertainment establishments and sexually oriented businesses under this article and the administration thereof. These regulatory fees are in addition to, and not in lieu of; the occupational licenses taxes imposed by the City Code or state law and other land development or regulatory fees associated with general commercial activities and locations 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 22, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-98. - Contents of license, term of license, renewals, expiration, lapse. 
(a)  Contents. An adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business license shall state on its face the name of the licensee, the name of the establishment, the street address of the establishment, the classification of the license, the date of issuance, and the date of expiration. 
(b)  Term. All licenses issued under this article shall be annual licenses which shall commence running on October 1, on which date they shall have been paid for, and shall expire on September 30 of the following year. If a license is issued after October 1, but by March 31 of the following year, the applicant shall pay the appropriate license fee in full. If a license is issued after March 31, but by October 1 of the same year, the applicant shall pay one-half the appropriate license fee. 
(c)  Expiration/renewal/lapse. Each license shall expire on September 30 of each year and may be renewed only by making an application for a license in accordance with the provisions of this article. Applications for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date of the license. Failure to make application at least 30 days before the expiration date will not suspend the expiration of the license. If the application for a renewal is denied, the applicant may immediately appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction, which court shall provide prompt judicial review of said appeal. 
(d)  Currently licensed establishments. An adult entertainment establishment licensed by the City on the effective date of this article [December 4, 2001] may continue to operate under its current license until September 30, 2002, but shall apply for a new license on or before August 31, 2003, and shall be immediately subject to all requirements and provisions of this article upon the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 23, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-99. - Records and reports. 
Each licensee shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 24, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-100. - Transfer of license. 
It is unlawful for a licensee to transfer his, her or its license to another person or entity or surrender possession, control, and operation of the licensed establishment to such other person or entity. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 25, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-101. - Establishment name change. 
It is unlawful for a licensee to change the name of an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business unless and until the following requirements are satisfied: 
(1)  The City Manager or designee is given 30 days notice in writing of the proposed name change; and 
(2)  The change of name fee in the amount of $500.00 is paid; and 
(3)  The licensee has complied with F.S. § 865.09; and 
(4)  The licensee has complied with the provisions of F.S. ch. 607; and 
(5)  The licensee has complied with the provisions of F.S. ch. 620. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 26, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-102. - Suspension and revocation of license. 
The City Manager or designee shall suspend a license when he or designee determines that any one of the following has occurred: 
(1)  For purposes of this section, the term "violation" shall mean an incident having occurred at, or by, an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business which is prohibited by the provisions of this article or made unlawful by F.S. chs. 561, 562, 563, 564, 565, 794, 796, 800, 826, 827, 847, 893 or 895, or an analogous federal statute. 
(2)  Inspection of records and premises. In the event that the City Manager or designee determines that the licensee or an operator at or of the licensee has refused to allow any inspection of records or premises as required by this article; the City Manager or designee may suspend the license for a period not to exceed 30 days. 
(3)  Illegal activity/suspension. 
a.  In the event three or more violations occur within a two-year period, and convictions result from at least three of the violations, the City Manager or designee shall, upon the date of the third conviction, notify the licensee that the license shall be suspended for a period of 30 days unless good cause is shown in accordance with this article, that the violations have not occurred. For purposes of calculating this two-year period, the two-year period shall be deemed to be those 24 months occurring immediately prior to the violation occurrence date for which the 30-day suspension is sought. 
b.  In the event one or more violations occur within a two-year period from the date of the last violation occurrence date from which the conviction resulted in a 30-day suspension pursuant to subsection (3)a., but not including anytime during which the license was effectively suspended, and a conviction results from one or more of the violations, the City Manager or designee shall, upon the date of the latest conviction, provide notice to the licensee that the license shall be suspended for a period of 90 days unless good cause is shown in accordance with this article that the violation has not occurred. 
c.  In the event one or more violations occur within a two-year period from the date of the last violation occurrence date from which the conviction resulted in a 90-day suspension pursuant to subsection (3)b., but not including any time during which the license was effectively suspended, and a conviction results from one or more of the violations, the City Manager or designee shall, upon the date of the latest conviction, provide notice to the licensee that the license shall be suspended for a period of 180 days unless good cause is shown in accordance with this article that the violation has not occurred. 
(4)  Revocation. The City Manager or designee shall revoke a license when he or designee determines that any one of the following has occurred: 
a.  There has been one or more violations that have occurred within a two-year period from the date the last violation occurrence date from which the conviction resulted in a 180-day suspension pursuant to (3)c., but not including any time during which the license was effectively suspended, and a conviction results from one or more of the violations, the City Manager or designee shall, upon the date of the latest conviction, provide notice to the licensee that the license shall be revoked unless good cause is shown in accordance with this part that the violation has not occurred. 
b.  The licensee or any person on its or his behalf or any person listed on the application pursuant to section 16-90(b) of this article, gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the application process. 
c.  The licensee or any person on its or his behalf or any person listed on the application pursuant to section 16-90(b) of this article has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises of the establishment or business or when with a customer. 
d.  The licensee or any person on its or his behalf or any person listed on the application pursuant to section 16-90(b) of this article has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises of the establishment or business or when with a customer. 
e.  The licensee or any person on its or his behalf or any person listed on the application pursuant to section 16-90(b) of this article knowingly operated the adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business during a period when the licensee's license was suspended. 
f.  Except in the case of an adult motel, the licensee or any person on its or his behalf or any person listed on the application pursuant to section 16-90 of this article has knowingly allowed any specified sexual activities to occur on the premises of the establishment or business. 
(5)  Effective dates of suspensions and revocations. Except as otherwise provided in this article, all periods of suspension and revocation shall become effective 15 days after the City Manager or designee posts the notice of suspension or revocation at the licensee's establishment, or on the date that the licensee turns in his, her or its license, which ever happens first. The suspension or revocation shall be abated in the event that the licensee files a timely challenge to the suspension or revocation in accordance with the procedures set forth in this article or upon order of a court of competent jurisdiction. If an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business license is revoked, the licensee shall not be issued another adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business license for a period of two years running from the date the revocation actually takes effect after all abatement periods have lapsed. 
(6)  Other remedies. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the City may pursue any and all other available remedies through any and all other available processes and procedures available to correct violations of City Codes. Included within such remedies are the enforcement actions set forth in this article, actions in a court of competent jurisdiction for injunctive or other appropriate relief; criminal prosecution, code enforcement proceedings, the issuance of citations, the suspension or revocation of permits relating to health or safety matters, and any and all other remedies available under the laws of the State of Florida and the United States. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 27, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-103. - Suspension and revocation proceedings. 
(a)  Challenge to suspension or revocation. If the City Manager or designee notifies a licensee in writing of the pending suspension or revocation of a license as provided in section 16-102 of this article, then the suspension or revocation shall become final and effective 15 days after mailing to the licensee's record address, posting at the licensed establishment, or actual delivery of the notice to the licensee, unless the licensee first files with the City Manager or designee a written response stating the reasons why the suspension or revocation is alleged to be in error or inappropriate and a written notice of intent to challenge the suspension or revocation requesting a hearing to determine whether the suspension or revocation will become effective. The suspension or revocation shall be abated in the event that a licensee files a timely challenge to the suspension or revocation in accordance with the procedures of this article or upon an order of a court of competent jurisdiction. A suspension or revocation already in effect, but not previously challenged in a suspension or revocation hearing, maybe challenged in the same manner but is not abated during the proceedings. 
(b)  Hearing on suspension or revocation. When a licensee files a written response and notice of intent to challenge a pending or existing suspension or revocation then a public hearing to determine if the pending suspension or revocation will become effective and final hearing shall be held by the City Council. The City Manager or designee shall notify the City Attorney and any appropriate City offices who shall schedule and provide notice of the hearing date and time. 
(1)  The suspension or revocation hearing shall be held within 30 days of the City Manager's receipt of a written challenge and request for a hearing by the aggrieved licensee. 
(2)  The participants before the City Council shall be the licensee, any witnesses of the licensee, the City Manager or designee and any witnesses of the City Manager or designee. All witnesses shall provide their legal name, mailing addresses and telephone number. 
(3)  The procedures used shall be those typically used in a civil case with the City Manager or designee having the burden of proof by preponderance of the evidence. 
(4)  Testimony and evidence may be submitted by any witness but shall be limited to matters directly relating to the grounds for suspension or revocation. Irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious testimony or evidence shall be excluded. 
(5)  All testimony shall be under oath. The City Council shall decide all questions of procedure and standing. Unless otherwise mutually agreed to between the licensee and the City Manager or designee, the order of presentation of testimony and evidence shall be as follows: 
a.  The City Manager or designee and any witnesses of the City Manager or designee. 
b.  The licensee and any witnesses of the license; 
c.  Rebuttal witnesses from the City Manager or designee. 
d.  Rebuttal witnesses from the licensee. 
e.  Summation by the City Manager or designee. 
f.  Summation by the licensee. 
(6)  The City Council may also call and question witnesses or request additional evidence as the City Council deems necessary and appropriate. 
(7)  To the maximum extent practicable, the hearing shall be informal. Reasonable cross examination of witnesses shall be permitted, but questioning shall be confined as closely as possible to the scope of direct testimony. 
(8)  If the City Council comes to believe that any facts, claims, or allegations necessitate additional review or response by either the licensee or the City Manager or designee, then the City Council may order the hearing continued until an announced date certain, not to exceed 30 days from the date of continuance. The City Council shall render a final decision on the appeal within 60 days of the City Manager's receipt of licensee's written notice of challenge. 
(9)  The City Council shall render a written decision determining whether the suspension or revocation will become or remain effective at the conclusion of the hearing at which the appeal is decided or as soon as practicable thereafter. 
(c)  Filing of decision. The original of the written decision of the City Council shall be filed with the City clerk and copies shall be delivered or mailed to the licensee, the City Manager or designee and the Flagler County Sheriff's Office. 
(d)  Judicial review. Any person who participated in a suspension or revocation hearing before the City Council and who is aggrieved by the decision of the City Council may immediately challenge the decision in any court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to the rules of procedure of that court. The record of the hearing shall consist of the complete record of the proceedings before the City Council. The City Council's decision shall be promptly reviewed by the court. 
(e)  Requirement of exhaustion procedures. Judicial review of a suspension or revocation, or related hearing or appeal proceedings, shall be available only after the administrative procedures and remedies set forth in this section have been exhausted. 
(f)  Notice of final suspension or revocation. If no response or request for a suspension or revocation hearing is filed within 15 days of the notice of a pending suspension or revocation, or if the licensee who requested the hearing does not appear at the suspension or revocation hearing after notice, or if the City Council decides after a hearing that a pending suspension or revocation will become final, then the City Manager or designee shall issue to the licensee notice of final suspension or revocation of the adult entertainment license and mail or arrange delivery of the notice to the licensee's record address. 
(g)  Effective date of suspension or revocation. The suspension or revocation of a license shall take effect the day after delivery of a notice of final suspension or revocation to the licensee in person, by posting on the licensed establishment, or by mail to the licensee's record address, or on the date the licensee surrenders the license, whichever happens first. The licensee shall immediately return and surrender a revoked license to the City Manager or designee or surrender the revoked license, upon demand, to a member of the Flagler County Sheriffs Office. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 28, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-104. - Worker records. 
(a)  Each adult entertainment establishment and sexually oriented business, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, shall create, establish and maintain a record of all workers of the establishment or business. The record shall contain the worker's full legal name and any aliases and all past or current aliases of the worker; his or her date of birth; his or her residential address; his or her residential telephone number (if any) and all pager numbers and other similar numbers used; his or her driver's license number and a photocopy of the license; his or her state or federally issued identification card number including the worker's social security account number; the employment status of the worker including, but not limited to, whether the worker is a salaried employee, an independent contractor, a lessee, a sub-lessee, a subcontractor allowed to work at the establishment, or such other arrangement as may be in place; whether income taxes are withheld for the worker; and a recent passport type photograph of the worker as of the date of association with the establishment which accurately reflects the date on which the photograph was taken. Said records shall be maintained for a period of no less than two years from the date the worker is separated from employment. 
(b)  The original records required by subsection (a) or true and exact photocopies thereof; shall be kept at the adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business at all times including clear photographs. 
(c)  All operators of an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business shall be responsible for knowing the location of the original records, or the true and exact photocopies thereof. 
(d)  All operators of an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business shall, upon request by a law enforcement officer or the City Manager or designee, make available for immediate inspection the original records, or the true and exact photocopies thereof at any time when the establishment or business is open for business. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 29, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-105. - General requirements for all adult entertainment establishments and sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  Each adult entertainment establishment and sexually oriented business, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, shall observe the following general requirements: 
(1)  Conform to, comply with and abide by all applicable safety, employer related, building, fire, health, zoning or land use statutes, codes, ordinances, rules and regulations, whether federal, state or local. 
(2)  Keep the adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business license posted and prominently displayed in a conspicuous place at the establishment or business at all times, which license shall be available for inspection upon request at all times by the public, any law enforcement officer and the City Manager, or designee, when the establishment or business is open for business. 
(3)  Opaquely cover each non-opaque area where a person outside the adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business may otherwise see inside the establishment or business. 
(4)  Provide to any law enforcement officer and the City Manager or designee, during all hours of operation or when an operator is present at the establishment, access through the main entrance and into all areas of the establishment where customers are permitted without the necessity of using a key, computer entry, password or seeking clearance from a worker or customer to obtain entry through an electronically operated door or entryway. 
(5)  Install, construct, keep, maintain or allow only those signs at the establishment or building exterior which comply with the provisions relating to signage in the land development regulations of the City. 
(6)  Not allow any person under 18 years of age to be present when services are provided to or performed for a customer or when the establishment or business is open for business. 
(7)  Not employ or provide goods or services to any person under 18 years of age. 
(8)  Not provide, offer or engage in any services to any person when not licensed to do so under this article. 
(9)  Not operate when a license issued pursuant to this article has been suspended, revoked or canceled or when the license is expired. 
(10)  Not permit any animal except seeing eye dogs to accompany a worker or customer when services are provided or performed. 
(11)  Not place, operate or contain video cameras, transmitting or taping equipment anywhere on the premises except where customers are advised in advance by posted notice. 
(12)  Not advertise the presentation of any activity prohibited by any law, rule or regulation whether federal, state or local. 
(13)  Ensure that the view areas specified in this article remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any customer is present in the premises so as to ensure that no customer is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which non-workers will not be permitted. 
(14)  Ensure that at least one operator is on duty and present at the establishment or business when the establishment or business is open for business who is responsible and knows the whereabouts of all records required by this article. Said operator's name shall be conspicuously posted on the premises at all times the business or establishment is open for business. 
(15)  Ensure that at least one operator is situated in each Manager's station, when required by this article, at all times that any customer is present inside the premises. 
(16)  Ensure that the premises are equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access at an illumination of not less than 15 to 20 average maintained foot candles as measured 35 inches above the floor level. The light shall be maintained at all times any customer is present in the premises. 
(17)  Not alter or otherwise change the contents of an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business license. 
(18)  Ensure that each exterior entrance and exit door for use by customers and interior doors which permit entrance to the interior and exit to the interior from any interior foyer area shall remain unlocked when any person who is not a worker is inside the establishment. 
(19)  Establish, create and maintain worker records as required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 30, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-106. - Sexually oriented businesses. 
In addition to the general requirements for adult entertainment establishments and sexually oriented businesses contained in this article, a sexually oriented business shall, regardless of whether it is licensed thereunder, comply with the following general requirements: 
(1)  Post in an open and conspicuous place a list of services provided by the sexually oriented business which services shall be described clearly in the English language along with a specification as to the cost of each service. 
(2)  Provide each customer, in advance of any service being provided, with a written customer contract, written clearly in the English language, setting forth the service or services to be rendered, the cost of such service or services, the actual full name of the worker providing the service and actual full name, address and date of birth of the customer as reflected on a state or federally issued identification card or drivers license and the customer's telephone number. 
(3)  Create, establish and maintain a daily register in a format provided by the City Manager, or designee, containing the actual full names and addresses of all customers as reflected on a state or federally issued identification card or drivers license, the services performed, the time expended, the mode of payment and the full name of the worker providing the service. 
(4)  Not allow any worker of the sexually oriented business to accept any tip or gratuity, directly or indirectly, from a customer in addition to the service fee specified in the customer contract. 
(5)  Maintain all customer contracts and daily registers for a period of two years following the customers date of service. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 31, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-107. - Adult theater provisions. 
In addition to the general requirements relating to adult entertainment establishments and sexually oriented businesses contained in sections 16-105 and 16-106 of this article, an adult theater, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, shall: 
(1)  If the adult theater contains an auditorium or hall, comply with each of the following provisions: 
a.  Have individual and separate seats (not couches, benches, or other seating configurations allowing or providing for the seating of multiple persons on the same item of furniture) to accommodate the maximum number of persons who may occupy the area; 
b.  Have a continuous main aisle alongside of the seating areas in order that each person seated in the areas shall be visible from the aisle at all times; 
c.  Have a sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near each entrance to the auditorium or hall which lists the maximum number of persons who may occupy the auditorium or hall area, which number shall not exceed the number of seats within the hall or auditorium area; and 
d.  Be illuminated at an illumination of not less than 15 to 20 foot candles average maintained as measured at 35 inches above the floor level and shall maintain the light at all times so that any customer present in the hall or auditorium may be seen. 
(2)  If the adult theater contains adult booths, each adult booth shall comply with each of the following provisions: 
a.  Have a sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance which states the maximum number of persons who may occupy the booth, which number shall correlate with the number of seats in the booth; 
b.  Have a permanently open entrance not less than three-feet wide and not less than six-feet high, not capable of being closed or partially closed by any curtain, door, or other partition which would be capable of wholly or partially obscuring any person situated in the booth; provided, however, that the requirements of all building and related codes shall also be complied with; 
c.  Have individual, separate seats (which are not couches, benches, or other seating configurations allowing or providing for the seating of multiple persons on the same item of furniture) which correlate with the maximum number of persons who may occupy the booth; 
d.  Have a continuous main aisle alongside the booth in order that each person situated in the booth shall be visible from the aisle at all times; 
e.  Have an illuminated and continuous main aisle in which workers and customers can be seen from one end to the other; and 
f.  Have, except for the entrance, walls or partitions of solid construction without any holes or openings in such walls or partitions. 
(3)  Have one or more manager's stations. 
(4)  Configure the interior of the premises in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any customer is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. 
(5)  If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, configure the interior of the premises in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any customer is permitted access for any purposes from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection shall be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)  If the adult theater is designed to permit outdoor viewing by persons seated in automobiles, cause the motion picture screen so situated, or the perimeter of the establishment so fenced, such that the material to be seen by those persons may not be seen from any public right-of-way, property assigned a residential zoning classification or assigned a residential land use designation, any religious institution or church, any educational institution or school, or from a park. 
(7)  Cover the floors of areas accessible to customers with smooth and non-permeable flooring material which can withstand frequent effective cleaning with industrial strength cleaning agents. Carpeting of any type is prohibited. 
(8)  Use smooth and non-permeable upholstery material, which can withstand frequent cleaning with industrial strength cleaning agents, to cover furniture permitted by this article for the use of customers. 
(9)  Have, in areas accessible to customers, interior wall surfaces which can withstand frequent cleaning with industrial strength cleaning agents. 
(10)  Use only those shades and blinds which can withstand frequent cleaning with industrial strength cleaning agents. (Draperies are prohibited). 
(11)  Maintain areas accessible to customers in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(12)  Keep all furniture upholstery material free from holes and rips. 
(13)  Utilize an appropriate and effective adaptation of the U.S. Center for Disease Controls universal precautions for the storage and transmission of the HIV virus and other diseases when cleaning or sanitizing the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 32, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-108. - Adult performance establishment provisions. 
(a)  In addition to the general requirements for adult entertainment establishments and sexually oriented businesses contained in sections 16-105 and 16-106 of this article, an adult performance establishment shall, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, have: A stage provided for the expressive display or exposure of any worker's specified anatomical areas to a customer consisting of a permanent platform (or other similar permanent structure) raised a minimum of 18 inches above the surrounding floor and encompassing an area of at least 100 square feet. The stage shall be located at least three feet from the nearest table, chair, area or other accommodation where customers are seated or otherwise located; provided, however, that a table at which any customer is seated or served shall not be used as a stage. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the stage requirement in subsection (a), an adult performance establishment may also have smaller stages for the expressive display or exposure of a worker's specified anatomical areas to a customer consisting of permanent or removable platforms raised a minimum of 18 inches above the surrounding floor from where customers are seated or located; provided, however; that a table at which any customer is seated or served shall not be used as a stage. 
(c)  In addition to the general requirements for adult entertainment establishments and sexually oriented businesses contained in this article, an adult performance establishment shall, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article: 
(1)  In any area in which a private performance occurs, have a permanently open entrance not less than three-feet wide and not less than six-feet high, which entrance shall not have any curtain rods, hinges, rails or the like which would allow the entrance to be closed or partially closed by any curtain, door, or other partition; provided, however, that the requirements of all building and related codes shall also be complied with; and 
(2)  In any area in which a private performance occurs, have a wall to wall, floor to ceiling partition of solid construction without any holes or openings, which partition may be completely or partially transparent, and which partition separates the worker from the person viewing the displays. 
(3)  Post a sign which is clearly legible and located in a conspicuous place setting forth that straddle dancing is strictly prohibited 
(4)  Not place or permit the placement of a bed or mattress in the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 33, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-109. - Commercial bodily contact establishments provisions. 
In addition to all general requirements of this article pertaining to adult entertainment establishments and sexually oriented businesses as set forth in section 16-105 and section 16-106 of this article, a commercial bodily contact establishment, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, shall: 
(1)  Operate only from a fixed physical location which is set forth on its sexually oriented business license and all required occupational licenses. 
(2)  Not advertise, offer or provide any other service other than services which are posted. 
(3)  Provide clean linen and towels for each customer when towels and linens are used during the course of providing services to a customer; provided, however, that heavy white paper may be substituted for sheets if such paper is used for only one customer and then discarded into a sanitary receptacle. 
(4)  Store clean linen, towels and other materials used in connection with providing commercial bodily contact in closed cabinets. 
(5)  Disinfect and sterilize non-disposable instruments after each use on a customer. 
(6)  Cause all workers to conceal their specified anatomical areas with an opaque covering at all times when on the premises of the business by wearing an opaque surgical type gown. 
(7)  Not encourage, allow or permit any customer to consume food or beverages in the business. 
(8)  Provide commercial bodily contact in an area wherein such area is visible at all times from common areas in the establishment. No contact may occur in a separate or individual cubicle, room, booth or area which is not visible from common areas of the establishment and a receptionist area; provided, however, that if male and female customers are provided services at the same time, separate work areas shall be established for each gender. 
(9)  Not advertise, display, publish, exhibit, place, distribute or promote on any advertising matter or signage services that are not posted or a suggestion that services not posted will be provided. 
(10)  Not advertise, display, publish, exhibit, place, distribute or promote on any advertising matter or signage any suggestion that workers will be dressed in any manner other than as required in this article. 
(11)  Not begin a meeting or service with a customer between 10:00 p.m. of any day of the week and 9:00 a.m. the following day. 
(12)  Not provide services at any place other than a physical location licensed to provide commercial bodily contact under the provisions of this article. 
(13)  Not place or permit the placement of any bed, mattress or sofa at the business; provided, however, that a sofa may be placed in the reception area open to the public at the main entrance of the business and cots or padded mats may be used when providing commercial bodily contact. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 34, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-110. - Escort service. 
In addition to all general provisions of section 16-105 and section 16-106 of this article pertaining to adult entertainment establishments and sexually oriented businesses, an escort service, regardless of whether licensed under this article, shall: 
(1)  Not advertise, offer or perform any other service than services which are posted. 
(2)  Cause all workers and escorts to conceal their specified anatomical areas with an opaque covering at all times when on the premises of the escort service. 
(3)  Not advertise, display, publish, exhibit, place, distribute or promote on any advertising matter or signage services that are not posted or a suggestion that services not posted will be provided. 
(4)  Not begin a meeting or service with a customer between 10:00 p.m. of any day of the week and 9:00 a.m. the following day. 
(5)  If offering or providing escorts or escort service within the City, each escort service shall notify the development services department and the City Manager or designee of an authorized physical location, which may or may not be within the City, from where the escort service operates and dispatches escorts. 
(6)  Include in all advertising or promotional literature posted, placed, published, or distributed within the City the number of a valid sexually oriented business license issued by the City unless the escort service does not refer, send, or dispatch escorts to any location within the jurisdictional limits of the City. 
(7)  Each escort service shall ensure that every escort and worker of the escort service is provided with a copy of the escort service's license and carries it while working as an escort for the service, and displays said license upon the request of any law enforcement officer or the City Manager or designee. In addition to a copy of the escort service's license, each escort service shall ensure that each escort has an occupational license to engage in the occupation of escort within the City and that they carry said license while working, and displays said license upon the request of any law enforcement officer or the City Manager or designee. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an escort or worker of an escort service who is a paid employee for whom taxes and social security payments are withheld and paid by the licensed escort service and who is not an independent contractor may substitute and carry a copy of the sexually oriented business/escort service license of the employing escort service only, provided that worker records as required by this article are created and maintained by the licensed escort service. 
(h)  If a meeting with or the service of a customer occurs at a location not open to the public, then the escort shall check in with the on-duty manager of the premises in person where the meeting or service occurs or begins prior to meeting or servicing a customer and advise the manager of the following: Names of the escort(s), the escort service and customer(s); the escort's time of arrival and estimated time of departure; and a copy of the escort service's sexually oriented business license and the escort's own occupational license, if applicable, and the location of the meeting within the structure. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 35, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-111. - Engaging in prohibited activity; customers. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any customer in or for an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business regardless of whether licensed pursuant to this article to do any of the following acts: 
(1)  To engage or participate in a straddle dance at the establishment or business. 
(2)  To offer, contract or otherwise agree to engage or participate in a straddle dance with a person at the establishment or business. 
(3)  To engage or participate in any specified sexual activity at the establishment or business or while in the presence of a worker. 
(4)  To display or expose while in the presence of a worker or when at the establishment or business any specified anatomical area. 
(5)  To offer or deliver a tip or gratuity to any worker of an establishment or business before, during or after the provision of services except at an adult performance establishment. 
(6)  If a worker is a female, to intentionally touch, fondle or manipulate her own clothed or unclothed breast(s), either directly or through a medium. 
(7)  To intentionally touch, fondle, massage, or manipulate any specified anatomical area of a worker, a customer, or himself or herself whether clothed or unclothed, on the premises of the establishment or business. 
(8)  To intentionally touch, fondle, massage or manipulate a worker on any specified anatomical area when at or receiving services from the adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business. 
(9)  To intentionally touch, fondle, massage or manipulate the clothed or unclothed breast(s) of a female worker, or to touch the clothed or unclothed body of a worker at any point below the waist and above the knee of the worker when at an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business. 
(10)  To occupy an adult booth in which booth there are more people than that specified on the posted sign required by this article. 
(11)  To otherwise violate or aid or abet a violation of this article. 
(12)  To encourage or solicit any worker to engage in any specified sexual activity. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any customer at or of a sexually oriented business to do any of the following acts regardless of whether the establishment is licensed pursuant to this article: 
(1)  To intentionally touch, massage or manipulate, directly or indirectly or through a medium while on the premises of the establishment or when with a worker, the customer's specified anatomical areas. 
(2)  To solicit any worker to provide a service not posted. 
(3)  To solicit or receive any service not indicated and contracted for in the written customer contract. 
(4)  To provide to the worker providing the service either directly, indirectly or through a medium, any tip, gratuity or other consideration beyond the fee specified in the customer contract. 
(5)  To expose any specified anatomical area to the view of a worker. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 36, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-112. - Engaging in prohibited activity; workers; operators. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any worker of an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business, regardless of whether licensed under this article, to do any of the following acts or for an operator of an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business, regardless of whether licensed hereunder, to knowingly permit, suffer, aid, allow or encourage any worker to do any of the following acts: 
(1)  To engage or participate in a straddle dance with a customer at the establishment or business. 
(2)  To offer, contract or otherwise agree with a customer to engage or participate in a straddle dance with a person at the establishment or business. 
(3)  To engage or participate in any specified sexual activity or activities at the establishment or business with a customer, him or her self or a worker 
(4)  To display or expose at the establishment or business specified anatomical areas except in accordance with the provisions of this article and other applicable law. 
(5)  To request or accept a tip or gratuity from a customer except at an adult performance establishment. 
(6)  To work in an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business that he or she knows or should know is not licensed under this article, or which has a license which is under suspension, has been revoked or canceled, or has expired, regardless of whether he, she or it has applied for and obtained a license under this article. 
(7)  To display or expose specified anatomical areas while engaging in personal advertising, pandering, or solicitation, whether passive or otherwise, on behalf of the worker, any other worker, or the establishment or business while situated outside any structure at the establishment or business, or at a place at the establishment or business where the worker is visible from any public right-of-way or sidewalk. "Personal advertising" means encouraging or enticing, by whatever direct or indirect means, potential customers outside the doors of the establishment or business to enter the establishment or business. 
(8)  To suffer, permit, or allow any door of the business or establishment that is visible from a public right-of-way or sidewalk to be opened or remain opened except when a person is entering or exiting the establishment or business. 
(9)  To allow or encourage a customer to intentionally touch or fondle, either directly or through a medium, any specified anatomical area of the customer, a worker or another customer. 
(10)  If the worker is a female, to allow herself to be intentionally touched on her clothed or unclothed breast(s) by a customer. 
(11)  If a worker is a female, to allow herself to be intentionally touched by a customer on any portion of her body below the waist and above the knee. 
(12)  To display or expose any specified anatomical area unless such worker is in an area described in subsections 16-108(a) or 16-108(b) of this article, and the stage on which the worker is located is not located between the legs of a customer. 
(13)  To provide or engage in any private performance unless such worker is in an area described in subsection 16-108(c) of this article. 
(14)  To remain in the presence of a customer who is exposing specified anatomical areas at the establishment or in the presence of a worker or another customer. 
(15)  To violate or aid or abet in a violation of the provisions of this article. 
(16)  To encourage or knowingly permit any customer to intentionally touch, fondle, massage or manipulate, either directly or indirectly through a medium, any of the customer's specified anatomical areas on the premises of the establishment or when in the presence of another customer or worker. 
(17)  To encourage or solicit any customer to engage in any specified sexual activity. 
(18)  To intentionally touch, fondle, massage or manipulate any customer on the customer's clothed or unclothed body between the waist and above the knee. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any worker of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, to do any of the following acts, or for an operator of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, to knowingly or with reason to know permit suffer or allow any worker to commit any of the following acts: 
(1)  To accept a tip or gratuity from or on behalf of a customer in addition to the service fee stated in the written customer contract. 
(2)  To begin a meeting or service, continue a meeting or service, solicit a meeting or service or make or solicit a sale between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of any particular day and 9:00 a.m. the following day. 
(3)  Provide commercial bodily contact except at the physical structure of the establishment which has a commercial bodily contact establishment license. 
(4)  To provide any service not posted as required by this article. 
(5)  To provide any service without first executing a customer contract. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any worker of an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business, regardless of whether licensed pursuant to this article, to knowingly permit, suffer, aid, allow or encourage any customer to do any of the following acts: 
(1)  To intentionally touch, fondle, massage or manipulate, either directly or indirectly through a medium, any of the customer's specified anatomical areas when at the establishment or business or while in the presence of a worker or another customer. 
(2)  To intentionally touch, fondle, massage or manipulate, either directly or indirectly through a medium, any specified anatomical area of another customer or a worker when at the establishment or business or while in the presence of a worker or customer. 
(3)  To engage in any specified sexual activities at the establishment or business with a worker, customer, him or her self or with another customer. 
(4)  To expose the customer's specified anatomical areas at the establishment or business or when receiving services or when in the presence of a worker or another customer. 
(5)  To engage or participate in a straddle dance. 
(6)  To intentionally touch, fondle, massage or manipulate a worker at any point below the waist and above the knee. 
(7)  To intentionally touch a female worker on the clothed or unclothed breast. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 37, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-113. - Operation without license. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to be an operator of or at or to be a worker for an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business where the person knows or should know: 
(1)  That the establishment or business does not have an adult entertainment establish mentor sexually oriented business license for the applicable classification. 
(2)  That the establishment or business has a license which is under suspension. 
(3)  That the establishment or business has a license which has been revoked, canceled or has expired. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 38, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-114. - Operation contrary to operational requirements. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to be an operator of an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business which does not satisfy all of the general requirements of section 16-105 of this article, regardless of whether the establishment is licensed thereunder. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to be an operator of a sexually oriented business which does not satisfy all of the general requirements of section 16-106 of this article regardless of whether the establishment is licensed thereunder. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to be an operator of an adult performance establishment which does not satisfy all of the special requirements of section 16-108 of this article regardless of whether licensed thereunder. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person to be an operator of an adult theater which does not satisfy all of the special requirements of section 16-107 of this article regardless of whether the establishment is licensed thereunder. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person to be an operator of an escort service which does not satisfy all of the special requirements of section 16-110 of this article regardless of whether licensed thereunder. 
(f)  It is unlawful for any person to be an operator of a commercial bodily contact establishment which does not satisfy all of the special requirements of section 16-109 of this article regardless of whether the establishment is licensed thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 39, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-115. - Use of restrooms or dressing rooms. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any provision in this article indicating to the contrary, it is not unlawful for any worker of an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, to expose any specified anatomical area during the worker's bona fide use of a dressing room or bathroom which is occupied at the time only by workers of the same sex. 
(b)  Not withstanding any provision in this article indicating to the contrary, it shall not be unlawful for any customer of an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, to expose any specified anatomical area during the customer's bona fide use of a bathroom which is occupied at the time only by customers of the same sex. 
(c)  It is unlawful to be an operator of an adult performance establishment which has a dressing room for use by its workers, that is accessible to customers. 
(d)  It is unlawful to be an operator of a sexually oriented business which has a dressing room for use by its customers that is accessible to workers. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, a worker engaged in the work of a restroom attendant or valet may occupy a restroom which is also occupied by customers provided that the valet or attendant does not expose any specified anatomical area to the view of a customer and is of the same sex of the customer occupying the restroom. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, it is not unlawful for a worker or customer to touch their own specified anatomical areas during their bonfire use of a restroom, dressing room or bathroom when such touching is necessary and inherent to the activity of changing clothes or excretory functions. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 40, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-116. - Minors—Unlawful provisions. 
It is unlawful for an operator or worker of an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business regardless of whether licensed under this article, to knowingly or with reason to know, permit, suffer or allow: 
(1)  Admittance to the establishment or business of a person under 18 years of age when the establishment or business is open for business. 
(2)  A person under 18 years of age to remain at the establishment or business when the establishment or business is open for business. 
(3)  A person under 18 years of age to purchase goods or services from the establishment or a worker at the establishment or business. 
(4)  A person under 18 years of age to be a worker at or for the establishment or business. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 41, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-117. - Records—Unlawful provisions. 
(a)  It is unlawful to be an operator or worker of an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, if the current and valid adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business license is not conspicuously displayed on the premises of the establishment or business. 
(b)  It is unlawful to be an operator of an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business, regardless of whether licensed under this article, which does not create, establish and compile worker records, maintain worker records or where such records are not produced for inspection by a law enforcement officer upon request when the establishment or business is open for business. 
(c)  It is unlawful to be an operator of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether it is licensed under this article, at which customer contracts, daily registers and a list of services have not been compiled, maintained or are not produced for inspection by a law enforcement officer upon request when the establishment or business is open for business. 
(d)  It is unlawful for a worker at or of an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business, regardless of whether licensed under this article, to fail to obtain, carry or produce for inspection by a law enforcement officer upon request, an occupational license for the occupation in which the worker is engaged; provided, however, that a worker of an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business who is a paid employee for whom income taxes and social security payments are withheld and paid by the establishment and who is not an independent contractor shall not be required to obtain an occupational license and/or their own adult entertainment establishment/sexually oriented business license. 
(e)  It is unlawful for an escort, regardless of whether they are a paid employee for whom income taxes and social security payments are withheld and paid by the escort service, to fail to carry and produce for inspection by a law enforcement officer a copy of the sexually oriented business license of the employing escort service when working as an escort or providing the services of escort. 
(f)  It is unlawful for any person or any person on their behalf applying for a license under this article to make a false or misleading statement or provide false or misleading information which is intended to facilitate the issuance of a license. 
(g)  It is unlawful for any worker, customer or operator to provide false or misleading information in any worker record, customer contract or daily register required by this article. 
(h)  It is unlawful to be an operator or worker at an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business which does not have conspicuously posted the name of the operator on duty while the establishment is open for business. 
(i)  It is unlawful for an operator of an adult entertainment establishment to fail to produce for inspection any worker record required by this article, when requested by a law enforcement officer or the City Manager or designee when the establishment or business is open for business. 
(j)  It is unlawful for an operator of a sexually oriented business to fail to produce for inspection any worker record, customer contract or daily register required by this article when requested by a law enforcement officer or the City Manager or designee when the establishment or business is open for business. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 42, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-118. - Hours of operation—Unlawful provisions. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any operator of an adult entertainment establishment, regardless of whether licensed pursuant to this article, to allow such establishment to remain open for business or to knowingly allow any worker to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service or solicit a service between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any particular day. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any operator of sexually oriented business, regardless of whether licensed pursuant to this article, to allow such business to remain open for business or to permit any worker to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, begin, continue or provide a service or solicit a service between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any particular day. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any worker of an adult entertainment establishment, regardless of whether licensed pursuant to this article, to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service or solicit a service between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any particular day. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any worker of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether licensed pursuant to this article, to provide a service, solicit a service, engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, begin a service or continue a service between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any particular day. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 43, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-119. - Special prohibitions relating to escorts and escort services—Unlawful provisions. 
It is unlawful for any escort, escort service or worker of an escort service, regardless of whether licensed under this article, to commit any of the following acts or for an operator of an escort service regardless, of whether licensed thereunder, to knowingly permit, suffer, aid, assist or allow any escort or escort service worker to commit any of the following acts: 
(1)  To enter a hotel, motel or other place of temporary lodging for the purpose of meeting or providing services to a customer without immediately upon entering such hotel, motel or other place and prior to meeting the customer making personal face-to-face contact with the on-duty manager at the front desk or reception area and providing that person with the following information: 
a.  The time of arrival and estimated time of departure; 
b.  A copy of the escort service's sexually oriented business license and, if applicable, the escort's occupational license; 
c.  The name of the escort, the escort service and the customer being met/served; and 
d.  The location of the meeting or service within the structure including the room number. 
(2)  To require, entice or solicit any customer to remove any article of clothing. 
(3)  To display or expose any specified anatomical area to a customer. 
(4)  To begin a meeting or service without first meeting the customer in a public place such as a bar or restaurant before accompanying the customer to any place not open to the public such as a hotel room or residence. 
(5)  To meet with or provide services to a customer in any place not open to the public such as a hotel room, motel room or residence without first executing the customer contract as required by this article. 
(6)  To provide services to a customer even in a public place without first executing the customer contract as required by this article, immediately following the meeting of the customer. 
(7)  To solicit a tip or gratuity from a customer in exchange for a promise or suggestion that any act or service not contracted for in the customer contract will be performed. 
(8)  To accept any compensation or payment except that which is provided in the customer contract. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 44, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-120. - Special prohibited acts, commercial bodily contact—Unlawful provisions. 
It is unlawful for a worker of a commercial bodily contact establishment, regardless of whether licensed pursuant to this article, to commit any of the following acts or for the operator of a commercial bodily contact establishment, regardless of whether licensed thereunder, to knowingly or with reason to know, permit, suffer, aid, assist or allow any worker to commit any of the following acts: 
(1)  To provide commercial bodily contact or to be present at the premises of the business when open for business unless covering their specified anatomical areas by wearing an opaque surgical type gown. 
(2)  To display or expose any specified anatomical area to a customer. 
(3)  To allow a customer to expose or display the customers' specified anatomical areas in the presence of a worker. 
(4)  To allow a customer to engage in any specified sexual activity with him or herself another customer or with a worker. 
(5)  To perform or provide commercial bodily contact except at the premises of a commercial bodily contact establishment licensed under this article. 
(6)  To engage in or offer to engage in private modeling or the activities of an escort with any customer. 
(7)  To provide commercial bodily contact or service to a customer without first executing a customer contract as required by this article. 
(8)  To intentionally touch, fondle, manipulate or massage the specified anatomical area of any customer. 
(9)  To allow any customer to intentionally touch, fondle, manipulate or massage any specified anatomical area of any worker or the body of any worker below the waist and above the knee, directly, indirectly or through a medium. 
(10)  To remain in the presence of any customer who is displaying, exposing, intentionally touching, fondling or manipulating any specified anatomical area. 
(11)  To allow any customer to intentionally touch, massage or manipulate any specified anatomical area while on the premises of the business or when in the presence of a worker. 
(12)  To solicit or require a customer to remove any item of clothing as a prerequisite to providing commercial bodily contact. 
(13)  To accept or solicit any tip, remuneration, consideration or gratuity in excess of the fee provided in the executed customer contract. 
(14)  To accept or solicit any tip, remuneration, consideration or gratuity in exchange for any enhanced service. 
(15)  To fail to require a customer to cover such customers' specified anatomical areas with a towel, robe, undergarment, bathing suit or other similar fully opaque material while on the premises of the business. 
(16)  To engage in or offer to engage in any private performance or act as an adult model. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 45, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-121. - Commercial bodily contact establishments—Prohibited; savings provision. 
(a)  Not withstanding any provision of this article, it is unlawful to operate, or be a worker for or at a commercial bodily contact establishment which engages in commercial bodily contact. 
(b)  Not withstanding the provisions of subsection (a), in the event that subsection (a), prohibiting commercial bodily contact establishments is found to be unconstitutional, or otherwise invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction or should an injunction be issued relative to the enforcement of subsection (a), then all provisions set forth in this article applicable to commercial bodily contact establishments and sexually oriented businesses shall apply to businesses and establishments engaged in commercial bodily contact. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 46, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-122. - Occupational licenses; home occupations. 
(a)  The development services department of the City may take such steps as may be necessary to ensure that the occupational license tax is paid by only such individuals and entities that are lawfully permitted in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Adult entertainment establishments and sexually oriented businesses shall not be approved as home occupations. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 47, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-123. - Sexual encounter businesses prohibited; prohibited acts; unlawful provisions. 
(a)  It is unlawful to be an operator of or be a worker at a sexual encounter business. 
(b)  It is unlawful to cause, encourage, or allow a person under 18 years of age to be present at a sexual encounter business. 
(c)  It is unlawful to aid or abet a person causing, encouraging or allowing a person under 18 years of age to be present at a sexual encounter business. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 48, 12-4-01)  
Sec. 16-124. - Immunity from prosecution. 
The City and any and all of its officers, departments or agents and any law enforcement officer shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for the reasonable, good-faith trespass upon an adult entertainment establishment or sexually oriented business while acting within the scope of the authority set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-39, § 49, 12-4-01)  
ARTICLE IV. - ALARM SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 16-151. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm business means the business, by any person, of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system or causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved or installed any alarm system in or on any building, structure or facility, either privately owned or commercially owned. 
Alarm system means any assembly or equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged to signal the occurrence of a fire, an illegal entry or any other occurrence requiring urgent attention and to which a law enforcement agency, fire agency, emergency medical agency or other emergency response agency is expected to respond. 
Alarm user means the person in control of any building, structure or facility wherein an alarm system is maintained. 
Automatic dialing device means a device which is interconnected to a telephone line and is programmed to select a predetermined telephone number and transmit by voice message or code signal an emergency message indicating a need for emergency response. 
Burglary alarm system means an alarm system signaling an entry or attempted entry into the area protected by the system. 
Emergency medical system means an alarm system signaling the need for emergency medical attention. 
False alarm means an alarm signal indicating a burglary, robbery, fire, emergency medical or other emergency situation that is reasonably expected to elicit a response by a law enforcement agency, a fire agency, an emergency medical agency, or other emergency response agency, when a situation requiring such response does not in fact exist. "False alarm" does not include an alarm signal caused by violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably contemplated by the alarm user nor subject to control by the alarm business operator or alarm user. 
Fire alarm system means an alarm system signaling fire or smoke in the area protected by the system. 
Interconnect means to connect an alarm system, including an automatic dialing device, to a telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical device that utilizes a telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit a message upon activation of the alarm system. 
Other emergency alarm system means an alarm system signaling that other emergency services are required. 
Primary trunk line means a public telephone line serving the City, that is designated to receive calls for service from the public. 
Robbery alarm system means an alarm system signaling a robbery or attempted robbery. 
(Ord. No. 00-8, § 1, 3-7-00) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 16-153. - Administrative procedures. 
(a)  The City shall establish procedures governing the implementation of this article, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Registration procedures and forms. 
(2)  Processing of false alarm reports submitted by alarm users. 
(3)  Collection of fees. 
(4)  Alarm deactivation procedures. 
(5)  Appeal processes by alarm users. 
(6)  Recordkeeping systems. 
(7)  Alarm response procedures. 
(8)  Notification procedures. 
(b)  These procedures shall be reviewed periodically by the City, and changes may be made as deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 00-8, § 1, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 16-154. - Use of automatic dialing devices. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any alarm business, user or other person to program or interconnect an automatic dialing device to select a primary trunk line of the City, or a fire department located in the City, and it is unlawful for an alarm business or user to fail to disconnect or reprogram an automatic dialing device which is programmed to select such primary trunk line within 12 hours of receipt of written notice from the City that it is so programmed. 
(b)  Within 60 days after April 10, 1989, all existing automatic dialing devices programmed to select a primary trunk line shall be reprogrammed or disconnected. 
(Ord. No. 00-8, § 1, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 16-155. - Termination at City communications center prohibited; exceptions. 
No commercial or private alarm system may be terminated in the City communications center, except that the City may at his discretion allow the termination of governmental alarm systems or certain alarm systems originating at federally insured banking or savings institutions and other high risk areas as he may deem appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 00-8, § 1, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 16-156. - Registration required; deactivation of alarms. 
Prior to the installation or use of any type robbery, burglar, fire, emergency medical or other emergency response alarm within the City, the alarm user shall furnish to the City, his name, address and telephone number and information regarding the full names, addresses and telephone numbers of at least two people who can be reached at all times and who are authorized to enter the premises and deactivate the alarm system. If any such person shall fail to appear and turn off any such alarm system within one hour after being notified by the City to do so, then the alarm user of the premises shall be automatically charged a fee of $25.00 for each such occurrence. If the alarm user fails to pay such fee when due, he shall be notified in writing by the City Manager's office that there will be no further response to alarms at that location. 
(Ord. No. 00-8, § 1, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 16-157. - False alarms. 
(a)  Generally. For a response by the City, a City fire department, an emergency medical agency or any other City-funded emergency response agency to any false alarm within the City, the City shall charge the alarm user fees as follows: 
(1)  For a response to premises at which no other false alarm has occurred within the preceding six-month period, referred to in this section as a first response, no fee shall be charged, but the alarm user shall, within three working days after notice to do so, make a written report to the City on forms prescribed by him setting forth the cause of such false alarm, the corrective action taken, whether such alarm has been inspected by an authorized serviceman, and such other information as the City may reasonably require to determine the cause of such false alarm. 
(2)  For a second response to premises within six months after a first response, no fee shall be charged, but a written report shall be required as for a first response. 
(3)  For a third response to premises within six months after such first response, a fee of $25.00 shall be charged the alarm user, and if such third false alarm or any such succeeding false alarm is a result of failure to take necessary corrective action, the City may order the disconnection of such alarm system and it shall be unlawful to reconnect such alarm system until such corrective action is taken, provided that no disconnection shall be ordered as to any premises required by law to have an alarm system in operation. 
(4)  In those instances where the alarm user is required by law to have an alarm system in operation, thereby prohibiting the disconnection for repeated failure to take necessary corrective action, the false alarm fee charged the alarm user shall be $100.00 for each such false alarm in excess of two within the six-month period. 
(b)  Robbery alarms. The same procedure as outlined in subsection (a) of this section for false alarms shall apply to robbery alarms, except that owners or managers of premises protected by robbery alarms must additionally include in any written report submitted to the City an outline of such corrective measures as may have been taken to prevent future accidental triggering of the alarm system by employees. 
(c)  Notice of fee. The City shall notify the alarm user of the amount of fee due, as indicated in subsection (a) of this section. The notification shall be delivered by mailing the notification by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the alarm user's address provided as indicated in this division, or by such other means of delivery that would reasonably notify the alarm user of the fee charged and due. 
(d)  Payment of fee. All fees due under the provisions of this section shall be paid directly to the City Manager. Fees shall be due and payable five days after notification as provided pursuant to subsection (c) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 00-8, § 1, 3-7-00)  
ARTICLE V. - GARAGE SALES 
 
Sec. 16-171. - Authority, purpose, area of applicability. 
This article is enacted under the home rule power of the City for the purpose of providing the necessary regulations of garage sales in the City in the interest of public health, safety and welfare of the citizens and residents. This article shall apply and be in force in all residential districts of the City. 
(Ord. No. 00-19, § 1, 3-14-00)  
Sec. 16-173. - Times and locations. 
(a)  Garage sales may be conducted on any improved residential lot, parcel, or tract of land in any residential district within the City. 
(b)  Garage sales may be conducted to include up to four families on the sale premises when sale items are owned by those families. 
(c)  Garage sales shall be limited to two times in a calendar year, for a maximum of two consecutive days in each period. The limitation of two times a year applies to the location of the garage sale. 
(d)  Garage sales shall be held only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. 
(e)  At the conclusion of the garage sale each day, all unsold articles shall be removed or packed in such a manner so as not to be visible from any public street or abutting property. 
(f)  Any person who desires to conduct a garage sale must obtain a permit for each garage sale. The fee for the garage sale permit will be established by resolution, which may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 00-19, § 1, 3-14-00; Ord. No. 2012-9, § 2, 9-18-12)  
Sec. 16-174. - Signs. 
Regulations regarding garage sale signs can be found in chapter 12 of the Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 00-19, § 1, 3-14-00; Ord. No. 2012-9, § 3, 9-18-12)  
Sec. 16-175. - Noise. 
No amplified speech or music may be used in association with a garage sale. 
(Ord. No. 00-19, § 1, 3-14-00)  
Sec. 16-176. - Parking. 
Parking of vehicles shall be conducted in compliance with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 00-19, § 1, 3-14-00)  
Sec. 16-177. - Persons and sales exceptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following persons or sales; 
(1)  Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction; 
(2)  Sales by not for profit organizations, when conducted on their own property; or 
(3)  Conducted on public or private commercial property where the owner has consented to the garage sale.  
Sec. 16-178. - Penalties. 
Unless otherwise provided herein, violations of this article shall be punishable in accordance with chapter 2 of the City of Palm Coast Code of Ordinances. In addition, the City may bring any other action available at law or equity to penalize or enjoin violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-9, § 4, 9-18-12)  
ARTICLE VI. - LOCAL BIDDER PREFERENCE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-11, §§ 1—6, adopted May 15, 2007, added provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, said provisions were included herein as §§ 16-201—16-206. 
Cross reference— Purchases and contractual services, § 2-27 et seq. 
 
Sec. 16-201. - Legislative findings/intent. 
The City annually spends significant amounts on purchasing personal property, materials, and contractual services and in constructing improvements to real property or to existing structures. The dollars used in making those purchases are derived, in large part, from taxes, fees, and utility revenues derived from local businesses in the corporate/City Limits of the City of Palm Coast, and the City Council has determined that funds generated in and from the Palm Coast community should, to the extent possible, be placed back into the local Palm Coast economy. Therefore, the City Council has determined that it is in the best interest of the City of Palm Coast to give a preference to local businesses in the corporate/City limits of the City of Palm Coast in making such purchases whenever the application of such a preference is reasonable in light of the dollar-value of proposals received in relation to such expenditures. 
(Ord. No. 07-11, § 1, 5-15-07)  
Sec. 16-202. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
"Local business" means a vendor or contractor who has paid its local business tax to the City of Palm Coast at least six months prior to bid or proposal opening date; does business in Palm Coast community by providing goods, services, or construction; and maintains a physical business address located within the jurisdictional limits of Flagler County in an area zoned for the conduct of such business from which the vendor or contractor operates or performs business on a day-to-day basis. Post office boxes shall not be used for the purpose of establishing said physical address. 
(Ord. No. 07-11, § 2, 5-15-07)  
Sec. 16-203. - Local preference in purchasing and contracting. 
(a)  In bidding for, or letting contracts for procurement of, supplies, materials, equipment and services, as described in the purchasing policies of the City, the City Council, or other authorized purchasing authority, may give a preference to local businesses in making purchases or awarding contracts. 
(b)  If a local business is located within the City Limits of the City, that business shall receive the bid preference set forth in this article; provided, however, that, if a local business located within the City Limits of the City is not a bidder, and a local business which is located within Flagler County is a bidder, that business shall receive the bid preference set forth in this article. 
(c)  The bid preference to be awarded in this article shall be in an amount not to exceed five percent of the local business' total bid price if the cost differential does not exceed $10,000.00 for procurement activities in amounts over $30,000.00, or three percent if the cost differential does not exceed $900.00 for procurement activities in amounts more than $3,000.00, but less than $30,000.00. 
(d)  The total bid price shall include not only the base bid price, but also all alterations to that base bid price resulting from alternates which were both part of the bid and actually purchased or awarded by the City Council or other appropriate authority. 
(e)  In the case of requests for proposals or qualification, letters of interest, or other solicitations and competitive negotiations and selections in which objective factors are used to evaluate the responses, local businesses shall be assigned five percent of the total points of the total evaluation points. The same preferences set forth in subsection (b) shall be applied in the same manner. 
(Ord. No. 07-11, § 3, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 07-17, § 1, 7-17-07)  
Sec. 16-204. - Exceptions to local preference policy. 
(a)  The procurement preference set forth in this article shall not apply to any of the following purchases or contracts: 
(1)  Good or services provided under a cooperative purchasing agreement or interlocal agreement; 
(2)  Contracts for professional services procurement of which is subject to the Consultants' Competitive Negotiation Act or subject to any competitive consultant selection policy or procedure adopted or utilized by the City Council; 
(3)  Purchases or contracts which are funded, in whole or in part, by a governmental entity and the laws, regulations, or policies governing such funding prohibit application of that preference; 
(4)  Purchases made or contracts let under emergency or noncompetitive situations, or for litigation related legal services, etc., as such are described in the City's purchasing policies; or 
(5)  Purchases with an estimated cost of less than $3,000.00 or less; 
(b)  Application of local preference to a particular purchase, contract, or category of contracts for which the City Council is the awarding authority may be waived upon written justification and recommendation by the City Manager and approval of the City Council. 
(c)  The preference established in this article does not prohibit the right of the City Council or other purchasing authority to compare quality or fitness for use of supplies, materials, equipment and services proposed for purchase and compare qualifications, character, responsibility and fitness of all persons, firms, or corporations submitting bids or proposals. 
(d)  The bid preference established in this article does not prohibit the City Council, or other authorized purchasing authority, from giving any other preference permitted by law in addition to the preference authorized in this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-11, § 4, 5-15-07)  
Sec. 16-205. - Application and enforcement of preference policy. 
(a)  The local preference policy established in this article shall apply to new contracts and procurements solicited after the effective date of this article. 
(b)  This article shall be implemented in a fashion consistent with otherwise applicable City purchasing policies and procedures. 
(Ord. No. 07-11, § 5, 5-15-07)  
Sec. 16-206. - Promulgation of rules. 
(a)  The City Manager is hereby authorized to adopt administrative rules supplemental to the provisions of this article as deemed necessary and appropriate to implement the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The provisions of this article and the rules adopted by the City Manager shall be provided to potential bidders, vendors and contractors to the widest extent practicable. 
(Ord. No. 07-11, § 6, 5-15-07)  
ARTICLE VII. - CONVENIENCE BUSINESS SECURITY 
 
Sec. 16-226. - Short title, purpose, and authority. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Palm Coast Convenience Business Article." The purpose of this article is to provide a method of local regulation of convenience businesses within the City. These regulations are authorized and consistent with the State statutory regulations found in F.S. ch. 812. 
(Ord. No. 08-24, § 3, 11-4-08)  
Sec. 16-227. - Definitions. 
(a)  As used in this article, the term "convenience business" means any place of business that is primarily engaged in the retail sale of groceries, or both groceries and gasoline, and that is open for business at any time between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. The term "convenience business" does not include: 
(1)  A business that is solely or primarily a restaurant; 
(2)  A business that always has at least five employees on the premises after 11:00 p.m. and before 5:00 a.m.; 
(3)  A business that has at least 10,000 square feet of retail floor space. 
(b)  The term "convenience business" does not include any business in which the owner or members of his or her family work between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. 
(c)  The definitions provided in subsections (a) and (b) are consistent with the current definitions found in F.S. § 812.171, and to the extent that those statutory definitions are amended, the definitions provided herein shall be deemed amended accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 08-24, § 3, 11-4-08)  
Sec. 16-228. - Security requirements. 
(a)  Every convenience business shall be equipped with the following security devices and standards: 
(1)  A security camera system capable of recording and retrieving an image to assist in offender identification and apprehension; 
(2)  A drop safe or cash management device for restricted access to cash receipts; 
(3)  A lighted parking lot illuminated at an intensity of at least two foot-candles per square foot at 18 inches above the surface; 
(4)  A conspicuous notice at the entrance which states that the cash register contains $50.00 or less; 
(5)  Window signage that allows a clear and unobstructed view from outside the building and in a normal line of sight of the cash register and sales transaction area; 
(6)  Height markers at the entrance of the convenience business which display height measures; 
(7)  A cash management policy to limit the cash on hand at all times after 11:00 p.m. 
(b)  A convenience business shall not have window tinting that reduces exterior or interior view in a normal line of sight. 
(c)  Every convenience business shall be equipped with a silent alarm to law enforcement or a private security agency, unless application for an exemption is made to and granted by the Attorney General. 
(d)  If a murder, robbery, sexual battery, aggravated assault, aggravated battery, or kidnapping or false imprisonment, as those crimes are identified and defined by Florida Statutes, occurs or has occurred at a convenience business since July 1, 1989, and arises out of the operation of the convenience business, that convenience business shall implement at least one of the following security measures: 
(1)  Provide at least two employees on the premises at all times after 11:00 p.m. and before 5:00 a.m.; 
(2)  Install for use by employees at all times after 11:00 p.m. and before 5:00 a.m. a secured safety enclosure of transparent polycarbonate or other material that meets at least one of the following minimum standards: 
a.  American Society for Testing and Materials Standard D3935 (classification PC110 B 3 0800700) and that has a thickness of at least 0.375 inches and has an impact strength of at least 200 foot pounds; or 
b.  Underwriters Laboratory Standard UL 752 for medium power small arms (level one), Bullet Resisting Equipment; 
(3)  Provide a security guard on the premises at all times after 11:00 p.m. and before 5:00 a.m.; 
(4)  Lock the business premises throughout the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m., and only transact business through an indirect pass-through trough, trapdoor, or window; or 
(5)  Close the business at all times after 11:00 p.m. and before 5:00 a.m. 
(e)  For purposes of this section, any convenience business that by law implemented any of the security measures set forth in subsections (d)(1)—(5), and has maintained said measures as required by the Department of Legal Affairs, Office of the Attorney General without any occurrence or incidence of the crimes identified by subsection (d) for a period of no less than 24 months immediately preceding the filing of a notice of exemption, may file with the department a notice of exemption from these enhanced security measures. 
(f)  These security requirements are consistent with those provided for in F.S. ch. 812, specifically F.S. §§ 812.173 and 812.1725, as those sections may be hereafter amended. To the extent that these statutory security requirements are amended, then these City of Palm Coast security requirements are similarly deemed amended hereafter. 
(Ord. No. 08-24, § 3, 11-4-08)  
Sec. 16-229. - Employee training. 
The owner or principal operator of a convenience business or convenience businesses shall provide proper robbery deterrence and safety training by an approved curriculum by the Attorney General to its retail employees within 60 days of employment. 
(Ord. No. 08-24, § 3, 11-4-08)  
Sec. 16-230. - Inspections. 
The City Manager, or his designee, shall ensure initial compliance with this article within 90 days of adoption. Thereafter, the City Manager, or his designee, shall conduct annual inspections within 30 days of the issuance or renewal of a business tax receipt. 
(Ord. No. 08-24, § 3, 11-4-08)  
Sec. 16-231. - Conduct of hearing. 
The City Manager, or his designee, shall at his discretion designate an alleged violation of this article to be heard either by the City's Code Enforcement Board or to the City's Hearing Officer. 
(Ord. No. 08-24, § 3, 11-4-08)  
ARTICLE VIII. - PAIN MANAGEMENT CLINIC 
 
Sec. 16-232. - Findings of fact; intent and purpose. 
(a)  The Flagler County Sheriff informed the City Council that a pattern of illegal drug use and distribution has been linked in large part to certain pain management clinics operating throughout the State of Florida; and 
(b)  The illegal distribution of prescription drugs, increased crime associated with such activity, and the health and safety issues relating to prescription drug abuse has created an urgent situation requiring immediate action to reduce the threat to the health, safety and welfare of City citizens; and 
(c)  The Florida Legislature has identified concerns regarding the increased use and abuse of substances controlled by federal and/or state law and the frequency of injury and death occurring as a result of the increased availability of controlled substances via medical practitioners operating in pain management clinics or facilities; and 
(d)  Florida Statutes require physicians and other persons dispensing prescription drugs through pain management clinics, facilities or offices, to register with the State Department of Health in order to conduct such business; and 
(e)  The negative secondary impacts associated with the certain pain management clinics include the congregation of drug users and drug addicted persons outside of pain management clinics in a manner that has a negative effect on the willingness of residents to patronize nearby businesses and which disturbs nearby residents all hours of the day but particularly in the early morning and late evening hours thus creating an urgent situation necessitating immediate investigation into and potential regulation of such clinics in Palm Coast; and 
(f)  It is not the intent of this article to interfere with the legal prescription, dispensation, or use of controlled substances; and 
(g)  Under its home rule authority Palm Coast can pass additional legislation to further regulate pain management clinics as long as these additional regulations are not preempted in the law and are not inconsistent with the statutory provisions. 
(Ord. No. 2011-20, §§ 1, 2, 11-1-11)  
Sec. 16-233. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms, whether appearing in the singular or plural form, shall have the following meanings. All other terms used in this article shall have the meaning provided in Chapter 2011-141, Laws of Florida, as it may be amended from time to time. 
Acute pain means the normal, predicted, physiological response to an adverse chemical, thermal, or mechanical stimulus and is associated with surgery, trauma, or illness. It is generally short-lived. Acute pain responses may vary between patients and between pain episodes within an individual patient. Acute pain episodes may be present in patients with chronic pain. 
Chronic pain or chronic nonmalignant pain means pain unrelated to cancer or rheumatoid arthritis which persists beyond the usual course of disease or the injury that is the cause of the pain or more than 90 days after surgery. 
City means the City of Palm Coast, Florida. 
Dangerous drugs means a controlled substance listed in Schedule II and Schedule III in F.S. § 893.03, as amended from time to time, specifically opiate analgesic and benzodiazepine drugs. 
Health care physician or physician means any practitioner who is subject to licensure or regulation by the Florida Department of Health under F.S. chs. 458 (physician) or 459 (osteopathic physician). 
Pain means an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associated with actual or potential tissue damage or described in terms of such damage. Categories of pain include acute pain or chronic pain. 
Pain management means the use of pharmacological and nonpharmacological interventions to control a patient's identified pain. Pain Management often extends beyond pain relief, encompassing the patient's quality of life, ability to work productively, to enjoy recreation, and to function normally in family and society. 
Pain management clinic means any publicly or privately-owned facility: 
(1)  That advertises in any medium for any type of pain-management services; or 
(2)  Where in any month a majority of patients are prescribed opioids, benzodiazepines, barbiturates, or carisoprodol for the treatment of chronic nonmalignant pain. 
Physician primarily engaged in the treatment of pain means a physician who prescribes or dispenses dangerous drugs when a substantial portion of the patients seen are prescribed or dispensed dangerous drugs for the treatment of chronic pain. For purposes of this definition, the term "substantial portion" means more than an insignificant or incidental portion. The term "substantial portion" does not necessarily mean a majority or predominant amount. 
(Ord. No. 2011-20, §§ 1, 2, 11-1-11)  
Sec. 16-234. - Exceptions. 
Businesses with one of the following characteristics are not regulated by this section: 
(1)  Licensed as a hospital or other licensed facility pursuant to F.S. ch. 395, as may be amended; 
(2)  The majority of the physicians who provide services in the clinic primarily provide surgical services; 
(3)  Owned by a publicly held corporation whose shares are traded on a national exchange or on the over-the-counter market and whose total assets at the end of the corporation's most recent fiscal quarter exceeded $50,000,000.00: 
(4)  Affiliated with an accredited medical school at which training is provided for medical students, residents, or fellows; 
(5)  Does not prescribe controlled substance for the treatment of pain; 
(6)  Owned or operated by a governmental entity for the sole purpose of serving that governmental entity. 
(7)  The clinic is wholly owned and operated by one or more board-certified anesthesiologists, physiatrists, or neurologists; or 
(8)  The clinic is wholly owned and operated by one or more board-certified medical specialists who have also completed fellowship in pain medicine approved by the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education, or who are also board-certified in pain medicine by a board approved by the American Board of Medical Specialties and perform interventional pain procedures of the type routinely billed using surgical codes. 
(Ord. No. 2011-20, §§ 1, 2, 11-1-11)  
Sec. 16-235. - Regulation of pain management clinics. 
Pain management clinics shall be subject to the following supplemental regulations and the physician designated as responsible for complying with all requirements related to registration and operation of the Pain Management Clinic shall ensure compliance herewith as follows: 
(1)  Display of licenses. Any pain management clinic shall be validly registered with the State of Florida and with the City and shall prominently display in a public area near its main entrance copies of all state licenses, City licenses, and occupational license/local business tax receipts, and the name of the owner and designated physician responsible for compliance with state and City law. 
(2)  Minimum floor area. A pain management clinic shall have a total leasable floor area of not less than 1,000 square feet. 
(3)  Activities in enclosed areas. All activities of pain management clinics, including sale, display, preparation and storage, must be conducted entirely within a fixed and completely enclosed business. Pain management clinics shall not provide outdoor waiting areas, such as seating and queues. 
(4)  Facility and physical operations. Pain management clinics shall provide the following: 
a.  Emergency lighting and communications (land line telephone); 
b.  Reception and waiting area; 
c.  Restroom(s); 
d.  Administrative area, including room for storage of medical records, supplies, and equipment; 
e.  Private patient examination room; 
f.  Treatment rooms, if treatment is being provided to patients; 
g.  A printed sign located in a conspicuous place in the waiting room viewable by the public with the name and contact information of the clinic's designated physician and all physicians practicing in the clinic. 
(5)  Drive-thru. Pain management clinics shall not provide drive-thru window operations or services. 
(6)  Alcoholic beverages. Alcoholic beverages shall be prohibited from being sold on the premises. 
(7)  No loitering. The pain management clinic shall not direct or encourage any patient or business invitee to stand, sit (including in parked car), gather, or loiter outside of the building where the clinic operates, including in any parking area, sidewalk adjacent, right-of-way, or neighboring property for any period of time longer than that reasonably required to arrive and depart. The pain management clinic shall post conspicuous signs stating that no loitering is allowed on the property. 
(8)  Operating hours. Regular business hours for pain management clinics are limited from monday through saturday and only during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. and shall only provide emergency services outside the regular business hours. 
(9)  Landlord responsibility. Any landlord who knows, or in the exercise of reasonable care should know, that a pain management clinic is operating in violation of the Palm Coast Code, or applicable Florida law, including the rules and regulations promulgated by the Department of Health, Board of Medicine, or Board of Osteopathic Medicine, shall have the responsibility to stop or take reasonable steps to prevent the continued illegal activity on the leased premises. Landlords who lease space to a pain management clinic must expressly incorporate language into the lease or rental agreement stating that failure to comply with the Palm Coast Code is a material breach of the lease and shall constitute grounds for termination and eviction by the landlord. 
(10)  Compliance with other laws. A pain management clinic shall at all times be in compliance with all federal and state laws and regulations and the Palm Coast Code. 
(11)  Patient payment options. No pain management clinic shall limit patient payment options to cash only. 
(12)  Certificate of use. A pain management clinic must apply for and receive a certificate of use from the City at the time that it seeks issuance or renewal of the local business tax receipt for the business, or at any time that there is a change of owner or the physician of record, pursuant to F.S. § 458.3265, or F.S. § 459.0137, as amended. This application for certificate of use shall establish, and shall be updated as needed: 
a.  Owner or operator of the facility; 
b.  Proof of registration with the Florida Department Health, pursuant to F.S. § 458.3265 or F.S. § 459.0137. If the registration of the pain management clinic is revoked or suspended by the Florida Department of Health, the City's certificate of use shall be revoked automatically and shall not be subject to the provisions herein; 
c.  The application for a certificate of use shall include an affidavit by the owner or the physician of record, pursuant to F.S. § 458.3265 or F.S. § 459.0137, as amended, attesting to the fact that no employee of the business, nor any independent contractor or volunteer having regular contact with customers of the business, has been convicted of a drug related felony within the five-year period prior to the date of the application, and that the business shall not employ or allow any such convicted employee, independent contractor or volunteer on the premises thereafter. 
d.  The application shall contain a sketch of the intended business to confirm compliance with the business/floor plan requirements of this section. The sketch shall confirm that the pain management clinic will not have any outdoor waiting areas such, such as seating or queues. 
e.  A copy of the lease agreement for business location. 
(Ord. No. 2011-20, §§ 1, 2, 11-1-11)  
Sec. 16-236. - Application to existing pain management clinics. 
All pain management clinics legally in existence prior to the effective date of this section, shall comply with the requirements herein within 365 days of the effective date of this section. Any pain management clinic legally in existence prior to the effective date of this section, but now in violation of this provision due to the pain management clinic's failure to meet the requirements of this section, shall be considered a legal nonconforming use for a period of one year from the effective date of this section. After the one-year period of time, such nonconforming use shall be removed or discontinued. 
If at any time the City determines that a pain management clinic is operating in any manner that is inconsistent with, or contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or any other applicable code or statutes, the City may revoke the certificate of use through the process outlined herein or as allowed by state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2011-20, §§ 1, 2, 11-1-11)  
Sec. 16-237. - Penalties. 
Unless as otherwise provided herein, violations of this article shall be punishable in accordance with chapter 35 of the City of Palm Coast Code of Ordinances. In addition, the City may bring any other action available at law or equity to penalize or enjoin violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-20, §§ 1, 2, 11-1-11)  
ARTICLE IX. - ELECTRONIC GAME PROMOTIONS 
 
Sec. 16-238. - Legislative authorization. 
This article is enacted in the interest of the public health, peace, safety, and general welfare of the citizens and inhabitants of Palm Coast, Florida, pursuant to Fla. Const. Article IX, section 2(b), F.S. ch. 166. It is established to regulate the use of electronic means to effect giveaways through drawings by chance conducted in connection with the sale of a consumer product or service, sweepstakes, and game promotions that do not otherwise violate Florida law. 
(Ord. No. 2012-4, § 1, 5-1-12)  
Sec. 16-239. - Definitions. 
City Manager shall mean the Palm Coast City Manager or his or her designee. 
De minimis activity establishment means an establishment operated by an organization exempt from federal taxation under Section 501 (c) of the Internal Revenue Code and with five or fewer electronic or mechanical devices that are used to conduct a drawing by chance, sweepstakes, or game promotion utilizing those electronic or mechanical devices. 
Electronic equipment means any electronic device provided by or on behalf of the operator that is used or adapted for use to conduct or reveal the results of, a drawing by chance conducted in connection with the sale of a consumer product or service, sweepstakes or other game promotion, that displays results by simulating a game or games ordinarily played on a slot machine or other similar games of chance. 
Electronic game promotion means a sweepstakes or other game promotion which utilizes electronic equipment or a drawing by chance conducted in connection with the sale of a consumer product or service which utilizes electronic equipment that does not otherwise violate State of Florida law. 
Establishment means the building, edifice, or location, along with its grounds, in or upon which the operator conducts an electronic game promotion. 
Operator means any person in whose name an electronic game promotion is conducted and in whose name the certificate of use is issued under this article. 
Person means an individual, association, partnership, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, not-for-profit entity, or entity of any kind authorized to engage in business in Florida. 
Slot machine means any mechanical or electrical contrivance; terminal that may or may not be capable of downloading slot games from a central server system; machine; or other device that, upon insertion of a coin, bill, ticket, token or similar object, or upon payment of any monetary consideration whatsoever, including the use of any electronic payment system, is available to play or operate, the play or operation of which, through any element of chance, may deliver or entitle the person or persons playing or operating the contrivance, terminal, machine, or other device to receive cash, billets, tickets, tokens, or electronic credits. These cash billets, tickets, tokens or electronic credits are then exchanged for cash or merchandise or anything of value whatsoever, whether the payoff is made automatically from the machine or manually. Slot machines may use spinning reels, video displays, cathode ray tubes, microprocessors or other similar technology, and have as their object the presentation or lining up, arrangement, or juxtaposition of symbols, alpha-numeric signs, colors or figures to determine a result or outcome. 
To the extent not defined in this section, the definitions utilized in F.S. ch. 849, shall be applicable to all terms used in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-4, § 1, 5-1-12)  
Sec. 16-240. - General prohibition. 
Except as expressly regulated and permitted by this article, no person, other than a de minimis activity establishment as defined herein, shall conduct a drawing by chance pursuant to F.S. § 849.0935, sweepstakes or game promotion pursuant to F.S. § 849.094, on electronic equipment, as defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 2012-4, § 1, 5-1-12)  
Sec. 16-241. - Certificate of use. 
(a)  Certificate of use required. Except for a de minimis activity establishment, every operator conducting an electronic game promotion that otherwise does not violate Florida law shall obtain a certificate of use from the City Manager for each establishment at the time that it seeks issuance or renewal of the local business tax receipt for the business, or at any time that there is a change of owner. The issuance of a certificate of use by the City does not constitute a determination that either the use or the location of the use is in accordance with law. 
(b)  Initial certificate of use. All operators who are conducting an electronic game promotion on the date of the adoption of this article have 45 days from the effective date of this article to apply for a certificate of use. Any such initial certificate of use shall have a term or duration until September 30, 2013. 
(c)  Certificate of use limited. The City Manager shall limit the total number of active certificates of use pursuant to this section to nine. All qualifying operators who receive a certificate of use shall be entitled to renew their certificate of use if they otherwise qualify and pay required fees. 
(d)  Duration of certificate of use. A certificate of use (other than an initial certificate of use) shall be renewed by the first September 30, one year from the date of issuance and by September 30 each year thereafter. 
(e)  Renewal of existing certificate of use. Existing certificates of use shall be renewed upon compliance with this article, notwithstanding the total number of certificates of use issued. The renewal application for the certificate of use shall be the same as the original certificate of use application, to include all the materials and the application fee required for the issuance of the original certificate of use, and shall include evidence of current lawfully existing operations consistent with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-4, § 1, 5-1-12)  
Sec. 16-242. - Certificate of use application materials; application fee. 
(a)  The application shall include the following materials: 
(1)  A complete inventory of electronic equipment located on the establishment, including but not limited to: The manufacturer(s) and the serial number(s) or equivalent identification; 
(2)  A Level 2 background screening for operator(s) of establishment. Level 2 background screening includes fingerprinting for statewide criminal history checks through FDLE and national criminal history checks through the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and a criminal records check through local law enforcement. Statutory authority for this activity is provided by F.S. § 166.0442; 
(3)  Certification by an independent testing laboratory through laboratory confirmation report that the computer software used by the operator to conduct the electronic game promotion has been tested and that it does not contain a random number generator. The verification shall comply with all applicable state and local laws, including this article; 
(4)  A sworn affidavit containing the following: 
a.  The identity of the operator and all of its owners, including names of principals, as opposed to company name, dates of birth and home addresses; 
b.  A statement of whether any of the individuals listed have, within the five-year period immediately preceding the date of the application, been convicted of any felony under the laws of Florida, the United States, or any other state, and, if so, the particular criminal act involved and the place of conviction; 
c.  A statement certifying that all information on the application and any attachments thereto are true and that the operator understands that any misstatement of material fact in the application will result in the denial of the certificate of use or, if it has been issued, in the suspension or revocation of the certificate of use. 
d.  A statement certifying that the establishment and the electronic game promotion comply with all applicable state regulations, including but not limited to, F.S. §§ 849.0935 and 849.094, and any necessary supporting documentation. 
(5)  Verification demonstrating that closest school, public park, or church exceed 1,000 feet from the establishment; and 
(6)  Each operator shall remit a nonrefundable application fee pursuant to the fee schedule established for certificate of use for electronic game promotions. This fee shall cover the costs for the time and expense of the City Manager in enforcing the provisions herein, reviewing and ruling on the application, and issuing the certificate. 
(Ord. No. 2012-4, § 1, 5-1-12)  
Sec. 16-243. - Review of certificate of use application. 
Within 60 days of receipt of a completed certificate of use application, the City Manager shall grant or deny the application. If any principal, officer, shareholder or director of the operator has a pending criminal case for an enumerated crime the City Manager may delay its grant or denial of the certificate until 60 days after the final judgment. 
(Ord. No. 2012-4, § 1, 5-1-12)  
Sec. 16-244. - Eligibility of operator. 
If an operator satisfies all certificate of use filing requirements and is not ineligible, the City Manager shall approve the application. The City Manager shall deny the certificate of use for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Within five years of the date of the application, operator or any owner thereof, has been convicted of, or has entered a plea of nolo contendere to a felony under the laws of Florida; 
(2)  Within five years of the date of the application, operator or any owner thereof has been convicted of, or has entered a plea of nolo contender to a misdemeanor involving exploitation of a vulnerable adult as defined by F.S. § 415.102; 
(3)  Within five years of the date of the application, operator or any owner thereof has been convicted of, or has entered a plea of nolo contender to a misdemeanor involving any type of fraud; 
(4)  Within three years of the date of the application, operator, or any owner thereof, has had a certificate of use under this article revoked; or 
(5)  The application materials are incomplete or untruthful. 
(Ord. No. 2012-4, § 1, 5-1-12)  
Sec. 16-245. - Revocation or denial of certificate of use. 
An operator whose certificate of use application is denied may reapply at any time by completing all steps of the application procedure, including payment of a new application fee. The City has the right, for just cause, to revoke a certificate of use after written notice to the operator. The decision to deny or revoke a certificate of use shall be considered nonfinal agency action subject to appellate review to the City Hearing Officer. The decision of the Hearing Officer shall constitute final agency action subject to judicial review. Any appeal of a decision regarding a certificate of use shall be made within 15 calendar days of receipt of a notice of revocation or denial by filing a written notice of appeal with the Hearing Officer, along with an appeal fee pursuant to the fee schedule established for certificate of use for electronic game promotions. Failure to file written notice of appeal and appeal fee within the prescribed time period constitutes a waiver of the right to appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2012-4, § 1, 5-1-12)  
Sec. 16-246. - Transfers of certificate of use. 
Certificates of use are not transferable. Establishments changing ownership and/or location shall make application for a certificate of use to include all the materials and application fee. 
(Ord. No. 2012-4, § 1, 5-1-12)  
Sec. 16-247. - Public nuisance. 
An electronic game promotion establishment may be declared a public nuisance when, on more than two occasions within a six-month period, the establishment is the site of a founded complaint related to: 
(1)  F.S. § 784.011, § 784.021, § 784.03, or § 784.045, relating to assault and battery; 
(2)  F.S. § 810.02, relating to burglary; 
(3)  F.S. § 812.014, relating to dealing in theft; 
(4)  F.S. § 812.131, relating to robbery by sudden snatching; 
(5)  F.S. § 893.13, relating to the unlawful distribution of controlled substances; or 
(6)  F.S. § 896.101, relating to money laundering. 
The electronic game promotion establishment declared a public nuisance may be abated pursuant to the procedures provided in chapter 35 of the City of Palm Coast Code of Ordinances. In addition, the City may bring any other action available at law or equity to penalize or enjoin violations of this article. 
Founded complaint means that a review of the facts by the City shows by a preponderance of the evidence that a crime has occurred. 
(Ord. No. 2012-4, § 1, 5-1-12)  
Sec. 16-248. - Inspection of establishments. 
During business hours, the City Manager, the Flagler County Sheriff's Office, or their agents may enter the establishments for purposes of inspecting all areas of the establishments otherwise accessible to the general public, to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article or any other ordinances within their authority, including but not limited to the right to enter the establishments and to select and remove any single piece of electronic equipment to inspect, test and/or have tested to determine compliance with this article in accordance with federal and state law. 
(Ord. No. 2012-4, § 1, 5-1-12)  
Sec. 16-249. - Signage requirements. 
(a)  Exterior of establishments. Window signage shall not be located between the vertical distance of four feet and six feet. 
(b)  Interior of establishments. The operator shall conspicuously post in the interior of the establishments, the following: 
(1)  The certificate of use shall be posted conspicuously at the main counter or at the entrance. 
(2)  The complete rules for all electronic game promotions at the establishment's front or main counter and a complete copy of the rules, prize tables, and odds of winning shall be made available on request without cost. 
(3)  A sign which includes the following language in at least 26-point font: "State and local law prohibits this establishment from requiring an entry fee, payment, or proof of purchase as a condition of participating. No donation or contribution is required. You may obtain free entries upon request from any employee on the establishment." 
(Ord. No. 2012-4, § 1, 5-1-12)  
Sec. 16-250. - Limitations on operation of business. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages. Operators shall not sell, serve, or permit any individual to consume or possess any alcoholic beverages at the establishment. 
(b)  Minors. Operators shall not permit anyone under 18 years of age to enter the establishment. 
(c)  Conditions of alternative means of entry. Entries that do not require purchase or financial donations shall be made available on request. The operator shall not impose any condition on the provision of such entries other than proof of identity by government issued identification from any state. The operator shall not limit the number of such entries offered per day per individual to less than the equivalent amount of entries that operator provides to individuals who make a donation, or purchase of a product or service valued at least $1.00. 
(d)  Limitation on electronic equipment. Operators shall not operate more than 100 pieces of electronic equipment except that operators conducting an electronic game promotion on the adoption date of this article may not operate more pieces of electronic equipment than were in operation on the date of adoption of this article. Replacing an existing piece of electronic equipment due to a defect or upgrade shall not be deemed a reduction pursuant to this subsection, provided that such replacement occurs within 30 days. 
(e)  Hours of operation. An operator conducting an electronic game promotion shall be required to limit hours of operation between 8:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m., seven days a week. 
(Ord. No. 2012-4, § 1, 5-1-12)  
Sec. 16-251. - Safety and security requirements. 
Operators shall maintain the following security devices and standards on establishments: 
(1)  A security camera system operating during business hours and capable of recording and retrieving an identifiable image; 
(2)  A drop safe or cash management device for restricted access to cash receipts where there are more than five pieces of electronic equipment on the establishment; 
(3)  A silent alarm system capable of notifying law enforcement; 
(4)  Establishments shall have at least one licensed security guard during nighttime hours starting at 6:00 p.m. The fact that a licensed security guard may not be required is not intended to immunize or forgive an operator from any statutory or common law obligation to maintain reasonably safe establishments at any time; and 
(5)  Window signage and tinting shall allow a clear and unobstructed view from outside the building and in a normal line of sight between the vertical distance of four and six feet across the facade of the establishment. 
Establishments are required to comply with this section of the Code within 60 days of the adoption of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-4, § 1, 5-1-12)  
Sec. 16-252. - Area of enforcement. 
In the event a county regulation conflicts with this article, this article shall prevail within the City. 
(Ord. No. 2012-4, § 1, 5-1-12)  
Sec. 16-253. - Enforcement; penalties. 
(a)  Violation of this article by an operator or any unpermitted person, company or entity shall be punishable by imposition of a civil penalty not to exceed $500.00 per violation. Each day the violation exists shall constitute a separate violation for the purposes of this article and shall be punishable as such. 
(b)  Palm Coast shall have the right to pursue all legal and equitable remedies necessary to ensure full compliance with this article, including but not limited to injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 2012-4, § 1, 5-1-12)  
ARTICLE X. - HERBAL INCENSE AND BATH SALTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-10, § 2, adopted Oct. 2, 2012, added provisions designated as art. VII, § 16-207. Inasmuch as art. VII already exists, the provisions have been redesignated as art. X, § 16-257. 
 
Sec. 16-257. - Sale or display of herbal incense. 
(a)  Definitions. 
For purposes of this section, the following definition shall apply: 
Bath salts means any substance containing a synthetic derivative of cathinone or any substance, whether in crystal, powder, liquid, tablet or capsule form, which the person distributing, displaying or offering for sale knows or reasonably should know contains any synthetic stimulant, notwithstanding any disclaimer such as "not for human consumption" and regardless of how the substance is displayed, marketed or labeled, including bath salts, potpourri, or other household products. This definition does not include 1) any pharmaceutical drugs containing synthetic cathinones or other synthetic stimulants approved by the FDA and available with a valid prescription, or 2) traditional bath salts that do not contain synthetic chemical stimulants such as sodium chloride, sea salts, magnesium sulfate (Epsom salts), sodium bicarbonate, and borax. Product packaging that indicates, suggests or implies that a substance mimics the pharmacological effects of cathinone, methcathinone, amphetamines, cocaine or MDMA creates a presumption that the person displaying or offering the substance for sale knows or should know that the substance contains a synthetic stimulant as defined herein. 
Herbal incense means aromatic plant material, containing synthetic chemical compounds or to which any synthetic chemical compound has been added that mimic the effects of a controlled substance, that is displayed, sold, or distributed in a loose, leafy, powder or granular form, or in compressed blocks that can be easily crushed to result in a powder or granular form, and can be placed into pipes, cigarette papers or other drug paraphernalia for ingestion by smoking, inhaling or other methods. 
(b)  Sale, display, or distribution prohibited. It is unlawful for any person or entity to sell, offer for sale, display or distribute herbal incense or bath salts within the City. 
(c)  Enforcement. This section may be enforced by any City Code Enforcement Officer, consistent with chapter 2, administration, article V, Boards, Commissions and Committees, sections 2-201 through 2-243. 
(d)  Penalties. 
(1)  Any person found in violation of this section shall be punished as provided in chapter 2, article V, division 1, subdivision 2, civil citation system, of the City Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  Any civil citation issued for noncompliance of this section shall be referred by the City to the City's Hearing Officer and the violation will, thereupon, be enforced and disposed of in accordance with the general state law applicable to citations. 
(Ord. No. 2012-10, § 2, 10-2-12)  
Chapter 17 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 15; businesses and business regulations, ch. 16; fire prevention and protection, ch. 25. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL  
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-30, §§ 1—12, adopted July 5, 2005, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 17-26—17-36, pertained to Fair Housing Code, and derived from Ord. No. 00-27, §§ 1—11, adopted Nov. 16, 2004. 
 
Sec. 17-25. - Legislative purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to declare the policy of the City of Palm Coast, in the exercise of its police power for the public safety, health, morals and welfare, to assure equal opportunity to obtain adequate housing by all persons regardless of race, color, sex, to include, but not be limited to, sexual orientation, religion, national origin, familial status, or handicap, and, to that end, to eliminate discrimination in housing. The protections afforded against discrimination on the basis of familial status as set forth in this article shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 1, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 17-26. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Council means the City Council of the City of Palm Coast, Florida. 
Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under this article. 
Dwelling means any building, structure, or portion hereof which is occupied as, or designated or intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which if offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof. 
Familial status means one or more individuals (who have not attained the age of 18 years) being domiciled with: 
(1)  A parent or another person having legal custody of such individual or individuals; or 
(2)  The designee of such parent or other person having such custody with the written permission of such parent or other persons. 
Family includes a related group of persons and a single individual in appropriate circumstances. 
Handicap means that a person has physical or mental impairment which is recognized under the Americans with Disabilities Act and that he/she has a record of having, or is regarded as having, such physical or mental impairment. 
Person includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, point-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustee in bankruptcy, receivers, and fiduciaries by whatever name. 
To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the resident. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 2, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 17-27. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The provisions of this article, except in section 17-28(b), shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any single-family house sold or rented by a bona fide private individual owner if: 
a.  The owner does not own more than three such single-family houses at any one time; 
b.  In the case of the sale of a single-family house, the owner was not the most recent resident at the time of such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period; 
c.  The owner does not own interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his or her behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental or more than three single-family houses at any one time; 
(b)  The sale or rental of any single-family house shall be excepted from the application of this article only if such house if sold or rented: 
(1)  Without the use of any manner of sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent, or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman, or person; and 
(2)  Without the publication, posting, or mailing, after notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of this article, provided, however, that nothing in this article shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to two rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies on of such living quarters as his or her residence. 
(d)  For the purposes of this article, a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if: 
(1)  He or she has, within the preceding 12 months participated as principle in three or more transactions involving the sale of rental of any dwelling or any interest therein, or 
(2)  He or she has, within the preceding 12 months participated as agent other than in the sale of his or her personal residence in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein, or 
(3)  He or she is the owner of any dwelling designated or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families. 
(e)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association, society, or any non-profit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex, to include, but not be limited to, sexual orientation, religion, national origin, familial status, or handicap. 
(f)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a private club, not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings from which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(g)  Nothing in this article requires any person renting or selling a dwelling to modify, alter, or adjust the dwelling in order to provide a physical accessibility except as otherwise required by law. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 3, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 17-28. - Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, it is prohibited and unlawful to refuse to sell or rent after making bona fide offer or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny a dwelling to any person because of race, color, to include, but not be limited to, sexual orientation, religion, national, origin, familial status, or handicap. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, it is prohibited and unlawful to discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, sex, to include, but not be limited to, sexual orientation, religion, national origin, familial status, or handicap. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, it is prohibited to make, print, or publish, or cause to made, printed, or published any notice, statement, or advertisement with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, imitation, or discrimination based on race, color, to include, but not be limited to, sexual orientation, religion, national origin, familial status, or handicap, or an intention to make any such preference, imitation, or discrimination. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, it is prohibited and unlawful to represent to any person because of race, color, sex, to include, but not be limited to, sexual orientation, religion, national origin, familial status, or handicap that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(e)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, it is prohibited and unlawful for profit to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, sex, to include, but not be limited to, sexual orientation, religion, national origin, familial status, or handicap. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 4, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 17-29. - Discrimination in the financing of housing. 
Except as provided in this article, it is prohibited and unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company, or other corporation, association, firm, or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefore for the purpose of purchasing, construction, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against him or her in the fixing of the amount, financial assistance, because of race, color, sex, to include, but not be limited to, sexual orientation, religion, national origin, familial status, or handicap of such person or any person associated with him or her in connection with such loan or other financial assistance or of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 5, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 17-30. - Discrimination in the provision of brokerage service. 
It is prohibited and unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate broker's organization or other service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him or her in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation on account of race, color, sex, to include, but not be limited to, sexual orientation, religion, national origin, familial status, or handicap. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 6, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 17-31. - Administration. 
(a)  The City Manager shall administer the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The City Council may delegate its functions, duties, and powers to an appointed board, including functions, duties, and powers with respect to investigating, conciliating, hearing, determining, ordering, certifying, reporting, or otherwise acting as to any work, business, or matter under this article. 
(c)  The City Manager, or designee, shall: 
(1)  Implement the provisions of this article and rules and regulations promulgated hereunder and all articles, codes, rules, and regulations pertaining to housing and discrimination; 
(2)  Receive, initiate, and investigate any and all complaints alleging violations of this article and take appropriate action to eliminate, conciliate, prevent, and/or initiate prosecution of such violations; 
(3)  Provide assistance from time-to-time relating to equal housing opportunity; 
(4)  Publish and disseminate public information and educational materials relating to housing discrimination; 
(5)  Enter into written working agreements as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this article with federal, state, county and other agencies and entities involved in reducing housing discrimination; and 
(6)  Take other informational, educational, or persuasive actions to implement the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 7, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 17-32. - Procedure. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by an alleged unlawful practice prohibited by this article may file a written complaint with the City Manager, or designee, within 45 days after the alleged unlawful practice occurs. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a complaint, the City Council or its appointed board shall serve upon the individual charged with a violation (hereinafter referred to as the respondent), the complaint and a written summary setting forth the rights of the parties including, but not limited to, the right of the respondent to a hearing on the matter before adjudication by the City Council or a board appointed by the City Council to hear such matters. 
(c)  The City Manager, or designee, shall investigate the complaint. 
(d)  Within 60 days from the date of the completion of the investigation, the City Council or its appointed board shall hear evidence pertaining to the complaint at a quasi-judicial hearing and issue a written order. 
(e)  Copies of the decision shall be provided to the complainant and the respondent. 
(f)  If the appointed board hears the matter, its decision may be appealed to the City Council in a de novo proceeding by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk within ten days of the issuance of the written order. 
(g)  The City Council or its appointed board may determine: 
(1)  That the complaint lacks ground upon which to base action for violation of this article, or 
(2)  That the complaint has been adequately dealt with by conciliation of the parties, or 
(3)  That the case warrants filing charges against the offending party in an appropriate forum. In some cases, both conciliation and adjudicative orders, or both adjudicative orders and initiation of judicial or administrative action may be indicated. 
(h)  If the City Council or its appointed board issues an adjudicative order to correct, adjust, conciliate, prevent, or prohibit any unlawful act prohibited by this article, and the respondent refuses or fails to comply with or obey such adjudication, the City Council or its appointed board shall consider initiating appropriate action or refer the matter to an appropriate agency. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 8, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 17-33. - Procedures relating to hearings. 
(a)  When a hearing is required before the City Council or its appointed board, the City Council or its appointed board shall schedule the hearing and serve upon all interested parties a notice of time and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be held promptly, but not less than 15 days after service of such notice. 
(b)  The parties, or their authorized counsel, may file such statements with the City Council or its appointed board, prior to the hearing date, as they deem necessary in support of their positions. The parties may appear before the City Council or its appointed board in person or by duly constituted representative and may have the assistance of attorneys. The parties may present testimony and evidence and shall have the right to cross-examine witnesses. All testimony shall be given under oath or by affirmation. The City Council or its appointed board shall not be bound by strict rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity, but due process shall be observed. The City Council or its appointed board shall keep a full public record of the hearing. The constitutional rights of the respondent not to incriminate himself or herself shall be observed. 
(c)  The City Council or its appointed board shall make a finding of fact, and determination of action to be taken. 
(d)  The City Council or its appointed board may issue subpoenas to compel access to or the production or appearance of premises, records, documents, individuals, and other evidence or possible sources of evidence relative to complaints. 
(e)  Upon written application to the City Council or its appointed board, a respondent shall be entitled to the issuance of a reasonable number of subpoenas by and in the name of the City. Subpoenas issued at the request of a respondent shall show on their face the name and address of such respondent and shall state that they were issued at this request. 
(f)  Witnesses summoned by the subpoena of the City Council or its appointed board shall be entitled to the same witness and mileage fees are as witnesses in proceedings in the State Courts of Florida. Fees payable to a witness summoned by a subpoena issued at the request of a respondent shall be paid by the respondent. 
(g)  Within ten days after service of a subpoena upon any person, such person may petition the City Council or its appointed board to revoke or modify the subpoena. The City Council or its appointed board shall grant the petition if it finds that the subpoena requires appearance or attendance, at an unreasonable time or place, that it requires production of evidence which does not relate to any matter under investigation, that it does not describe with sufficient particularity the evidence to be produced, that compliance would be unduly onerous, or for other good reason. 
(h)  In case of refusal to obey a subpoena, the City Council or its appointed board or the person at whose request it was issued may petition for its enforcement in the appropriate court. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 9, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 17-34. - Other remedies. 
Nothing in this article shall prevent any person from exercising any right or seeking any remedy to which he or she might otherwise be entitled, or from filing of any complaint with any other agency or any court having proper jurisdiction. The City may pursue any legal remedy or enforcement proceeding available to the City under controlling law. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 10, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 17-35. - Report to Florida Real Estate Commission. 
If a real estate broker, a real estate salesman, or an employee thereof has been found to have committed an unlawful practice in violation of this article, or has failed to comply with an order issued by the City Council or its appointed board, the City Council or its appointed board shall, in additional to the other procedures set forth herein, report the facts to the Florida Real Estate Commission. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 11, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 17-36. - Administrative rules. 
The City Manager is hereby authorized to adopt administrative rules that he or she deems necessary and appropriate to implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-30, § 12, 7-5-05)  
ARTICLE III. - RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-28, §§ 1—6, adopted November 16, 2004, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion as Art. III, §§ 17-37—17-42 was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 17-37. - Legislative findings and intent. 
(a)  The above recitals are hereby adopted as legislative findings. 
(b)  It is the intent of the City Council of the City of Palm Coast to encourage the appropriate management of residential rental properties that are owned by absentee landlords, to ensure that rental properties area maintained in a high quality manner as required of all residential properties and to ensure that residential rental properties are maintained with the care necessary to ensure code compliance as evident in the vast majority of owner-occupied residences located within the City of Palm Coast. 
(c)  It is the intent of the City Council of the City of Palm Coast to provide for an educational program that results in compliance with the provisions of this article and all other applicable codes and ordinances of the City by landlords and designated local representatives. 
(Ord. No. 04-28, § 1, 11-16-04)  
Sec. 17-38. - Applicability/definitions. 
(a)  The registration requirements described within this article shall be applicable to the rental of residential properties, but shall not apply to any of the following uses provided that there is on-site property management and maintenance: hotels, motels, rooming houses, resort dwellings, bed and breakfast inns, manufactured housing developments, apartment units, and condominium units. Nor shall the registration requirements described within this article apply to rented duplex units in which the property owner resides within the attached on-site dwelling unit. Although exempted from the registration requirements, all of the aforementioned uses may be required to obtain an occupational license in accordance with section 17-39 of this article. 
(b)  The definitions set forth at Section 509.242, Florida Statutes, and Section 320.01(2)(b), Florida Statutes, shall apply to the interpretation of this article as shall the terms defined otherwise in the land development regulations of the City. 
(c)  The term "absentee landlord" means an owner of residential rental property who does not live within the jurisdictional limits of Flagler County, Florida and counties abutting Flagler County. 
(Ord. No. 04-28, § 2, 11-16-04)  
Sec. 17-39. - Rental unit registration and registration fees required. 
(a)  All owners of residential properties shall be required to register within 60 days of the effective date of this article. At minimum, each registration shall include the name, address and telephone number(s) and other available contact information of the property owner(s) and the addresses of all rental units being leased by said property owner(s). For absentee landlords as defined herein, the registration shall also include a local representation designation as discussed in section 17-41. Local representation designation is optional for non-absentee landlords. 
(b)  All registered property owner(s) shall provide notification of any changes of address, physical location and/or telephone number to the City within 30 days of the change. 
(c)  Effective in Fiscal Year 2005—2006, the registration shall be annually renewed upon payment of the City occupational license tax. 
(d)  The owner of any residential rental properties shall pay the City a rental unit registration fee. The rental unit registration fee shall be due upon initial registration and renewed annually thereafter. 
(e)  The City Council shall establish the registration fee rates and charges by means of a resolution. The registration fee shall be assessed on a per unit basis. An additional registration fee shall be charged for absentee landlords. 
(Ord. No. 04-28, § 3, 11-16-04)  
Sec. 17-40. - Local representation designation upon registration and payment of registration fee(s) for residential rental properties; acknowledgment form for receipt of notice of minimum standard housing standards. 
(a)  In the event that an owner of residential rental property is an absentee landlord, upon registration of his/her/its residential rental property or properties, the said absentee landlord shall include the name, address and telephone number(s) and other available contact information pertaining to an authorized local designated representative who conducts business within Flagler County. 
(b)  Each local designated representative of an absentee landlord shall maintain a current working local telephone number and current local address, not a public or private post office box, and provide notification thereof of any changes of address, physical location and/or telephone number to the City within 30 days of the change. 
(c)  In the event of any code enforcement action being taken relative to the residential rental property, in addition to any notices as required by state law, the local designated representative shall also be notified; provided, however, that failure to provide such notice shall not preclude the enforcement of the City's Codes and ordinances by the City's Code Enforcement Board if the notice requirements of F.S. ch. 162, have been meet. 
(d)  The designation of a local designated representative shall be deemed to act as authorization for the representative to make statements on behalf of the owner during the course of any code enforcement proceeding if the representative is not precluded from so acting under the provisions of controlling Florida law. 
(e)  Upon Registration, each absentee landlord subject to the provisions of this article shall receive notice of, and shall execute and file with the City, an acknowledgment, on a form approved by the City, that he/she/it is familiar with the provisions of all codes and ordinances applicable to the residential rental property. 
(f)  Upon designation of a local representative either the absentee landlord or the local designated representative shall pay a fee as established by resolution adopted by the City Council. 
(g)  Local representation designation shall be optional for non-absentee landlords. 
(Ord. No. 04-28, § 4, 11-16-04)  
Sec. 17-41. - Inspections; non-compliance inspection fee. 
(a)  External inspections of rental residential properties subject to this article shall occur based upon complaints or as initiated by code inspectors. 
(b)  Beginning in Fiscal Year 2006—2007, at minimum, in order to maintain a current annual registration, each unit must have had an external investigation conducted within two years of the registration renewal date. 
(c)  Internal inspections by the City shall occur based upon complaints as set forth in subsection 17-41(d), or as initiated by code inspectors to ensure that such properties are in compliance with the provisions of all applicable codes and ordinances; provided, however, that this provision shall not be interpreted as authorizing the City to conduct internal inspections of properties without the consent of the owner or occupant or without an inspection warrant. 
(d)  Beginning in Fiscal Year 2008—2009, at minimum, in order to maintain a current annual registration, each unit must have had an internal investigation conducted within four years of the registration renewal date. 
(e)  The City shall assess a noncompliance inspection fee on a per unit basis per re-inspection if any violation still exists after allowance of a reasonable time period for compliance. The City Council shall establish the amount of the fee by means of a resolution. 
(Ord. No. 04-28, § 5, 11-16-04)  
Sec. 17-42. - Penalties. 
(a)  The City may impose any penalty authorized by State law and seek any legal remedy available to the City under State law; provided, however, that the penalty of incarceration shall not be imposed. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 17-40(a), failure to register as a local designated representative shall be a Class I citation under the City's Schedule of Citations. 
(Ord. No. 04-28, § 6, 11-16-04)  
ARTICLE IV. - ABANDONED REAL AND PERSONAL PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 17-51. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of the City to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens by establishing a process to address abandoned personal and real property located within the City. It is the City's further intent to specifically establish an abandoned residential property program as a mechanism to protect residential neighborhoods from becoming blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance and security of abandoned properties. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 17-52. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned personal property includes, but is not limited to, wrecked or derelict property which has been left abandoned and unprotected from the elements and shall include wrecked, inoperable or partially dismantled motor vehicles, trailers, boats, machinery, refrigerators, washing machines, plumbing fixtures, furniture and any other similar article which has been left abandoned and unprotected from the elements. 
Abandoned real property includes, but is not limited to, any improved real property that is vacant or is under a current notice of default and/or notice of mortgagee's sale by the lender, or a pending tax assessor's lien sale, or properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was retained by the beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure, and any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. 
Abate means to repair, replace, remove, destroy or otherwise remedy the condition in question by such means and in such manner and to such an extent as necessary in the interest of the general health, safety and welfare of the community as determined by the City Manager or his/her designee. 
Accessible property includes, but is not limited to, a property that is accessible through a compromised/breached gate, fence, wall, etc. 
Accessible structure means a structure/building that is unsecured or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior space by unauthorized persons. 
Enforcement officer means any law enforcement officer, building official, zoning inspector, code enforcement officer, fire inspector or building inspector employed within the City. 
Evidence of vacancy means any condition that on its own, or combined with other conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, overgrowth, dead vegetation, accumulation of abandoned personal property, as defined herein, statements by neighbors, passers-by, delivery agents or government agents, or other evidence that the property is vacant. 
Foreclosure means the process by which a property, placed as security for a real estate loan, is sold at public sale to satisfy the debt if the borrower defaults. 
Inoperable vehicle means any wrecked or partially dismantled vehicle that is parked or stored without having all the wheels mounted, or is in a condition of substantial disrepair, or which is parked or stored without having tires inflated, or other similar condition. An inoperable vehicle shall not be kept on private property unless it is within a completely enclosed building or structure. 
Out of area means an owner, operator, or other person in control of a vacant building, or authorized agent that is unable to arrive at the premises within one hour after contact or notification by the City or Emergency Response personnel. 
Private property means all lands and improvements other than public lands. 
Property management company means any entity responsible for the maintenance of property. 
Public property means canals, all waterways, lands and improvements owned by a governmental body or any governmental agency including but not limited to easements and rights-of-way, but excluding the campus of any institution of the state university system. 
Real property means a lot, plot, or parcel of land, including any structures on the land. 
REO means Real Estate Owned Property. Property that is owned by the mortgage company after an unsuccessful foreclosure auction. 
Residential building means any improved real property, or portion thereof, situated in the City, designed or permitted to be used for dwelling purposes, and shall include the buildings and structures located on such improved real property. 
Vacant means any building/structure regardless of its structural condition that is not legally occupied. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 17-53. - Applicability. 
This article shall be considered cumulative and not superseding or subject to any other law or provision for same, but shall rather be an additional remedy available to the City above and beyond any other state, county and/or local provisions for same. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 17-54. - Penalties. 
A person who violates a provision of this article, or who fails to perform an act required of the person by this article, commits an offense. A person commits a separate offense each day or portions of a day during which a violation is committed, permitted, or continued. Pursuant to F.S. § 162.09, and subsection 2-211(b), City of Palm Coast Code of Ordinances, the violator may be fined up to $5,000.00 per day for a violation and ordered to pay administrative costs incurred by the City of Palm Coast in enforcing its Codes. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 17-55. - Placement of abandoned personal property prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon personal property upon private property in violation of this or any other applicable law, ordinance or regulation. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to abandoned personal property authorized to be left on private business property properly operated, licensed and zoned in the City for the purpose of accepting/storing personal property. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 17-56. - Public nuisance. 
All abandoned personal property or abandoned real property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, the abatement of which, pursuant to the policing power of the City of Palm Coast, is hereby declared to be necessary for the health, welfare and safety of the residents of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 17-57. - Abandoned personal property removal procedure. 
(a)  Personal property abandoned on public land shall be removed pursuant to the provisions of F.S. § 705.103, as may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  Personal property abandoned on private land, other than an inoperable vehicle shall be removed pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 35, City of Palm Coast Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  Inoperable vehicles abandoned on private land shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The enforcement officer shall cause a notice to be placed upon such inoperable vehicle in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND ALL PERSONS INTERESTED IN THE ATTACHED PROPERTY. THIS PROPERTY, TO WIT: 
(setting forth brief description) 
LOCATED AT: 
(setting forth brief description of location) is: 
IMPROPERLY STORED AND IS IN VIOLATION OF 
(setting forth ordinance or violation violated) 
AND MUST BE REMOVED WITHIN TEN (10) DAYS FROM THE DATE OF THIS NOTICE; OTHERWISE IT SHALL BE PRESUMED TO BE ABANDONED PROPERTY AND WILL BE REMOVED AND SOLD OR DESTROYED BY ORDER OF THE CITY OF PALM COAST, FLORIDA, DATED THIS: 
(setting forth the date of posting of notice); 
SIGNED (setting forth name, title, address and telephone number of enforcement officer.) 
(2)  Such notice shall be not less than eight (8) inches by ten (10) inches and be sufficiently weatherproof to withstand normal exposure to the elements. 
(3)  The enforcement officer shall also make reasonable effort to ascertain the name and address of the owner of the inoperable vehicle and, if such address is reasonably available, the officer shall mail by certified mail a copy of the notice to the owner on or before the date of posting the above-described notice on the inoperable vehicle. 
(4)  The enforcement officer shall mail by certified mail and first class mail, a copy of the above-described notice to the owner of the real property upon which the inoperable vehicle is located, as shown by the Property Appraiser's or Tax Collector's records used by the county or any other address provided to the local government by such owner, on or before the date of posting such notice. 
(5)  At the end of the ten-day period of posting of such notice, if the owner or person having interest in the inoperable vehicle has not removed it from the private property, or shown reasonable cause for failure to do so, the City may cause the inoperable vehicle to be removed by a towing company who shall cause it to be removed and placed in storage in accordance with local, state and federal regulations. At the conclusion of the required storage, if the inoperable vehicle is not claimed, and if the salvage value is above $100.00, the towing company shall pay the City of Palm Coast the sum of $25.00 or ten percent of such value, whichever is greater, for the administrative costs in handling with said article. If the inoperable vehicle is claimed, the owner shall be responsible for all towing and storage costs and the City shall receive from the owner $150.00 to cover administrative costs. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 17-58. - Registration of abandoned real property. 
(a)  For any property that has suffered damage or destruction from a fire, flood, storm, or similar event that rendered the building incapable of being occupied, or if real property is determined to be abandoned real property as defined herein, the owner/mortgagee shall register the property with the City Manager, or his/her designee on forms provided by the City, or with an electronic registration system or an alternate system approved by the City Manager or designee. The lender shall also notify the City of Palm Coast of the filing of such information with an electronic registration system or an alternate system. A registration is required for each parcel of abandoned real property. 
(b)  If real property is occupied but remains in default of the mortgage, it shall be inspected by the mortgagee or his designee monthly until: (i) the mortgagor or other party remedies the default; or (ii) it is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy at which time it is deemed abandoned. If deemed abandoned, the mortgagee shall, within ten days of that inspection, register the property with the City Manager, or his/her designee, on forms provided by the City, or with an electronic registration system, or alternate system. The lender shall also notify the City of Palm Coast of the filing of such information with an electronic registration system or alternate system. 
(c)  Registration pursuant to this section shall contain the name of the owner/mortgagee, the direct mailing address of the owner/mortgagee, a direct contact name and telephone number of the mortgagee, facsimile number and e-mail address, the lender's loan number and "an electronic registration system number, if applicable." In the case of a corporation or out-of-area mortgagee, registration shall also contain the local property management company responsible for the security and maintenance of the property, the agents' addresses, telephone numbers, and e-mail addresses. The registrant shall report to the appropriate registration agency any change in the information provided on the registration no later than ten days following the date of the change of information. 
(d)  A registrant shall permit representatives of the Sheriff's Department, the Flagler County Department of Environmental and Health Services, the Fire Department, the Community Development Department, and the Building Official to inspect the interior and exterior of the vacant building, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at reasonable times upon request. The registrant commits an offense if he/she, either personally or through an agent or employee, refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the vacant building as required by this subsection. 
(e)  Registration fee. When the City serves as the Registration Agency, an annual nonrefundable registration fee in the amount of $150.00 per property, shall accompany the registration form(s). 
(f)  This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure, and to any properties transferred to the beneficiary of the mortgage under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. If or when the property becomes REO (Real Estate Owned) property, the City of Palm Coast shall be notified by the lender of the REO Agents' addresses, telephone numbers, and e-mail addresses. 
(g)  Properties subject to this section shall remain under the annual registration requirement, and the security and maintenance standards of this section are applicable as long as they remain vacant, or REO property. 
(h)  The owner, operator, authorized agent or other person in control of a vacant building must be able to arrive at the premises within one hour after a contact person named under this section is notified by the City or emergency response personnel that an emergency has occurred on the premises. 
(i)  Any person or corporation that has registered a property under this section must report any change of information contained in the registration within ten days of the change. 
(j)  The owner of a vacant property must submit a vacant building plan, which must contain the following: 
(1)  A plan of action and a time schedule for correcting all existing violations. 
(2)  A plan of action for maintaining the building and its premises. 
(3)  A plan of action for occupying or selling the building, including but not limited to, a time schedule for renovation or repairing the building and a time schedule for marketing, advertising, or offering the building for sale. 
(4)  A plan of action and time schedule for any demolition of the building. 
(5)  A registrant may update the vacant building plan at any time, by providing the City Manager, or his/her designee, with an updated vacant building plan. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 17-59. - Maintenance requirements for abandoned real and personal property. 
(a)  Properties subject to this chapter shall be kept free of weeds, overgrown brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices, except those required by federal, state, or local law; abandoned personal items included, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances; printed material or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned. 
(b)  The property shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior structure. 
(c)  Front, side, and rear yard landscaping shall be maintained in accordance with the City's codes. 
(d)  Landscape shall include, but not be limited to, grass, ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential installation. Landscape shall not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt or similar material. 
(e)  Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, watering, irrigation, cutting, and mowing of required landscape and removal of all trimmings. 
(f)  Swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs shall be maintained so the water remains free and clear of pollutants and debris. Swimming pools and spas shall comply with the enclosure requirements of the City Code of Ordinances, specifically the provisions of the Property Maintenance Code found in subsection 15-109(b). 
(g)  Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly maintain the property may result in a violation of the City Code and issuance of a citation or notice of violation/notice of hearing by the City's Code Enforcement Officer. Pursuant to a finding and determination by the City's Code Enforcement Board/Hearing Officer, the City may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with the section unless the City Manager or his/her designee determines that conditions on a property constitute an imminent public health threat, and the situation calls for abatement sooner than the abatement procedures in this Code permit. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 17-60. - Security requirements. 
(a)  Properties subject to this section shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. 
(b)  A "secure manner" shall include, but not be limited to, the closure and locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that may allow a child to access the interior of the property and/or structure. Boarding of any access point is an allowable means of securing property, for a period not to exceed 60 days. 
(c)  If the property is owned by a corporation and/or out of area mortgagee, a local property management company shall be contracted to perform bi-weekly inspections to verify compliance with the requirements of this section, and any other applicable laws. 
(d)  The property shall be posted with the name and 24-hour contact phone number of the local property management company. The posting shall be an eight-inch by ten-inch sign. The posting shall contain the following language: 
THIS PROPERTY IS MANAGED BY: 
TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL: 
The posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible, or secured to the exterior of the building/structure facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible or, if no such area exists, on a stake of sufficient size to support the posting in a location as close as possible to the main door entrance of the property. Exterior posting shall be constructed of and printed with weather-resistant materials. 
(e)  The local property management company shall inspect the property on a bi-weekly basis to ensure that the property is in compliance with this chapter. Upon the request of City, the local property management company shall provide a copy of the inspection reports to the code enforcement division. 
(f)  Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly maintain the property may result in a violation of the City Code and issuance of a citation or notice of violation/notice of hearing by the City's Code Enforcement Officer. Pursuant to a finding and determination by the City's Code Enforcement Board/Hearing Officer, the City may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 17-61. - Opposing, obstructing enforcement officer; penalty. 
Whoever opposes, obstructs or resists any enforcement officer or any person authorized by the City Manager, or his/her designee, in the discharge of duties as provided in this article, upon conviction shall be punished as provided by Florida law. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 17-62. - Immunity of enforcement officer. 
Any enforcement officer or any person authorized by the City Manager, or his/her designee are hereby granted immunity from prosecution or suit for engaging in lawful actions in the implementation of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 17-63. - Additional authority. 
The City Manager, or his/her designee, shall have authority to require the mortgagee and/or owner of record of any property affected by this section, to implement additional maintenance and/or security measures including, but not limited to, securing any and all door(s), window(s) or other openings, employment of an on-site security guard, or other measures as may be reasonably required to help prevent further decline of the property. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 17-64. - Adoption of rules; expenditure of funds; declaration of city purpose. 
The City Manager, consistent with his/her duties and authorities under the City Charter, including those duties and authorities relating to emergency situations, is authorized and empowered to adopt rules and regulations and expend city funds as may be reasonably necessary and available to carry out the terms of this chapter, the expenditure of such funds being declared a proper city purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 17-65. - Provisions of ordinance supplemental means of code enforcement. 
The provisions of this article are additional and supplemental means of enforcing the City's Codes and may be used for the enforcement of all codes and ordinances duly adopted by the City Council. Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the City from enforcing its Codes and Ordinances by other means set forth in the City's Codes, provided in the Statutory Law of the State of Florida, or otherwise available to the City. 
(Ord. No. 2010-04, § 2, 3-2-10)  
Chapter 23 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; environment, ch. 24; fire prevention and protection, ch. 25. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL  
ARTICLE II. - RECOVERY OF COSTS INCURRED IN HAZARDOUS MATERIALS RESPONSES 
 
Sec. 23-26. - Definition. 
Hazardous materials means toxic or otherwise hazardous substances including, but not limited to, vapors or gases or highly volatile liquids which are produced, used, transported or stored in containers or within piping systems under pressure or at reduced temperature to lower vapor pressure which, if released directly or indirectly into the atmosphere, may impose a serious and acute threat to public safety or the environment. 
(Ord. No. 00-7, § 1, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 02-8, § 1, 6-4-02)  
Sec. 23-27. - Financial responsibility for cost recovery. 
Any person or persons, company, corporation, association, firm, entity, trust, partnership, or any other persons or organization which is in the act of storing or manufacturing, disposing, utilizing, or transporting by means of any craft, vessel, or vehicle, and who causes a leak, spill, or release of any hazardous material requiring a response by any emergency response agency or department of the City, or causes fire suppression activities as a result of arson in the City, is financially responsible for the total current cost and expense of the equipment and personnel, replacement cost of any damaged or destroyed equipment, any and all supplies expended, any other miscellaneous expenses incurred during the response to, while conducting suppression activities, during the return to respective departments, stations, or agencies, and any costs of hazardous materials containment, control, decontamination, cleanup, restoration, supplies expended, operational expenses of equipment and personnel, any transportation, storage and/or disposal of contaminated materials as may be necessary to relieve the threat of loss of life, endangerment to health, property, and environment. 
(Ord. No. 02-8, § 2, 6-4-02)  
Sec. 23-28. - Cost determination. 
Costs incurred and recoverable to the City, shall not include costs incurred by other state or federal agencies. The fees are to be determined per current Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Guidelines, Schedule of Equipment Rates, including Appendix to FEMA Schedule of Equipment Rates: Aircraft Rates, as set forth by City resolution. 
(Ord. No. 02-8, § 3, 6-4-02)  
ARTICLE III. - COMPREHENSIVE EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN 
 
Sec. 23-51. - Adoption. 
The City Council hereby approves and adopts the attached Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan developed and proposed by the City Manager and his staff to address future emergencies that may occur within the jurisdictional limits of the City. The Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan may be amended from time-to-time in accordance with City policies and procedures and shall not constitute a substantive part of this article, but shall serve as the method by which City of Palm Coast Government shall address and respond to local emergencies. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, § 1, 2-15-05) 
Editor's note— The Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan is not set out in length herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the offices of the city clerk.  
Sec. 23-52. - Definitions. 
[For the purpose of this article the following terms, words and phrases shall have the meaning hereinafter set forth:] 
Emergency means any occurrence, event, disaster or threat thereof, whether accidental, natural, or caused by man, in war or peace, which results or may result in substantial injury or harm to the population of the City or substantial damage to or loss of property within the City. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, § 2, 2-15-05)  
Sec. 23-53. - Authority to declare states of local emergency. 
Pursuant to Chapter 252, Florida Statutes, which authorizes the waiver of procedures and formalities otherwise required of political subdivisions to take whatever prudent action is necessary to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the community in the event of a state of local emergency, when a quorum of the City Council is unable to meet, the City Manager, is empowered to declare local states of local emergency whenever determined that a natural or manmade disaster or emergency has occurred or that the occurrence or threat of one is imminent and requires immediate and expeditious action. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, § 3, 2-15-05)  
Sec. 23-54. - Proclamation; term. 
A state of local emergency may be declared by proclamation of the Mayor, after conferring with the City Manager, exercising their respective powers under the provisions of the City Charter and this article. Upon a proclamation declaring a state of local emergency being issued by the Mayor, the City Manager shall have all powers set forth in the City's Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan. The state of local emergency shall continue for a maximum period of seven days, but may re-instituted for additional periods not to exceed seven days, until the Mayor, after conferring with the City Manager, finds that the threat of danger no longer exists and terminates the state of local emergency by proclamation. Only the Mayor shall have the authority to be recognized by the Governor for the purposes of military law. Upon a local state of emergency being declared and ended, the City Manager shall, as soon as practicable after the termination of the state of local emergency, report to the City Council on the actions of the City and the effectiveness of the operations of the City under, and pursuant to, its Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan. The City Manager shall, as needed, propose amendments to the City's Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan and the codes, ordinances and policies of the City in order to enhance the City's responsiveness to emergency situations. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, § 4, 2-15-05)  
Sec. 23-55. - Proclamation to activate emergency management plans. 
A proclamation issued as set forth herein declaring a state of local emergency, shall activate the City's Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan and shall be the authority for use or distribution of any supplies, equipment, materials or facilities assembled or arranged to be made available pursuant to such plans. Said proclamation shall also institute coordination activities with Flagler County, in accordance with the provisions of state law. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, § 5, 2-15-05)  
Sec. 23-56. - Effect and purpose of state of local emergency. 
(a)  Upon the declaration of a state of local emergency pursuant to this article, the state of local emergency shall be effective during the period of such local emergency for the duration of the period of time established in the applicable proclamation or as otherwise provided by state law, to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Palm Coast and those other persons residing in, traveling in or conducting business in the City. 
(b)  The City Manager, is hereby vested and delegated with the power and authority to take all actions consistent with the provisions of the City Charter necessary to address the emergency situations that may arise as a result of local emergencies upon the issuance of a proclamation by the Mayor declaring a state of local emergency. 
(c)  Without limiting the generality of the provisions of subsection (b), the City Manager is hereby vested and delegated with the power to accomplish the following actions upon the issuance of a proclamation by the Mayor declaring a state of local emergency: 
(1)  To waive and dispense with any and all purchasing or procurement policies and practices of the City in order to address and respond to emergency conditions and associated impacts and in order that the City will be in a position to respond to the day-to-day exigencies that may arise and procure necessary goods and services to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(2)  To issue development permits to allow the reconstruction and repair of non-conforming structures that have been damaged. 
(3)  To issue development permits and construction permits without assessing customary fees and charges for activities that pertain to the restoration and rehabilitation of any and all structures damaged. 
(4)  To suspend the watering or irrigation of properties in the event that the City's water supplies or water supply system or facilities is or are threatened with harm or an inability to function at a level that is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(5)  To permit tree removal, notwithstanding the requirements of any code or ordinance, in order to protect the public safety and prevent property damage from occurring. 
(6)  Suspend or limit the sale, dispensing or transportation of alcoholic beverages, explosives and combustibles. 
(7)  Establish curfews including, but not limited to, the prohibition of or restrictions on pedestrian and vehicular movement, standing and parking, except for the provision of designated essential services, such as fire, police, emergency medical services and hospital services to include, but not be limited to, the transportation of patients, utility emergency repairs and emergency calls by physicians. If the Flagler County Sheriff or the City Police Chief, as the case may be, advises the City Manager that a curfew may be in the public interest and protect the public health, safety, and welfare, the City Manager may issue a proclamation that a curfew be in effect. A copy of the proclamation shall be delivered by the Flagler County Sheriff or the City Police Chief, as the case may be, to each member of the City Council as soon as practicable after its issuance by the City Manager and copies of the proclamation shall be posted at such places and locations as the City Manager shall deem practicable under the circumstances. The City Manager, as soon as practicable, shall request the Mayor, or Vice Mayor, in the absence of the Mayor, to issue a proclamation affirming the determination of the City Manager. 
(8)  Utilize all available resources of the City Government as reasonably necessary to cope with the emergency. 
(9)  Declare certain areas within the City off limits. 
(10)  Make provisions for the availability and use of temporary emergency housing and the emergency warehousing of materials. 
(11)  Establish emergency operating centers and shelters in addition to or in place of those provided in Flagler County's or the City's emergency management plans. 
(12)  To prohibit the use of fresh water supplied by the City for any purpose other than cooking, drinking or bathing. 
(13)  Confiscate merchandise, equipment, vehicles or property needed to alleviate the local emergency. Reimbursement to the owner shall occur within 60 days and at customary value charged for the items during 90 days previous to the state of local emergency. 
(14)  To call on the National Guard of the Army, public safety officials and law enforcement officials as necessary to assist in the mitigation of the local emergency or to help maintain law and order, rescue and traffic control. 
(d)  The City Manager shall, as soon as practicable after the action taken, report to the City Council the actions taken under the provisions of this section. The City Council shall review and oversee actions taken to ensure that the measures taken in response to emergency situations are consistent with the provisions of this article and City policy. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, § 6, 2-15-05; Ord. No. 2011-16, § 2, 10-4-11)  
Sec. 23-57. - Overcharging prohibited/price gouging. 
In order to preserve, protect or sustain the life, health or safety of persons, or their property, within any area where a state of local emergency exists, it is unlawful, during the duration of a state of local emergency or subsequent recovery period in which the City has been designated as a disaster area, for any person, firm or corporation located or doing business in the City, to overcharge for any goods, materials, services, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses, sold or rented, within the City. Overcharging shall mean to charge more than the normal average retail price for any merchandise, goods, or services sold during the emergency. The average retail price, as used herein, is defined to be that price at which similar merchandise, goods, or services was being sold in Flagler County during the 90 days immediately preceding the emergency or a mark-up which is a larger percentage over wholesale cost, than was being added to wholesale cost prior to the emergency. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, § 7, 2-15-05)  
Sec. 23-58. - Limit of authority. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit the authority of the City Council to take any action authorized by law relative to emergency preparedness, disaster relief or any similar subject or matter. 
(Ord. No. 2005-07, § 8, 2-15-05)  
Chapter 24 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; businesses and business regulations, ch. 16; fire prevention and protection, ch. 25; floods, ch. 26; health and sanitation, ch. 28; solid waste, ch. 41; streets, roads, bridges and other public places, ch. 42; utilities, ch. 49; waterways, ch. 50. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 24-1. - Destruction of vegetation along electric utility easements and corridors by chemical defoliation. 
(a)  Declared hazard and nuisance. The systematic, broadcast destruction of vegetation along and on electric utility easements and corridors through the use of chemical defoliant(s) without City evaluation of the risks to public health and natural resources is hereby declared to be a potentially serious hazard and public nuisance. 
(b)  Prohibited. The use of chemical defoliants for systematic, broadcast destruction of vegetation on electric utility easements and corridors is hereby prohibited until such time as the City Council implements, employs or enacts a regulatory procedure for the management of vegetation along and on electric utility easements and corridors. 
(c)  Moratorium. The electric utility shall cease and desist such systematic, broadcast defoliant operations, and there shall be a moratorium on such operations until such time as the provisions of subsection (b) are implemented. Such implementation shall be accomplished no later than 90 days from the effective date of this section [March 7, 2000]. 
(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 3-7-00)  
ARTICLE II. - POLLUTION CONTROL  
DIVISION 1. - POLLUTION CONTROL REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 24-31. - Policy; purpose. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the City to regulate and control the generation, storage, treatment, disposal and transportation of hazardous waste for the benefit of the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City. 
(b)  It is hereby found and declared that this article provides for regulation of air, water and soils to meet or exceed the provisions of F.S. ch. 403 as administered by the environmental health section of the City Health Unit. 
(c)  It is the public policy of the City to conserve the waters of the City and protect, maintain and improve the quality thereof for public water supplies, for the propagation of wildlife, fish and other aquatic life, and for domestic, agricultural, recreational and other beneficial uses, and to provide that no pollutants be discharged into any waters, air or land within the City. 
(d)  It is the public policy of the City to achieve and maintain such levels of air quality as will protect human health and safety to the highest degree practicable and to prevent injury to plant and animal life and foster and protect the comfort, health and welfare of the people and facilitate the enjoyment of the natural environment of the City. 
(e)  It is the public policy of the City to protect the quality and level of water, both surface and underground, for wildlife, fish and other aquatic life, and to preserve the aesthetic qualities of the terrain and prevent degradation of lands. 
(f)  It is the public policy of the City to prevent, abate and control the pollution of the air, water and soils of the City, and the provisions of this article are enacted for the purpose of meeting the responsibility of the City Council to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City. All City departments, agencies and private citizens are encouraged to report suspected violators of this article to the environmental health section of the City Health Unit, for coordination, investigation or enforcement. 
(g)  It is the public policy of the City to regulate and abate the activities which are causing or which may cause pollution of the air, water and soils resources in the City which are or may be detrimental to human, animal or aquatic or plant life or to property, or which may unreasonably interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property within the City, to ensure a continued safe environment, to ensure purity of air, water and soil, to ensure domestic and public water supplies, to ensure protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and to provide for recreational and wildlife needs as the population increases and the economy expands. 
(h)  It is the public policy of the City to promote atmospheric control and freedom of the air from general and specific contaminants, to control the pollution of water in the streams, bays, lakes, estuaries, underground waters and soils, to control the pollution of soils and provide for the reclamation of soils, and to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of animals, humans and marine and plant life within the boundaries of the City against air, water and soil pollution caused by or resulting from the emission or escape of dust, fumes, gas, mist, odor, heat, smoke, vapor, toxic, poisonous or noxious chemicals or raw sewage or any combination thereof. 
(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 24-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building Department means the Building Department of the City. 
Commercial, institutional or industrial establishment or governmental agency means any person in any wholesale or retail commerce or governmental agency that engages in any activity or process which stores, handles, uses, transports or disposes of materials or chemicals which lead or could lead to the generation of hazardous waste. 
Existing commercial or industrial establishment means a commercial or industrial establishment in operation on April 10, 1989, or which had been issued a building permit by the Building Department by April 10, 1989. 
Hazardous waste, generators of hazardous waste, storers of hazardous waste and disposers of hazardous waste shall be as defined in 40 C.F.R., parts 260 through 265, incorporated by reference in F.A.C. 17-30.02. These definitions and the chemical products or substances which fall under the definitions were published in Federal Register on May 19, 1980; October 30, 1980; November 17, 1980; November 19, 1980; December 31, 1980; and January 9, 1981. 
New commercial or industrial establishment means a commercial or industrial establishment beginning operation or receiving a building permit from the Building Department after April 10, 1989. 
Pollution means the presence in the outdoor atmosphere upon or within the ground or water of any substance in quantities, conditions or manner which may be harmful or injurious to human health or welfare, to animal or aquatic life, or to marine life, or which unreasonably interferes with or may interfere with the enjoyment of life or property or the future use and enjoyment thereof for all legitimate purposes. 
Water means and includes but is not limited to any and all rivers, streams, creeks, lakes, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, marshes and all other bodies of surface or underground water, including but not limited to fresh, brackish, saline or tidal, situated wholly or partly within or bordering upon the City. 
(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 24-33. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to mine, excavate or fill, or to cause the pollution of any of the air, waters, or soils of the City in violation of or by failure to comply with the laws of the state or this article, including orders or rules fixing standards of air, water, or soil quality or permits issued under the laws of the state or the authority of this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 24-35. - Aiding or procuring another to violate article. 
It is unlawful to aid, assist or procure another to violate this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 24-36. - Inspections. 
(a)  The department shall have the right to make and shall be given unequivocal access for unannounced periodic inspections and tours, as it deems necessary, of all commercial and industrial establishments, vehicles and premises, during reasonable hours, or in response to any complaint, to ascertain if the establishment is in compliance with the terms and conditions of this 
article. The inspection shall include but is not limited to assessing the general operation and condition of the facility, approved chemical and material handling, storage, transportation and disposal procedures and, if only chemical and manufacturing processes or activities previously approved by the department are being used, how these processes, procedures or activities relate to the generation of hazardous wastes. 
(b)  Any facility or officer or employee thereof that refuses to allow any employee or agent of the City's environmental health section of the City Health Unit, to inspect the premises of any commercial or industrial establishment or hinders the performance of his duty to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this article in any manner shall be deemed in violation of this article. If necessary, the department will contact a law enforcement officer and proceed on such premises with a warrant or other document of authority as necessary to lawfully enter such premises for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 24-37. - Response alert procedure. 
The environmental health section of the City Health Unit in cooperation with the City Manager or designee and other state and local agencies shall establish a response alert procedure to coordinate all necessary agencies for efficient coordination in the event of a hazardous chemical spill or incident in the City. 
(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 24-39. - Transport of hazardous or toxic products. 
All persons engaged in transporting hazardous or toxic products or hazardous wastes shall do so in such a manner to prevent leakage or spillage. No person shall allow any hazardous or toxic materials to leak, spill or drop from any vehicle. Industrial or commercial establishments operating in the City shall notify the department as well as fire and law enforcement agencies by telephone or in person prior to hazardous wastes being transported away from their establishment. 
(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 24-40. - Disposal of hazardous waste. 
No hazardous wastes shall be dumped or disposed of in any City waters, in any landfill, nor through any burial or surface spreading method or technique unless all applicable permits are obtained from the environmental health section of the City Health Unit prior to such activity. 
(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 24-41. - Approval of manufacture, storage or use of certain chemicals. 
(a)  New establishments. No new commercial or industrial establishment shall manufacture, store or use any chemical products or substances identified in 40 C.F.R., part 261, as incorporated by Chapter 17-30.02 of the Florida Administrative Code, or generate, store, treat, transport or dispose of reportable quantities of wastes created from the use of these products without first making application to and obtaining permission from, first, the environmental health section of the City Health Unit, second, the City Council, and third, the City Manager or designee. This three-step procedure will be the only approval procedure sanctioned and allowed under this article and will constitute the only means by which full approval to manufacture, store or use chemical products identified in 40 C.F.R., part 261, or which could lead to the generation of hazardous wastes may be granted. 
(b)  Prerequisites for issuance of building permit. No building permit for new commercial or industrial establishments shall be issued by the City Manager or designee until the environmental health section of the City Health Unit has determined the applicant is in total compliance with all federal and state laws and rules applicable to the manufacturing, storage, disposal and use of chemical products which could lead to the generation of hazardous waste, and has issued an operating permit. Further, the department must determine that the applicant has taken the steps required by federal and state law to ensure their operation will not pollute the air, water, soil or environment of the City. 
(c)  Submission of application; fee. Applicants will use a commercial/industrial facility assessment form developed by the department and will pay a fee of $150.00 for the costs of processing the application. This fee shall be nonrefundable, except as provided in subsection (d) of this section. If new commercial and industrial establishments do not handle any chemical compounds or substances which lead to the generation of hazardous waste, the health department may waive the fee upon submission of an affidavit from the applicant to this effect. 
(d)  Operating permit. An operating permit shall be issued by the department upon full compliance with this article and shall remain in effect until closure, revocation, change of ownership or change of use or approved original processes or activities. This permit shall cost $25.00. 
(e)  Contents of application; compliance with state law. All applicants must list all chemical compounds and materials which lead or could lead to the generation of hazardous wastes, as defined in this article and as on file at the environmental health section of the City Health Unit. The application shall include material safety data sheets (MSDS's) on each and every chemical, compound or material the applicant intends to use in any way on his premises. Any and all applicable permit requirements of the state department of environmental regulation are understood to be additional to the provisions of this article. 
(f)  Existing establishments. Existing commercial and industrial establishments manufacturing, storing, selling or using any chemical products identified in 40 C.F.R., part 261, as incorporated by F.A.C. 17-30 or which generate, store, treat, transport or dispose of wastes created from the use of these products, shall complete an environmental assessment on forms provided by the department on or before six months after April 10, 1989. Those who do not utilize these chemical compounds or substances should notify the department, in writing, on or before six months after April 10, 1989. No fee will be charged by the environmental health section of the City Health Unit for reviewing the environmental assessments provided by existing commercial and industrial establishments. An on-site inspection may be required to verify information contained on the assessment form or if no assessment is submitted. 
(g)  Amendment of facilities assessment. If at any time a commercial or industrial establishment changes ownership or controlling interests, ceases operation, or deviates, changes, revises or amends its manufacturing, storing, treatment or usage procedures or its activities and processes, or the chemicals and substances it uses, it must immediately notify the department and file an amended industrial/commercial facility assessment with the department. No fee shall be required for this amended assessment. Submission of the amended assessment shall be prior to the new procedure, activity, process or chemical being used or placed in service. The department may, at its discretion, upon reviewing the amended assessment, inform the City Council of these developments and seek its approval. The department, at its discretion, may also require a yearly update assessment if it deems it necessary for the protection of the public health. 
(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 24-42. - Establishments using methyl-isocyanate prohibited. 
No commercial or industrial establishment that uses methyl-isocyanate shall be allowed to operate in the City. 
(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 3-7-00)  
DIVISION 2. - EROSION CONTROL 
 
Sec. 24-76. - Protection of surface water bodies. 
(a)  Definitions. The following terms, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed herein, except where context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bulkhead means a structure built between a waterbody on one side and land on the other side. 
Surface water means water upon the surface of the earth, whether contained in bounds created naturally or artificially or diffused. Water from natural springs shall be classified as surface water when it exits from the spring onto the earth's surface [F.S. § 373.019(21)]. 
Water bodies means fresh and salt water canals, ditches, lakes, marshes, rivers, swamps and swales in the City. 
(b)  Violations. It shall be a violation: 
(1)  To dump vegetative material or a container of yard clippings into a waterbody. 
(2)  To allow material from a construction site to be deposited or to erode into a waterbody, and fails to remove same within 15 days after notification of noncompliance. 
(3)  For an owner or his agent to allow or maintain hazards from objects projecting or hanging into water bodies. 
(4)  For a contractor to fail to backfill bulkheads within 30 days after construction or repair of the bulkhead. 
(5)  For persons onshore or aboard a water craft to discharge human wastes into a waterbody. 
(c)  Exceptions to violations. [The following are exceptions to the violations listed in subsection (b):] 
(1)  Temporary water bodies created to hold runoff water during construction. 
(2)  Special exceptions granted by the City on application where sufficient reason and safeguards are shown to protect the public interest. 
(d)  Methods to prevent erosion. Persons involved in the construction, remodeling or repair of buildings and/or pools in the City shall use Best Management Practices to prevent erosion of surface soil into adjoining water bodies. Best Management Practices shall be designed in accordance with the State of Florida Erosion and Sediment Control Designer and Reviewer Manual (June 2007) and the Florida Stormwater, Erosion, and Sedimentation Control Inspector's Manual (FDEP July 2008) and shall be shown on the "Grading and Drainage Plan" or on a separate "Erosion Control Plan". Any one or more of the following methods shall be used at the option of the contractor or owner on side and backyard water bodies, unless directed to the contrary by the City: 
(1)  A strip of vegetated land not less than eight-feet wide shall be left undisturbed on the site adjacent to a waterbody, as defined in subsection (a) above; 
(2)  In the rear or side yard leading to a waterbody, a properly staked and installed filter cloth screen across the lot line shall be maintained until the lot has been sodded and landscaped; 
(3)  Bales of straw or hay may be used to prevent soil runoff in place of a filter cloth screen or eight-foot vegetated strip; 
(4)  Any other erosion control devices approved by the City Manager or designee. 
(e)  Installation of erosion control devices. Staked filter cloth or other approved erosion control devices shall be installed and its function maintained at the downstream end of a roadside swale adjoining the property to prevent soil run-off. 
(f)  Erosion control during construction/repair of seawalls, bulkheads. Prior to the start of construction, persons involved in the construction or repair of seawalls and bulkheads shall use Best Management Practices to prevent erosion from the adjoining property into the waterbody. 
(1)  For properties on which building construction will begin within 90 days, backfill shall be to the top of the seawall, establishing a swale not less than five feet from the seawall to collect any eroded material. On completion of final grade on the site, the work shall be sodded. In instances where sodding is delayed, erosion control devices must be maintained until the site is sodded. 
(2)  For properties on which construction is not to start within 90 days, the site shall be left with minimal clearing and approved erosion control devices installed sufficient in size and number to catch and retard erosion until the site is developed. 
(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 01-16, § 2, 9-4-01; Ord. No. 2018-25 , § 2, 11-6-18)  
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY  
DIVISION 2. - PRIVATE TO PUBLIC TRANSFER OF SURFACE WATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 24-126. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to establish the minimum conditions for transferring, to the public, maintenance of a private surface water management system within the City. The following standards for storm events shall be on an interim basis for the City. 
(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 24-128. - Conditions for transfer and acceptance of ownership or maintenance by public—Establishment. 
The City establishes the following minimum conditions for transfer to, and acceptance by, the public of ownership or maintenance of a private surface water management system: 
(1)  Petition. A private surface water management system owner, association, corporation, or other legal entity responsible for ongoing maintenance may submit a petition to the City Council for the transfer to, and acceptance of, public maintenance of a private surface water management system. 
(2)  Criteria for acceptance. The following criteria, at a minimum, shall be considered in the evaluation of a petition for transfer: 
a.  An owner-funded, independent engineering study performed by an engineering firm approved by City Manager or designee. The study must include an evaluation of the system's design, including its existing capacity based upon the predominant types of land uses served within the discrete watersheds. The study must identify the existing level of service and analyze the general performance, including an evaluation of the adequacy of the current level of service; the general condition and expected life of the facilities; the impact of the facilities upon the area's surface water quality and adjacent natural resources; and capacity for a 100-year storm event be assured using formulae, impervious percentages, times of concentration, runoff coefficients, and other design criteria as approved by the City Manager or designee. 
b.  All existing deficiencies identified by the engineering study, reviewed by the City Manager or designee and so determined by the City Council must be corrected or repaired by the owner of the private system as a condition of transfer. 
c.  The owner of the private system must dedicate all lands necessary for the City to own, operate and maintain the system as a condition of transfer. 
d.  The owner must provide to the City, or a City-approved public entity, capitalization funds to help alleviate the taxes necessary to own, operate and maintain the system. Factors that may be considered include: 
1.  Cost to own, operate, and maintain the system (operational government budget); 
2.  Government options to fund budgets, including ad valorem and special assessments; and 
3.  Level and amount of capital needed to reasonably avoid taxpayer subsidy of a developer. 
e.  Warranties against defects must be provided to the City or the approved public entity. The length and type of warranty shall be based on the following factors: 
1.  Age and size of system; 
2.  Population density served by the system and further development potential; 
3.  Potential loss of life and property in the event of system failure; 
4.  Potential loss of collateral functions, such as water recharge, in the event of system failure; 
5.  Potential for environmental damage occasioned by a system failure; 
6.  Cost of designing, permitting and constructing a replacement system in the event of system failure; and 
7.  Other factors as may be identified by the engineering study or recommended by the City Manager or designee and all as may be approved by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 24-129. - Same—Minimum; determination of compliance. 
(a)  The conditions and evaluation criteria identified in section 24-128 are the minimum necessary to permit a transfer of ownership or maintenance of a private surface water management system to a public surface water management system. 
(b)  Following the submittal to the City Council of the required study and all other relevant information, the City Council will determine compliance with the following conditions: 
(1)  All existing deficiencies must be corrected or repaired by the owner of the private system; 
(2)  The owner of the system must dedicate all lands necessary for the City or an approved public entity to own or operate and maintain the system; 
(3)  The owner must provide capitalization funds to help alleviate the taxes necessary to own, operate and maintain the system; 
(4)  The owner must provide warranties against system defects. 
(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 24-130. - Prohibition against transfer without Council approval. 
(a)  No person, firm or corporation may transfer, to the public, ownership or maintenance of a private surface water management system without compliance with the City comprehensive land use plan and this division. 
(b)  The standards contained in the comprehensive plan for transfer of ownership have existed since their adoption and have not been altered or modified to the enactment of this division. No owner of a private surface water management system shall be grandfathered from or vested against the provisions of this division if such system owner received notice from the City of the applicability of the comprehensive plan to a transfer occurring after adoption of the comprehensive plan standards. 
(Ord. No. 00-13, § 1, 3-7-00)  
DIVISION 3. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT UTILITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 2011-1, adopted March 1, 2011, amended div. 3 in its entirety, in effect repealing §§ 24-131—24-138 and enacting similar new provisions in lieu thereof as §§ 24-131—24-139. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Sec. 24-131. - Legislative intent and legislative findings. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. It is the intent of this division for the City Council of the City of Palm Coast to establish the public function and service of stormwater management as a City utility enterprise in accordance with F.S. § 403.0893, as well as the City's constitutional home rule powers and authority. It is the City Council's purpose and intent to establish a program of user charges for stormwater management services to be charged to all property within the City of Palm Coast, whether developed or vacant, that contributes stormwater runoff to and benefits from the City's stormwater management facilities and systems. It is the intent of the City Council to accomplish and adequately maintain the functions of such stormwater utility at levels of service required by the City and law. These functions include, but are not limited to, administration, maintenance, planning, design, construction, regulation, surveying, operation, and inspection as they relate to stormwater management facilities and systems of the City. 
(b)  Legislative findings. In addition to the legislative findings contained in the "whereas" recitals of Ordinance No. 2011-1, the City Council finds that all land, whether developed or vacant, contribute stormwater runoff to, or benefit from, the City's stormwater management facilities and systems, unless otherwise demonstrated pursuant to the provisions of this division. Such benefits include, but are not limited to, flood control and protection and environmental protection. It is also hereby found that vacant properties contribute stormwater runoff to, or benefit from, the City's stormwater management facilities and systems at a level that is less than the level associated with developed properties. Further, the City Council hereby adopts the technical findings and recommendations contained in the Jones Edmunds Final Report, dated February 2011, and said findings and recommendations shall be used as a guide in interpreting and applying the provisions of this division. Additionally, the methodology and statistical estimates contained in the Jones Edmunds Final Report that are used to calculate the fees and charges required under this division are a reasonable and equitable means to assess the cost of the City's stormwater services which are provided to the beneficiaries of the City's stormwater management facilities and systems. 
(Ord. No. 2011-1, § 1, 3-1-11)  
Sec. 24-132. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings as hereinafter defined when used in this division: 
City means the City of Palm Coast, Florida. 
City Manager means the City Manager of Palm Coast or designee. 
Drainage area means the watershed (acreage) contributing surface water runoff to the City's stormwater management facilities or systems. 
Dwelling unit means a living unit containing independent facilities for cooking, bathing and sleeping, or each independent living unit in a building containing more than one living unit for which a certificate of occupancy has been issued regardless of whether the unit(s) is actually occupied. 
Equivalent resident unit (ERU) means the basic unit for the computation of stormwater service charges/rates representing the average impervious and pervious area for all single-family residential properties in the City which unit shall be established from time to time in stormwater management services charges/fees resolutions adopted by the City Council at a public meeting. Properties other than single-family residential properties shall be assessed as multiples of the basic ERU. 
Impervious area means any part of any parcel of land that has an impermeable cover caused to be erected or constructed by the action of persons and those hard surfaced areas which prevent or retard the entry of water into the soil mantle, as it entered under natural conditions prior to development activity and/or which cause water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at an increased rate of flow from that present under natural conditions prior to development activity. Such areas include, but are not limited to, buildings, structures, parking lots, driveways, patios, decks, walkways, rooftops, sidewalks, storage areas, athletic courts and any and all other surfaces which similarly impact the natural infiltration or runoff pattern which existed prior to development activity. 
Multifamily residential properties means and includes all duplex, triplex, quadraplex, condominium, trailers, apartment and other lots or parcels of real property containing more than one dwelling unit. Common areas associated with such properties shall be included and apportioned in the charges to the multifamily units on such properties. 
Nonresidential/commercial properties means and includes all property zoned or used for commercial, industrial, retail, governmental, or nonresidential purposes and shall include all real property in the City not classified as single-family residential properties or multifamily residential properties as defined in this division. 
Receiving water means those creeks, streams, rivers, lakes, sinkholes and other bodies of water into which surface waters are directed, either naturally or in manmade ditches, canals, pipes or open systems or facilities. 
Single-family residential properties means and includes all properties zoned or used for single-family detached housing units including, but not limited to, a mobile home on a separate lot or parcel of real property. 
Stormwater detention basin means a stormwater facility, either natural or manmade, that collects and contains stormwater runoff and allows the release of the stormwater through a structure or facility that is designed to control the rate of the release of the stormwater, as acknowledged by the City Manager or designee. 
Stormwater detention/retention basin means a stormwater facility, either natural or manmade, that performs a combination of the functions of both a stormwater detention basin and a retention basin, as acknowledged by the City Manager or designee. 
Stormwater management facilities or systems means and includes all natural and manmade improvements, structures, facilities, construction and other elements, of whatsoever type or nature, used to convey stormwater from the first point of impact with a surface feature to a suitable receiving water internal or external to the boundaries of the City. Stormwater management facilities or systems include, but are not limited to, roads with drainage systems or facilities, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, pipes, channels of whatsoever type or nature, storm drains, streams, ditches, wetlands, sinkholes, detention/retention basins, ponds of whatsoever type or nature, and other stormwater conveyance, retention, detention or treatment facilities by whatsoever name or type or nature. 
Stormwater retention basin means a stormwater facility, either natural or manmade, that collects and contains stormwater runoff and only allows the release of the stormwater runoff by one or more of the following means: evapotranspiration, percolation into the natural ground and/or percolation into a manmade filtration system that may convey the stormwater runoff to a stormwater management facility or system, as acknowledged by the City Manager or designee. 
Stormwater service area shall mean the area or areas within the City of Palm Coast City limits that contributes stormwater, directly or indirectly, to the stormwater management facilities or systems maintained by the City. 
Vacant means land that is in a natural vegetated state, or land that has been cleared of such vegetation with no impervious area, excluding vacant single-family residential property. 
Vacant non-clup areas shall mean the vacant land that was included in the original ITT Palm Coast Comprehensive Land Use Plan Volume 3, Section 4, b and c, titled "A Comprehensive Water Management Plan for Community Wide Drainage for Palm Coast, Module One Program," as prepared by Sverdrup & Parcel and Associates, Inc., dated May 1977, as shown in figures 2 (land use) for north and south of SR-100 and designated as undeveloped. 
(Ord. No. 2011-1, § 1, 3-1-11)  
Sec. 24-133. - Establish stormwater management utility. 
The City hereby establishes a stormwater management utility in accordance with F.S. § 403.0893, and the City's constitutional home rule authority. This utility shall be responsible for the construction and operation of the City's stormwater management facilities and systems within the stormwater service area in accordance with the level of service for such facilities established by the City and law (including as set forth in the City's Comprehensive Plan), and shall have equal status with the other utility services provided by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2011-1, § 1, 3-1-11)  
Sec. 24-134. - Governing board. 
The City Council shall serve as the Governing Board of the Stormwater Management Utility. 
(Ord. No. 2011-1, § 1, 3-1-11)  
Sec. 24-135. - Duties and powers of Governing Board (City Council) and City Manager. 
(a)  City Council powers. The City Council shall have all powers, consistent with the City Charter and state law, necessary for the exercise of its responsibility for drainage from all properties within the City including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Preparation of plans for improvements and betterments to the stormwater management facilities or systems. 
(2)  Construction of improvements and betterments to the stormwater management facilities or systems. 
(3)  Promulgation of regulations for the use of the stormwater management facilities or systems including, but not limited to, provisions for enforcement of such regulations. 
(4)  Review and approval of all new development permits within the City for compliance with stormwater management regulations included in present City ordinances or ordinances later adopted. 
(5)  Performance of maintenance and major and minor improvements to the stormwater management facilities or systems. 
(6)  Establishment of service charges for the City's stormwater management facilities or systems. 
(7)  Evaluation of water quality concerns for discharges to the stormwater management facilities or systems. 
(8)  Performance of all normal utility functions to include, but not be limited to, the planning, development, funding, construction, operation and maintenance of the City's stormwater management facilities or systems including, but not limited to, the hiring of staff, the selection of consultants, the entering into contracts for services and construction of facilities, and the handling of the purchase, lease, sale, or other rights to property for the stormwater management system. 
(9)  Issuance of revenue bonds for the purpose of performing those duties as described herein consistent with state law and the City Charter. 
(b)  Administrative and executive powers. In accordance with the Charter, and subject to the policies established by the City Council, the City Council shall delegate any administrative or executive powers that it may have under the provisions of this division to the City Manager. The City Manager may delegate any of his or her powers under the provisions of this division to his or her designee. 
(c)  Administrative procedures. The City Manager shall adopt administrative procedures to implement the provisions of this division, and said procedures shall not conflict with the provisions of this division. 
(d)  Adjustments, credits, or waivers based on improper calculations. Any person or entity owning property which is subject to stormwater utility fees imposed under this division may appeal the proper imposition or calculation of such fee under the terms of this division, or implementing resolution, by filing a written request for review with the Director of Engineering and Stormwater. Said request shall explain in detail the basis for appeal including a calculation error or the property is entitled to an adjustment, credit, or waiver based on the provisions set forth in subsection (f) of this section. 
(e)  Technical adjustments, credits, or waivers. A technical adjustment, credit, or waiver of up to 100 percent of the imposed fee shall be granted by the Director of Engineering and Stormwater if the subject property does not contribute stormwater runoff to or benefit from the City's stormwater management facilities and systems in any respect whatsoever. A full or partial mitigation adjustment, credit or waiver may be granted for: 
(1)  Permitted non-City stormwater facilities; 
(2)  Properties outside the stormwater service area; 
(3)  Properties utilized as part of the community-wide drainage system; 
(4)  Properties with extra onsite storage; 
(5)  Reduced service; and 
(6)  Original vacant non-clup areas. 
In making a determination for a technical mitigation adjustment, credit or waiver, the Director of Engineering and Stormwater shall apply the technical data and standards set forth in Jones Edmunds' Final Report, dated January 2011, which a copy is on file with the City Clerk. Upon the effective date of Ordinance No. 2011-1 ("effective date"), the Director of Engineering and Stormwater shall calculate and determine, in writing, the mitigation adjustment, credit or waiver for all eligible properties using publicly available information prior to invoicing the eligible properties the fees authorized under this division. A copy of the written determination shall be provided to the owners of the eligible properties. Said determination may be appealed to the City Manager under the same appeal procedures under subsection (g) of this section. In addition, a person or entity may initiate a request for a technical mitigation adjustment, credit or waiver with the Director of Engineering and Stormwater by filing an appeal of the fee imposed by the City. 
(f)  Historical technical adjustments, credits, or waivers. Upon the effective date of Ordinance No. 2011-1 ("effective date"), a person or entity may submit a completed application for a historical adjustment, credit, or waiver for City stormwater fees that were either paid, or charged but not yet paid, from April 8, 2008 of the effective date. The application shall be required to be completed and filed with the Director of Engineering and Stormwater within six months of the effective date ("application deadline"). Upon expiration of the application deadline, no further application will be accepted by the City. Completed applications that are filed under this subsection (f) shall be processed as an appeal pursuant to the applicable requirements of subsection (e), except, however, any adjustment, credit, or waiver granted shall not only be prospective, but shall also be retroactive to April 8, 2008 to the extent said requirements are applicable. Retroactive adjustments, credits, or waivers shall either be credited on future City stormwater fee invoices or reimbursed to the person or entity filing the application. The City Manager is hereby authorized to determine a procedure under which retroactive credits or reimbursements are made by the City based on administrative and financial considerations related to the sound management of a stormwater utility adopted under this division. 
(g)  Procedure for adjustments, credits, or waivers. The Director of Engineering and Stormwater shall make a written disposition of any request for an adjustment, credit, or waiver under this division and send a copy by mail to the person or entity making the request. If the request is filed within ninety (90) days of the first imposition or adjustment of such fee, any adjustment, credit, or waiver by the Director of Engineering and Stormwater shall be retroactive. Otherwise, such adjustment, waiver, or credit shall be prospective only. An aggrieved party may appeal the Director of Engineering and Stormwater's disposition to the City Manager by filing a written notice of appeal with the Office of the City Manager within 15 City business days after receipt of a copy of the Director of Engineering and Stormwater's determination. Failure to timely appeal the disposition made by the Director of Engineering and Stormwater shall constitute a waiver of any appellate right to challenge said disposition, and the decision of the Director of Engineering and Stormwater shall be final. The City Manager shall only review appeals filed in a timely manner and said review shall only be based on whether the Director of Engineering and Stormwater has properly interpreted and applied the terms of this division, and the City Manager shall otherwise have no power to waive, adjust, or credit a stormwater utility fee. The City Manager's determination of any appeal shall constitute the City's final decision on the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2011-1, § 1, 3-1-11)  
Sec. 24-136. - Authority for service charges. 
(a)  Authorization. The City Council is empowered by this division to establish, by adoption of a rate resolution, service charges (fees) for the City's stormwater management facilities or systems. Such service charges shall be based on the cost of providing stormwater management services to all properties within the City and shall, together with any other lawfully available and appropriated revenues, be sufficient to fund the level of service for stormwater management facilities established in the City's comprehensive plan. Service charges may be different for properties within the City and may be different for properties receiving different classes of service under this division. 
(b)  Rates for stormwater management services/charges/fees. Each rate resolution adopted by the City Council shall impose monthly service or other charges (fees) on all owners of real property in the City (not otherwise exempted by law or by this division) which contribute in any respect stormwater runoff to or benefit from the City's stormwater management facilities or systems. The rate resolution shall also provide for an effective date on which the charges shall commence being imposed. Monthly service charges shall be established for each of the following billing classifications: 
(1)  Single-family residential properties. Each single-family residential property with one dwelling unit shall be considered one ERU for billing purposes. 
(2)  Vacant single-family residential property. Each vacant single-family residential property shall be assessed and charged based on the following assignments of ERUs: 
a.  Property less than or equal to one acre = seventy-four one hundredths (0.74) ERUs. 
b.  Property greater than one acre = Two and ninety-six one hundredths (2.96) ERUs. 
(3)  Multifamily residential properties. All multifamily properties with multiple dwelling units shall be assessed and charged based on the following assignment of ERUs: 
a.  Duplex units = Three-fourths (0.75) ERUs per dwelling unit. 
b.  Triplex units = Three-fourths (0.75) ERUs per dwelling unit. 
c.  Quadraplex units = Three-fourths (0.75) ERUs per dwelling unit. 
d.  All other multifamily residential properties shall be charged based upon a calculation of ERUs derived from the basis of the amount of impervious area and pervious area on the properties which calculation shall be conducted in accordance with the process for non-residential/commercial property. 
(4)  Nonresidential/commercial property. Nonresidential/commercial property shall be assessed and charged on the basis of the impervious area and pervious area on the parcel relative to ERU, as defined in this division by: 
a.  One acre of impervious area = Six and two one hundredths (6.02) ERUs. 
b.  One acre of pervious area = Two and ninety-six one hundredths (2.96) ERUs. 
(5)  Other vacant property. All vacant property not assigned to a specific billing classification under this subsection (b) shall be two and ninety-six one hundredths (2.96) ERUs per one acre. 
(6)  Other impervious areas. All impervious areas (excluding public rights-of-way) not assigned to a specific billing classification under this subsection (b) shall be six and two one hundredths (6.02) ERUs per one acre. 
(7)  Application to all real property. Except as otherwise exempted by law or by this division, service charges shall apply to all real property within the City using or benefiting from the City's stormwater management facilities or systems including, but not limited to, those parcels of real property classified as nonprofit or tax-exempt for ad valorem tax purposes. Service charges shall apply to all governmentally owned real property including, but not limited to, properties of the City including, but not limited to, City-owned buildings, parks and other properties, but excluding property that is used as part of the City's stormwater management facilities or systems and serving a public purpose in its entirety. 
(c)  Billing. The service charges authorized and established by this division shall be billed in conjunction with the real property owner's or real property user's monthly water and/or wastewater bill. However, in the case of vacant property, an annual bill for the stormwater fees only shall be sent separately, in advance, to the property owner. Such stormwater charges billed on the monthly water and/or wastewater bill shall be due and payable as a single combined utility charge at the same time and in the same manner and subject to the same penalties as other City utility fees, and the withholding or failure to pay any part of the combined utility charge shall be subject to such penalties. Condominium or rental apartments and commercial properties shall be billed as property of the condominium association or landowner, respectively, rather than individual occupants. In the event the owner of a parcel of real property is not a customer obtaining City utility service(s), a new account shall be established and the owner of that real property shall be billed separately for the stormwater management service charges. The City Manager or designee may establish a new account for stormwater utility billing purposes for a property owner or a property user that does not also have a valid City water or wastewater utility account. The owner of every building, premise, lot, property, or dwelling unit shall be obligated to pay the fee for all services provided and billed hereunder. In the case that a tenant in possession of any premises or buildings shall pay such stormwater charges, the payment shall relieve the landowner from the obligation and lien; but the City shall not be required to look to any person other than the landowner for the payment of such charges. No changes of ownership or occupation of the premises shall affect the application of this subsection, and the failure of any purchaser to learn that the purchased property is subject to a lien shall in no way affect responsibility of the purchaser for such payment. 
(Ord. No. 2011-1, § 1, 3-1-11)  
Sec. 24-137. - Prohibited acts/obligations and duties. 
The prohibitions set forth in article VI of this chapter relating to discharges into waters of the City shall apply to discharges into the City's stormwater management facilities or systems. The City Council may establish, by rate resolution, a surcharge for any stormwater generated on private property which contributes inordinately to the total maximum daily load of any impaired water body. 
(Ord. No. 2011-1, § 1, 3-1-11)  
Sec. 24-138. - Delinquent charges; penalties. 
(a)  If any bill for current monthly or annual charges remains due and unpaid 20 days from the utility bill date, a delinquent (late) fee shall be charged to the customer account, in accordance with the provisions of a fee resolution adopted by the City. 
(b)  All service charges imposed pursuant to this division shall be a lien upon the property with which such charge is associated from the date said charge becomes due until the date such charge is finally paid. All liens filed pursuant to this section shall be subject to the City of Palm Coast Lien Ordinance set forth in section 43-76 et seq. 
(c)  The provisions of this division may be enforced by any and all lawful means by the City pursuant to all codes and ordinances duly adopted by the City Council or as may otherwise be available to the City pursuant to state law and nothing contained in this division shall prohibit the City from enforcing this division by other means set forth in the City's codes and ordinances, provided in the statutory law of the State of Florida, or otherwise available to the City. 
(d)  In accordance with the authority granted under F.S. § 403.0893(3), nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the City from using the non-ad valorem levy, collection, and enforcement method to collect any service charge imposed under this division. 
(e)  In the event the City must take any action against a person or entity to collect a service charge imposed by this division, the City shall be entitled to recover all court costs and reasonable attorneys' fees for such collection, through all appellate proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2011-1, § 1, 3-1-11)  
Sec. 24-139. - Financial accounts. 
(a)  The City Council shall maintain stormwater financial accounts into which all revenues from stormwater service charges, grants, or other funding sources shall be deposited and from which all expenditures related to the City's stormwater management utility shall be paid. Accounting and reporting procedures shall be consistent with state law and reported to the City Council by the City Manager or designee annually. 
(b)  Expenditures from the stormwater financial accounts for activities that are not directly or indirectly related to the City's stormwater management utility shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2011-1, § 1, 3-1-11)  
ARTICLE IV. - DRAINAGE 
 
Sec. 24-151. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "City of Palm Coast Drainage Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 1, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 24-153. - Intent. 
The intent of this article shall be to promote, protect and improve the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City. This article is for the purpose of reducing the effect of stormwater runoff from one lot to another and to provide for more positive drainage to outfall systems. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 1, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 24-154. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Drainage means the movement of stormwater from any point to a point lower in elevation. 
Driveway means an ingress/egress location from a public road to private property. 
Right-of-way means land in which the City owns the fee or has received a dedication for or has an easement devoted to, or required for, the use of a public road, the use of stormwater management, or any other public use. 
Road means and shall include streets, alleys, highways, sidewalks, bike paths, and any other ways open or unopened to travel by the public, including the road bed, right-of-way and all culverts, drains, ditches, inlets, embankments, bridges, retaining walls, guardrails or other appurtenances necessary for the maintenance of travel. 
Stormwater means water collected or collecting as a result of natural precipitation. 
Swale means a manmade conveyance facility which: 
(1)  Contains contiguous areas of flowing water following a rainfall event; 
(2)  Is planted with or has vegetation suitable for soil stabilization and prevention of erosion, stormwater treatment and nutrient uptake; and 
(3)  Is designed to take into account soil erosion, stormwater, soil percolation, slope, slope length and drainage area so as to prevent erosion and reduce pollutant concentration of any discharge. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 1, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 24-156. - Lot survey. 
(a)  Each owner or contractor of a building or facility shall illustrate the proposed building or facility elevation and the proposed finished elevation of the lot all along the lot lines and at the drainage facilities existing across the front and/or back of the lot. The elevations of the areas surrounding the lot for a distance of 15 feet or to the adjacent building are necessary to assure stormwater originating on the lot under consideration is properly cared for. The proposed directional flow of stormwater runoff shall be included on the illustration. The illustration shall be a part of the building permit application and submitted to the City Manager or designee for approval at the time that permit is applied for, and prior to lot clearing or grading activities. 
(b)  Following construction of any building or facility, prior to final inspection by the City Building Department, the owner or contractor shall provide a final survey of the property on which the building or facility is located, as well as the adjacent right-of-way. The final survey shall show all horizontal dimensions of the building or facility, setbacks from front, rear and side lot lines, a description of the type construction, ancillary buildings on the property, encroachments, easements and final grading (finished) elevations, as well as any other information necessary to give a complete physical inventory of the property and of the improvements constructed thereon. The final survey shall be signed and sealed by a professional land surveyor licensed to do business in the state. Grading elevations shall be shown along the lot lines at intervals of 20 feet and along the rear lot drainage system and the roadside swales at those same intervals. Invert elevations of pipes beneath driveways or driveway swales shall be shown as well as road elevations, both centerline and the edge adjacent to and/or opposite property corners. Elevations of drainage conveyance facilities with adjacent rights-of-way shall also be shown. The direction of stormwater runoff shall be shown on the final survey. 
(c)  The final survey shall be submitted to the City Manager or designee not less than two working days prior to the day the request for final inspection is made to the Building Official. If examination of the final survey and/or physical site examination by the City Manager or designee indicates stormwater drainage has not been properly provided for, then the owner or contractor shall correct deficiencies to provide for proper drainage. The drainage examination shall include movement of stormwater into the conveyance system and assurance that stormwater runoff onto adjacent lots has been considered and mitigated. 
(d)  No filling or grading will be permitted after the final survey except such grading as is necessary to rectify improper grading as indicated in subsection (c) above. 
(e)  Residential single-family buildings on lots one acre or more in size may be partially or totally exempt from the requirements for preliminary and final lot surveys if it can be clearly demonstrated, to the satisfaction of the City Manager or designee, that stormwater runoff originating on the property will not adversely affect the property of others. All other requirements of this article shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 1, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 24-157. - Driveway culverts and swales. 
Culverts required to provide suitable drainage shall be sized and located horizontally and vertically as required by the City Manager or designee. The owner or contractor constructing a building or facility shall install the culvert and grade the swale along the roads abutting the property to the cross-section and slopes required to assure the best possible drainage. Elevations established for the finished swales shall be top of sod. The rights-of-way abutting the property, from road pavement to right-of-way line, shall be sodded with the same sod as is used on the finished lot, or as may be otherwise approved by the City Manager or designee. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 1, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 24-158. - Lot grading. 
The owner or contractor constructing the building or facility shall grade the lot so that stormwater that falls onto the building or facility and the lot itself shall not drain onto adjacent lots. Except where a viable drainage system exists which would allow stormwater runoff to be conveyed to an outfall structure, all lot drainage shall be directed to the roadway swales. Ponding of stormwater on the lot or adjacent lots is not permitted, except where such ponding is a part of a stormwater system permitted or required for mitigation. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 1, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 24-159. - System maintenance. 
(a)  The drainage system of the permitted lot is an important part of the preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the community. Because each element of that system affects the system as a whole, no alteration of the drainage pattern shall be permitted, except by application to and approval from the City Manager or designee. The property owner, following issuance of a certificate of occupancy (CO), shall be responsible for maintaining the approved drainage pattern on the permitted lot and the area between the roadway and the right-of-way line. Such maintenance shall include, but is not necessarily limited to, mowing, prevention of erosion, and removal of obstructions to the flow of stormwater. 
(b)  Owners and contractors constructing a building or facility are responsible for maintaining swales, road surfaces, and adjoining properties. In case of damage to the public right-of-way or to private property, the damage must be corrected by the owner or contractor to the satisfaction of the City Manager or designee. 
(c)  Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent any revisions to the drainage on public rights-of-way by City forces whenever, in the sole opinion of the City, such revisions (or any maintenance efforts by the City) will provide for improvements to the overall stormwater management of the area. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 1, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 24-162. - Construction and protection of swales—Roadside. 
(a)  During any construction project, the owner, the contractor or their representative[s] shall consult with the City Manager or designee and cause a swale or roadside drainage ditch to be maintained as prescribed herein. All such stormwater conveyance systems shall be owned by the City if on the City right-of-way. Driveways shall be constructed as directed by the City Manager or designee. 
(b)  Following issuance of the certificate of occupancy, the owner shall be responsible for routine maintenance of the area between the road surface and the property line, including the swale. Such maintenance shall include mowing, prevention of erosion, and removal of obstacles affecting either flow of stormwater or public safety, as required. 
(c)  The owner and contractor shall maintain proper drainage within and through the property. No object shall be permitted in any swale which obstructs movement of water within the swale or percolation into the ground. The owner and contractor shall be responsible for removal of any such object. 
(d)  If, in the opinion of the City, the roadway adjacent to construction sites contains layers or clumps of dirt or mud or other debris on the road surface which may cause damage to the roadway or may result in a safety hazard, the City Manager or designee shall notify the contractor or the owner that the material must be removed. 
(e)  Chapter 42 of the City Code shall apply to all damage to the road, right-of-way, swale, and culvert by the contractor or others. 
(f)  The Building Department shall be primarily responsible for enforcing the above provisions. Such enforcement also shall be carried out by the City Manager or designee. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 1, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 24-163. - Same—Properties, swales and road surfaces adjoining construction site. 
(a)  Owners and contractors are responsible for protection of properties, swales, and road surfaces adjoining a construction site or within an area affected by equipment and activities associated with construction. 
(b)  Public agencies inspecting construction areas shall hold a contractor subject to the same limitations and responsibilities for activities on adjoining properties as on the permitted construction site. Failure to promptly repair damage to a swale or road surface shall be covered by chapter 42 of this Code and may, in addition, subject the contractor to a stop work order by the City Manager or designee. 
(c)  Damage to private land, public rights-of-way, or other lots shall be repaired prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. In case of damage to private property or to public rights-of-way, the damage must be corrected by the owner and contractor as directed by the City Manager or designee. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 1, 3-7-00)  
ARTICLE V. - WATER CONSERVATION POLICY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-15, §§ 3 and 4, adopted June 2, 2009, amended Art. V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. V, §§ 24-181—24-185, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 08-07, adopted May 20, 2008. 
 
Sec 24-181. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular include the plural. 
Address means the house number of a physical location of a specific property. This includes "rural route" numbers, but excludes post office box numbers. If a lot number in a mobile home park or similar community is used by the U.S. Postal Service to determine a delivery location, the lot number shall be the property's address. An "even numbered address" means an address ending in the numbers 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, or the letters A—M. An "odd numbered address" means an address ending in the numbers 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, or the letters N—Z. 
District means the St. Johns River Water Management District. 
Excess demand means the situation as declared by the City where infrastructure to process or deliver water to the City's water customers for landscape irrigation uses is not available to meet the demand of such uses, so as to require temporary reduction in water customer use within a particular area to protect the City's water supply infrastructure, or public health and safety from serious harm. 
Landscape irrigation means the outside watering of plants in a landscape such as shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, ground covers, plants, vines, gardens and other such flora that are situated in such diverse locations as residential areas, public, commercial, and industrial establishments, and public medians and rights-of-way. "Landscape irrigation" does not include agricultural crops, nursery plants, cemeteries, golf course greens, tees, fairways, primary roughs, and vegetation associated with recreational areas such as playgrounds, football, baseball and soccer fields. 
Micro-irrigation means the frequent application of small quantities of water on or below the soil surface as drops or tiny streams of spray through emitters or applicators placed along a water delivery line. Micro-irrigation includes a number of methods or concepts such as bubbler, drip, trickle, mist or micro-spray, and subsurface irrigation. 
Nonresidential landscape irrigation means the irrigation of landscape not included within the definition of "residential landscape irrigation," such as that associated with public, commercial and industrial property, including commercial or transient housing units, hotel and motel units, and public medians and rights-of-way. 
Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
Reclaimed water means the water that meets the current state Department of Environmental Protection standards for reuse after flowing out of any treatment plant or works. 
Residential landscape irrigation means the irrigation of landscape associated with any housing unit having sanitary and kitchen facilities designed to accommodate one or more residents, including multiple housing units and mobile homes. 
Water supply emergency means a situation that occurs when the City experiences a sudden and catastrophic loss of its water supply infrastructure. 
Water supply infrastructure means the water supply wells, treatment plants, storage tanks, and pumps and pipes comprising the water delivery system. 
(Ord. No. 09-15, § 3, 6-2-09)  
Sec. 24-182. - Declaration of excess demand, or water supply emergency. 
(a)  The City acknowledges that determinations of water shortage conditions within the jurisdictional boundaries of the St. Johns River Water Management District are solely within the purview and jurisdiction of the St. Johns River Water Management District. However, the City's delivery of processed water to its customers requires that its water supply infrastructure is functioning properly, and has the capacity to meet demand. 
(b)  The City Council may declare a situation of excess demand, or a water supply emergency, as described above and may limit the use of water supplied by the City to its water customers in order to protect the City's water supply infrastructure or the public health, safety and welfare. 
(c)  In the event the St. Johns River Water Management District declares a water shortage pursuant to Chapter 40C-21, Florida Administrative Code, the provisions of the District's water shortage order shall take precedence over the provisions of this article that are inconsistent with the water shortage order. At such time as any District water shortage order is rescinded, then all provisions of this article shall again become effective and enforceable. 
(Ord. No. 09-15, § 3, 6-2-09)  
Sec. 24-183. - Landscape irrigation schedules. 
(a)  When Daylight Savings Time is in effect, landscape irrigation shall occur only in accordance with the following irrigation schedule: 
(1)  Residential landscape irrigation at odd-numbered addresses or no address may occur only on Wednesday and Saturday and shall not occur between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.; 
(2)  Residential landscape irrigation at even-numbered addresses may occur only on Thursday and Sunday and shall not occur between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.; 
(3)  Nonresidential landscape irrigation, may occur only on Tuesday and Friday and shall not occur between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.; and 
(4)  No more than three-fourths-inch of water may be applied per irrigation zone on each day that irrigation occurs, and in no event shall irrigation occur for more than one hour per irrigation zone on each day that irrigation occurs. 
(b)  When Eastern Standard Time is in effect, landscape irrigation shall occur only in accordance the following irrigation schedule: 
(1)  Residential landscape irrigation at odd-numbered addresses or no address may occur only on Saturday and shall not occur between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.; 
(2)  Residential landscape irrigation at even-numbered addresses may occur only on Sunday and shall not occur between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.; 
(3)  Nonresidential landscape irrigation may occur only on Tuesday and shall not occur between 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.; and 
(4)  No more than three-fourths-inch of water may be applied per irrigation zone on each day that irrigation occurs, and in no event shall irrigation occur for more than one hour per irrigation zone on each day that irrigation occurs. 
(c)  All landscape irrigation shall be limited in amount to only that necessary to meet landscape needs. 
(Ord. No. 09-15, § 3, 6-2-09)  
Sec. 24-184 - Exceptions to landscape irrigation schedules. 
Landscape irrigation shall be subject to the following irrigation schedule exceptions: 
(1)  Irrigation using a micro-spray, micro-jet, drip or bubbler irrigation system is allowed anytime. 
(2)  Irrigation of new landscape is allowed at any time of day on any day for the initial 30 days and every other day for the next 30 days for a total of one 60-day period, provided that the irrigation is limited to the minimum amount of water necessary for such landscape establishment. 
(3)  Watering in of chemicals, including insecticides, pesticides, fertilizers, fungicides, and herbicides, when required by law, the manufacturer, or by best management practices, is allowed at any time of day on any day within 24 hours of application. Watering in of chemicals shall not exceed one-fourth-inch of water per application except as otherwise required by law, the manufacturer, or best management practices. 
(4)  Irrigation systems may be operated any time of day on any day for maintenance and repair purposes not to exceed 20 minutes per hour per zone. 
(5)  Irrigation using a hand-held hose equipped with an automatic shut-off nozzle is allowed at any time of day on any day. 
(6)  Discharge of water from a water-to-air conditioning unit or other water-dependent cooling system is not limited. 
(7)  The use of water from a reclaimed water system is allowed anytime. For the purpose of this paragraph, a reclaimed water system includes systems in which the primary source is reclaimed water, which may or may not be supplemented from another source during peak demand periods. 
(8)  The use of recycled water from wet detention treatment ponds for irrigation is allowed anytime provided the ponds are not augmented from any ground or off-site surface water, or public supply sources. 
Excess Demand and Water Supply Emergencies. 
(1)  Excess Demand Level One: When excess demand is determined, water pressure may be lowered, and the City's water supply customers shall only irrigate between the hours of 12:00 Midnight and 10:00 a.m. 
(2)  Excess Demand Level Two: When severe excess demand is determined, water pressure may be further lowered, and the 
City's water supply customers shall only irrigate between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(3)  Water Supply Emergency: When a water supply emergency is determined, all use of the City's water supply by the City's water supply customers beyond that necessary for maintenance of health and safety is prohibited in the affected area and no irrigation by the City's water supply customers is permitted. 
(Ord. No. 09-15, § 3, 6-2-09)  
Sec. 24-185. - Variances from specific day of the week limitations or from excess demand/water supply emergency provisions. 
The City Council may grant variances to the Landscape Irrigation Schedule and the Excess Demand/Water Supply Emergency provisions set forth above in Sections 24-183 and 24-184, respectively, under the following conditions: 
(1)  A variance from the specific landscape irrigation days or day set forth in Section 24-183 may be granted if strict application of the scheduled days or day would lead to unreasonable or unfair results in particular instances, provided that the applicant demonstrates with particularity that compliance with the schedule of days or day for landscape irrigation will result in a substantial economic, health or other hardship on the applicant requesting the variance or those served by the applicant. Where a contiguous property is divided into different zones, a variance may be granted hereunder so that each zone may be irrigated on different days or day than other zones of the property. However, in no event shall a variance allow a single zone to be irrigated more than two days per week during Daylight Savings Time or more than one day per week during Eastern Standard Time. 
(2)  When specified hours of customer irrigation during an Excess Demand or Water Supply Emergency would result in undue hardship for a specific customer. 
(3)  All users or customers requesting a variance as set forth above shall file with the City Manager a petition for variance, but must conform to the greatest possible extent to the provisions of this article until such variance is granted. 
(4)  A petition for variance shall be in writing and contain, at a minimum, the following: 
a.  The petitioner's name and address. 
b.  A detailed statement of the facts which the petitioner believes demonstrates that the request qualifies for variance. 
c.  A description of the variance desired. 
d.  The period of time for which the variance is sought, including the reasons and facts in support thereof. 
e.  Other relevant information the petitioner believes supports his/her petition for variance. 
(5)  Variances granted under the provisions of this Section shall be issued in writing. 
(Ord. No. 09-15, § 3, 6-2-09)  
Sec. 24-186. - Additional requirement. 
Any person who irrigates landscape with an automatic lawn sprinkler system installed after May 1, 1991, shall install, maintain and operate a rain sensor device or switch that overrides the irrigation system when adequate rainfall has occurred. 
When reclaimed water is available, the use of a private irrigation well for landscape irrigation is not authorized under subsection 40C-2.042(2), F.A.C. Reclaimed water is deemed available when reclaimed water is provided by a utility through a point of connection. 
(Ord. No. 09-15, § 4, 6-2-09)  
Sec. 24-187. - Application of article. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to each person located within the City of Palm Coast. 
(Ord. No. 09-15, § 4, 6-2-09)  
Sec. 24-188. - Enforcement officials. 
Law enforcement officials having jurisdiction in the area governed by this article are hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this article. In addition, the City Manager may also delegate enforcement responsibility for this article to various departments of the City of Palm Coast government. 
(Ord. No. 09-15, § 4, 6-2-09)  
Sec. 24-189. - Penalties. 
Any person found guilty of a violation of any provision of this article, or any lawful order of the City Council, or City Manager or his/her duly authorized representative, shall be punished by a maximum $500.00 fine or 60 days imprisonment, or by both a fine and imprisonment. The City may also enforce this article by any means available under the provisions of controlling law and may seek any available legal remedy. 
(Ord. No. 09-15, § 4, 6-2-09)  
ARTICLE VI. - PROHIBITION OF DISCHARGES 
 
Sec. 24-203. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)  It is the intent and purpose of the City Council of the City of Palm Coast to prohibit activities that result in the depositing (e.g., illicit discharging) into the waters of the City of any hazardous material, liquid or pollutant that by itself, or in combination with other activities or substances, would impair the environmental integrity of a body of water or bodies of water or may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment; or impair or adversely impact the recreational use or other public use of a body of water located within the City, following the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.) and Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems Rules (F.A.C. ch. 62-624 pursuant to the authority of F.S. § 403.0885) as guidelines. 
(b)  It is not the intent of the City Council of the City of Palm Coast to prohibit lawfully permitted activities for which a valid and current permit has been issued by an agency of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  It is the intent of the City Council of the City of Palm Coast to ensure that use of docks and related facilities or structures located on or along the Waters of the City occurs in a manner that is conducive to the public interest, which protects the environment and natural resources and is otherwise in the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 04-01, § 1, 2-3-04; Ord. No. 2018-25 , § 3, 11-6-18)  
Sec. 24-204. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings as hereinafter defined when used in this article: 
(a)  Best Management Practices means and includes, but is not limited to, scheduled activities, prohibitions, practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, treatment requirements, operating procedures, design specifications, and other management practices that are generally accepted in the field that are intended to prevent or reduce pollutants from entering the City stormwater system or being discharged from the City stormwater system. 
(b)  Clean Water Act or CWA means 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., as amended. 
(c)  Construction and demolition debris means discarded materials generally considered to be not water-soluble and nonhazardous in nature, including, but not limited to. steel, glass, brick, concrete, asphalt roofing material, pipe, gypsum wallboard, and lumber, from the construction or destruction of a structure as part of a construction or demolition project or from the renovation of a structure, and includes rocks, soils, tree remains, trees, and other vegetative matter that normally results from land clearing or land development operations for a construction project. including such debris from construction of structures at a site remote from the construction or demolition project site. Mixing of construction and demolition debris with other types of solid waste will cause the resulting mixture to be classified as other than construction and demolition debris. The term also includes: 
(1)  Clean cardboard, paper, plastic, wood, and metal scraps from a construction project; 
(2)  Except as provided in F.S. 403.707(9) (j), yard trash and unpainted, non-treated wood scraps and wood pallets from sources other than construction or demolition projects; 
(3)  Scrap from manufacturing facilities which is the type of material generally used in construction projects and which would meet the definition of construction and demolition debris if it were generated as part of a construction or demolition project. This includes debris from the construction of manufactured homes and scrap shingles, wallboard, siding, concrete and similar materials from industrial or commercial facilities. 
(d)  Garbage means any waste accumulation of animal, fruit, or vegetable matter used or intended for food or that accompanies the preparation, use, cooking, processing, handling or storage of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables or any other matter which is subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction and the generation of offensive and noxious gases or odors. 
(e)  Hazardous materials means any material including, but not limited to, any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
(f)  Hazardous waste . means any solid waste, or a combination of solid wastes, which, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, may cause, or significantly contribute to, an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness or may pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly transported, disposed of, stored, treated or otherwise managed. The term does not include human remains that are disposed of by persons licensed under F.S. ch. 497. 
(g)  Illicit connection means a point source discharge to the City's stormwater system or to waters of the United States, which is not composed entirely of stormwater or which is not authorized by a permit. 
(h)  Illicit discharge means any discharge to the City's stormwater system or to waters of the United States which is not composed entirely of stormwater, unless exempted pursuant to this regulation or an NPDES permit. 
(i)  Liquid means any and all types of liquids except rainwater. 
(j)  Litter means all waste and discarded materials, including but not limited to, glass, cans, scrap metal, paper, plastic, rubber, garbage, building materials, disposable packages or containers, chemicals, or deleterious materials not properly disposed. 
(k)  Litter receptacle means a container with a capacity of not less than ten gallons, constructed and placed for use as a depository for litter. 
(l)  Material means and includes, but is not limited to, dirt, bricks, grass clippings, lumber, trash, yard debris or wood. 
(m)  Person means a natural person or individual or any firm, corporation, association, club, society or other organization. 
(n)  Point source means any discernible and confined conveyance including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, conduit, well, container, rolling stocks, concentrated animal feeding operation, vessel, or other floating craft from which pollutants are discharged. This term does not include return flows from irrigated agriculture. 
(o)  Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution which may include, but is not limited to, petroleum products, including, but not limited to, oil, gasoline, and grease, solid waste, dredged soil, refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, debris, paints, varnishes, steam cleaning waste, pesticides, herbicides, or fertilizers, degreasers. solvents; hazardous substances and wastes, dissolved and particulate metals, sanitary sewage, filter backwash, sewage sludge, fecal coliform and pathogens, wastewater, radioactive materials (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954. as amended. 42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), chemically treated cooling water, chemical wastes, incinerator residue, antifreeze and other automotive products, lawn clippings, leaves, branches, etc., animal carcasses and wastes, biological materials, munitions, heat, wrecked or damaged equipment, rock, sand and industrial, (excepting the county's discharges), recreational vehicle waters, dyes, noxious or offensive matter, construction materials, any liquids in quantity or quality which are capable of causing a violation of the City's NPDES stormwater permit; and solids in such quantities or of such size capable of causing interference or obstruction to the flow in the City's stormwater system (MS4). Not excluding other materials which the City Manager or designee, federal or state regulatory agencies may deem appropriate to be included. 
(p)  Waters of the City means lakes, ponds, impoundments, the Intracoastal Waterway, streams, or any other body of water or waterway, or any tributary to said bodies of water or waterways, located within the City Limits of the City of Palm Coast or abutting the City Limits of the City of Palm Coast. 
(q)  Water or Waters in the State means any and all water on or beneath the surface of the ground or in the atmosphere, including natural or artificial watercourses, lakes, ponds, or diffused surface water and water percolating, standing, or flowing beneath the surface of the ground, as well as all coastal waters within the jurisdiction of the state. [F.S. § 373.019(22)] 
(r)  Wetland means those areas inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils. Soils present in wetlands generally are classified as hydric or alluvial or possess characteristics that are associated with reducing soil conditions. The prevalent vegetation in wetlands generally consists of facultative or obligate hydrophytic macrophytes that are typically adapted to areas having soil conditions described above. These species, due to morphological, physiological or reproductive adaptations, have the ability to grow, reproduce or persist in aquatic environments or anaerobic soil conditions. Florida wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bayheads, bogs, cypress domes and strands, sloughs, wet prairies, riverine swamps and marshes, hydric seepage slopes, tidal marshes, mangrove swamps and other similar areas. Florida wetlands generally do not include longleaf or slash pine flatwoods with an understory dominated by saw palmetto. The landward extent of wetlands is delineated pursuant to Sections 62-340.100 through 62.340.550, FAC as ratified by F.S. § 373.4211 (Subsection 40C-4.021(30), FAC). 
(Ord. No. 04-01, § 2, 2-3-04; Ord. No. 2018-25 , § 3, 11-6-18)  
Sec. 24-205. - Prohibited acts/obligations and duties. 
(a)  No discharge to the City's stormwater system ("MS4") shall be permitted to impair the operation of the MS4 or contribute to the failure of the MS4 to meet any local, state, or federal requirements, including, but not limited to, NPDES permits. 
(b)  Any person determined by the City to be responsible for a discharge contributing to the failure of the City's MS4 to comply with the provisions and conditions of an NPDES permit shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall provide corrective measures as determined necessary by the City Manager, or designee, and shall be responsible for fines and damages as indicated in subsection 1 below. 
(c)  Prohibition of illicit discharges and illicit connections : 
(1)  Illicit discharges and illicit connections to the City's MS4 are prohibited. 
(2)  Failure to report a connection to the City's MS4 or to waters of the United States from industrial activities, commercial entities, or construction activities constitutes an illicit connection. 
(3)  Failure to report to the City a discharge to the City's MS4 or to waters of the United States from industrial activities, commercial entities, or construction activities constitutes an illicit discharge. 
(4)  Any discharge to the City's MS4 or to waters of the United States which is in violation of federal, state, or local permits or regulations constitutes an illicit discharge. 
(5)  Persons responsible for illicit discharges or illicit connections shall immediately cease the illicit discharge or illicit connection, and obtain appropriate approvals from applicable regulatory agencies prior to resuming the discharge or connection. 
(d)  Inspection and Monitoring for Compliance. City personnel shall be granted access for inspection of facilities discharging or suspected of discharging to the City's MS4 or waters of the United States in order to effectuate the provisions of this chapter and to investigate violations or potential violations of any of the terms herein. All structures and processes which allow discharges to the City's MS4, as well as records concerning them, shall be made accessible to the City's personnel for this purpose. 
(e)  Maintenance of Structures. Structural control and other BMPs used for controlling the discharge of pollutants to the City's MS4 or to waters of the United States, shall be operated and maintained so as to function in accordance with permitted design and performance criteria and in compliance with federal, state, or local permit conditions and regulations. 
(f)  Exemptions. Discharges from the following activities shall not be considered an illicit discharge or illicit connection, unless such activities cause, or significantly contribute to, the impairment of the use of the City's MS4 or the violation of the conditions of the City's NPDES permit. The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this article: 
(1)  Water line flushing; 
(2)  Flushing of reclaimed water lines; 
(3)  Street cleaning; 
(4)  Sidewalk/building power washing (that does not utilize chemicals, detergents, etc.); 
(5)  Construction dust control; 
(6)  Landscape irrigation; 
(7)  Diverted stream flows or lake waters; 
(8)  Foundation, footing, and roof drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems); 
(9)  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined in 40 CFR 35.2005(20)); 
(10)  Discharges from potable water sources; 
(11)  Air conditioning condensate or cooling water; 
(12)  Springs; 
(13)  Lawn watering; 
(14)  Individual residential car washing; 
(15)  Flows from riparian habitat, surface waters, and wetlands; 
(16)  Discharges or flow from emergency firefighting activities and emergency response activities done in accordance with adopted spill response/action plan; 
(17)  Fertilizers and pesticides applied for normal lawn treatment and maintenance; 
(18)  Discharges specified in writing by the authorized federal, State, or other applicable enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety; and 
(19)  The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) or Industrial Wastewater treatment (IWWT) permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), or Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP) provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval or all necessary permits have been granted for any discharge into waters of the City. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drain, deposit, place or otherwise discharge pollutants into any stormwater system within the City, or to cause or permit to be drained, deposited, placed or otherwise discharged into such stormwater systems, any organic or inorganic matter which causes pollution, pursuant to the water quality standards established by all applicable regulatory agencies. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful to wash any public or private streets, buildings, sidewalks or parking areas, unless all visible debris and sediments have been removed prior to washing. If the removal of the debris and sediments is not feasible, as determined by the Land Use Administrator, then the street, building, sidewalk or parking area may only be washed with the City Engineer's written approval, which may include requirements to clean the affected drainage pipelines or provide treatment of wastewater to prevent downstream pollution. 
(i)  It is unlawful for a person in charge of or occupying a vessel docked at or moored to land, docks, piers or wharfs abutting waters of the City to fail to observe the applicable health and sanitary laws, rules and regulations relating to such activities and waters which prohibit acts contrary to the public health, safety, morals or welfare. 
(j)  The City shall take all appropriate actions relating to vessels that are abandoned in Waters of the City and shall coordinate its activities with the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission in accordance with the provisions of state law. 
(k)  It is the obligation and duty of all persons to utilize Best Management Practices in conducting activities abutting, on or proximate to the Waters of the City and it is unlawful for a person to fail to use Best Management Practices as required. 
(l)  Construction site refuse, solid waste, and litter. 
(1)  Owner, agent, and contractor shall not permit the accumulation of litter before, during or after completion of any construction or demolition project. 
(2)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent and contractor to provide litter receptacles and prevent scattering of litter on a daily basis. All litter shall be removed from construction sites not less than once a week. 
(3)  No person shall place any refuse, recyclable materials, trash, garbage cans or trash bags on, upon or over any storm drain, or so close thereto as to be drawn by the elements into a storm drain, which would result in or tend to cause a blockage of any part of such storm drainage system. 
(4)  It shall be the responsibility of owners or agents to keep areas free of garbage, trash, etc. The owners, agents, tenants or lessees of all property, whether improved or unimproved, including residential homes, apartment units, and businesses, shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of this chapter. The owners, agents, tenants or lessees shall be severally and jointly responsible for keeping the following areas free from garbage, solid waste, recyclable materials, and refuse at all times, exclusive of those periods immediately prior to collection, such areas to include the entire premises as well as the roadway, swale, and easement adjoining the property. 
(5)  Builders, building contractors, construction tradesmen, and homeowners shall be responsible for removing all excavation, construction and demolition wastes emanating from their work, and shall use vehicles designed or outfitted so as to prevent the wastes carried therein from being blown, dropped, or spilled from such vehicles. 
(m)  (1) Any persons convicted of violating any of the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred and no/100 dollars ($500.00) plus costs of prosecution or by imprisonment for not more than sixty days, or by both fine and costs and imprisonment in the discretion of the Court. 
(2)  The provisions of this section may be enforced by any and all lawful means by the City pursuant to all codes and ordinances duly adopted by the City Council or as may otherwise be available to the City pursuant to State law, and nothing in this Code prohibits the City from enforcing this section by other means set forth in the City's codes and ordinances, provided in the statutory law of the State of Florida, or otherwise available to the City. 
(Ord. No. 04-01, § 3, 2-3-04; Ord. No. 2018-25 , § 3, 11-6-18)  
ARTICLE VII. - ABANDONED OR DERELICT VESSELS 
 
Sec. 24-251. - Intent. 
(a)  It is the intent of the City Council of the City of Palm Coast to provide for the abatement, as necessary, of abandoned unattended or derelict vessels on the waters of the City and to promote the health, safety and welfare of the general public and the citizens of the City. It is further the intent of the City Council to protect the quality of water and other natural resources of the City. The City Council declares that the abandonment or the improper disposal of abandoned unattended or derelict vessels constitutes a public nuisance. 
(b)  It is not the intent of this article to, in any way, deviate from the provisions of Chapters 327 or 328, or Sections 376.15, 705.103 or Section 823.11, Florida Statutes, relating to derelict vessels, to restrict any action on behalf of the State of Florida or to delegate additional authority to the City of Palm Coast regarding derelict vessels other than as specifically set forth herein. It is the intent of the this article to further the policy of the State of Florida set forth in Article II, Section 7 of the Constitution of the State of Florida relating to natural resources and scenic beauty which provides, in pertinent part, that "it shall be the policy of the state to conserve and protect its natural resources and scenic beauty. Adequate provision shall be made by law for the abatement of air and water pollution and of excessive and unnecessary noise and for the conservation and protection of natural resources." 
(c)  It is the intent of this article to supplement existing regulations of abandoned and derelict watercraft found in section 4-16-08 of the City's Unified Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 09-10, § 2, 4-21-09)  
Sec. 24-252. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Abandoned unattended vessel means any unattended vessel in or on the waters of the City (1) which is adrift; (2) that is found in a badly deteriorated condition, or is taking on water, or is sinking or partially sunk, or sunk; (3) that is causing damage to private or public property; (4) that is releasing contaminants or chemicals into water; (5) that is or was on fire; (6) that is a menace to navigation; or (7) that is unattended for a period greater than 72 hours. 
City means the City of Palm Coast, Florida. 
City Manager means the Palm Coast City Manager or designee. 
Derelict vessel [means] any vessel that is (1) left, stored, or abandoned in a wrecked, junked, or substantially dismantled condition upon any public Waters of the City or (2) docked, grounded at or beached upon private property in a wrecked, junked, or substantially dismantled condition, or (3) docked or grounded at or beached upon the property of another without the consent of the owner of the property. 
Owner means a person who holds the legal title in or to a vessel, other than a lienholder. The term includes a person entitled to the use or possession of a vessel, subject to an interest in another person, reserved or created by agreement and securing payment of performance of an obligation, but the term excludes a lessee under a lease not intended as security. 
Unattended vessel is any vessel that has no person on board. 
Vessel is synonymous with boat as referenced in s.1(b), Art. VII of the State Constitution and includes every description of watercraft, barge, and airboat, other than a seaplane on the water, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water. 
Waters of the City means lakes, ponds, impoundments, streams, canals, or any other natural or manmade body of water or waterway, or any tributary to said bodies of water or waterways, located within the defined City Limits of the City of Palm Coast. 
(Ord. No. 09-10, § 3, 4-21-09)  
Sec. 24-253. - Abandoned or derelict vessels; removal from city waters. 
(a)  The City Manager is hereby authorized to take any and all necessary actions in conjunction with State and local law enforcement agencies to remove and impound any abandoned unattended or derelict vessel from waters of the City. 
(b)  The City Manager is hereby authorized to take any and all necessary actions to apply for funding from Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission and its program providing grants to local governments for the removal of abandoned unattended or derelict vessels from the public waters of the State. 
(c)  All actual City costs for removal, towing and storage will be assessed to the owner. If the vessel is unclaimed, it shall be disposed as provided in state statutes (Ref. Section 705.103, Florida Statutes) and may be retained by the City for official use or sold with the proceeds paying for the charges incurred, with the remainder of the funds to be used solely by the City for the education and enforcement of marine related laws (Ref. Chapter [Section] 328.66, Florida Statutes). To the extent allowed by law, failure to act on the part of the owner waives all liability of the City from damages as a result from towing and storage. 
(Ord. No. 09-10, § 4, 4-21-09)  
Sec. 24-254. - Prohibited acts. 
It is unlawful to dock or moor an abandoned unattended or derelict vessel to land, docks, piers or wharfs located in Waters of the City. 
(Ord. No. 09-10, § 5, 4-21-09)  
Sec. 24-255. - Further penalties and remedies. 
(a)  In addition to the relief provided in subsections 24-253(a) and (c), any person violating any of the provisions of this article may be punished to the maximum extent as provided in State law, as set forth in Section 162.22, Florida Statutes, and other controlling legal authority. 
(b)  All persons participating in, or contributing to, a violation of this article shall be in violation. 
(c)  The City may engage in any other code enforcement activities and processes, as it deems appropriate under the circumstances, and may seek judicial and administrative remedies as deemed appropriate by the City. 
(d)  Each act of violation of this article shall constitute a separate violation. 
(e)  Relating to any noncriminal penalty provided for herein and to the extent permitted by State law, the property owner of a dock, pier, wharf or boatlift shall be rebuttably presumed to have allowed any derelict or abandoned unattended vessel attached to such to have been attached with the consent of the property owner and the property owner may only rebut such presumption by a preponderance of the evidence to the contrary. The property owner of a dock, pier, marina facility, wharf or boatlift shall be responsible for compliance with all laws, codes and ordinances relating to the maintenance of such facilities as well as any and all vessels attached thereto or associated therewith. 
(Ord. No. 09-10, § 6, 4-21-09)  
Chapter 25 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 15; businesses and business regulations, ch. 16; emergency services, ch. 23; environment, ch. 24. 
State Law reference— Fire prevention and control, generally, F.S. chs. 553, 633. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 25-2. - Enforcement of fire safety laws. 
The building department shall enforce all fire safety laws. 
(Ord. No. 00-12, § 1, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 25-3. - Fire safety and rescue. 
(a)  Creation of the City of Palm Coast Fire Rescue Department/Fire Rescue Service Area. There is hereby created and established within the City of Palm Coast governmental structure a City of Palm Coast Fire Rescue Department. There is hereby created and established within the City limits of the City of Palm Coast, as they may be from time-to-time revised and amended in accordance with the controlling provisions of Florida law, a City of Palm Coast Fire Rescue Service Area which shall be consistent with the City limits of the City of Palm Coast. 
(b)  Ratification of prior acts. All actions taken by the City Council of the City of Palm Coast relative to the City of Palm Coast Fire Rescue Department prior to the effective date of this section and all actions of the City of Palm Coast Fire Rescue Department occurring prior to the effective date of this section are hereby ratified and affirmed. 
(c)  Operations of outside agencies within City limits. With the exception of the Division of Forestry of the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, and other governmental agencies acting under that Department's authority under Chapter 590, Florida Statutes, the only situations in which outside governmental agencies may enter the City limits of the City of Palm Coast to provide fire rescue fire suppression, basic life support, advanced life support, public education, code enforcement, hazardous material response and mitigation, training, testing and other emergency and public safety response functions shall be when the City of Palm Coast Fire Rescue Department formally requests the other agency to provide services within the City of Palm Coast through the City's Fire Chief, or designee, or pursuant to the terms and conditions of a first response or mutual aid agreement between the City of Palm Coast and the other governmental agency as approved by the City Council of the City of Palm Coast. It is prohibited and unlawful to interfere with the operations of the City of Palm Coast Fire Rescue Department within the City limits of the City of Palm Coast. The provisions of this section shall not apply to ambulance service. 
(d)  Penalties. The City of Palm Coast may pursue any code enforcement action available under controlling state law and any legal remedy available to the City to include, but not be limited to, a fine not exceeding $500.00 unless otherwise authorized by state law or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days unless otherwise authorized by state law, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 06-04, §§ 2—5, 3-21-06) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-04, §§ 2—5, adopted March 21, 2006, added provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, said provisions have been included herein as § 25-3.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 25-31. - Automatic fire sprinkler systems required. 
(a)  Automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be required in all new construction located in the City exceeding 10,000 square feet in floor area. 
(b)  Automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be required in existing buildings when any new addition creates an aggregate floor area exceeding 10,000 square feet. The aggregate floor area consists of the existing building plus the new addition. The automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be required in the entire building once it exceeds 10,000 square feet in floor area. 
(c)  Exceptions are as follows: 
(1)  Agricultural barns and pole barns. 
(2)  Airport hangars used for aircraft storage only not exceeding 10,000 square feet in floor area. 
(3)  Residential single-family and multi-unit structures, four or less units. 
(d)  Automatic fire sprinklers shall be installed, tested, inspected and maintained to the specifications of National Fire Protection Association Standards 13, 13D or 13R, whichever applies. 
(Ord. No. 00-12, § 1, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 02-11, § 1, 6-4-02)  
DIVISION 2. - FIRE CODE 
 
Sec. 25-51. - Standard Fire Prevention Code adopted. 
The 1988 edition of the Standard Fire Prevention Code, including all appendices thereto, is adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 00-12, § 1, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 25-52. - Local amendments to Fire Prevention Code relating to burning. 
The following local amendments to the Fire Prevention Code, are based upon the recitals set forth in the provisions of this section, and shall provide additional fire prevention standards within the City Limits of the City of Palm Coast and shall supplement the Florida Fire Prevention Code requirements. In the event of any conflict between a provision of this local amendment and the Florida Fire Prevention Code, this local amendment shall prevail. This local amendment shall be incorporated into the Florida Fire Prevention Code by the Code codifier in conjunction with the City's Fire Marshal. 
(1)  Open burning prohibited. 
a.  Open burning of commercial waste, residential trash, garbage, lawn debris, clippings, trees or other debris on residential, commercial or industrial property is prohibited within the City limits of the City of Palm Coast, but not including commercial land clearing operations which is addressed in subsection b. 
b.  The following types of open burning are permitted if pre-approved by the Fire Marshal and a permit issued by the Fire Marshal for such activities which approval may occur in the context of a preannexation agreement and which permits shall focus on addressing the disbursal of smoke and its adverse affects: 
1.  Ceremonial fires. 
2.  Commercial land clearing operations. 
3.  Prescribed burns conducted by fire control agencies. 
4.  When an emergency condition exists within the City that warrants burning. 
5.  Campfires. 
c.  Permits for open burning relating to commercial land clearing operations shall be issued by the Fire Marshal upon finding that: 
1.  All conditions precedent to lawful burning have been met, and 
2.  The Florida Division of Forestry has been notified of the burning, and 
3.  That the "burn index" of the Florida Division of Forestry will permit burning on the day or days for which an open burning permit is requested. 
d.  The following types of open burning do not require permitting by the Fire Marshal and are permitted if conducted in a safe manner and without the creation of a nuisance: 
1.  Outdoor fireplaces, kilns, ovens or other similarly approved devices. 
2.  Outdoor cooking fires that are engaged in bona fide food provision are constantly attended while cooking food and are no larger than three feet in diameter with flames no higher than three feet. 
3.  Warming fires conducted at work sites in a metal barrel when the temperature is below 45 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(2)  Permits for open burning. 
a.  Applications for open burning permits shall be on forms to be provided by the Fire Rescue Department. 
b.  The City Council may, by adoption of a resolution, establish an application fee for an open burning permits for each day or part thereof on which any open burning occurs, or as otherwise established by resolution of the City Council. The applicant for a permit shall provide the Fire Marshal with an estimate of the number of days on which the burning will occur and pay, in advance, the application fee for that estimated number. If the actual number of days is less than the said estimate, the permit holder shall be entitled to an appropriate refund. If a longer period of open burning is required, the applicant shall obtain a permit for all such additional days in the same manner as for the initial permit prior to continuation of the open burning and may not continue burning under the permit. 
c.  Nothing herein shall relieve any person from complying with any other applicable law, rule, registration and ordinance relating to open burning. 
(Ord. No. 06-06, § 1, 4-18-06) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-06, § 1, adopted April 18, 2006, added provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, said provisions were included herein as § 25-52.  
ARTICLE III. - ENFORCEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-20, §§ 1—9, adopted Oct. 16, 2001, included herein as §§ 25-76—25-84, superseded the provisions of Ord. No. 00-12, § 1, adopted March 7, 2000 in their entirety. Formerly said superseded provisions pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 25-76. - Enforcement responsibility. 
The Fire Marshal shall be responsible for the enforcement of the fire safety code. The Fire Chief may detail qualified inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary and as authorized by the City. It shall be the duty of the inspectors of the fire prevention division to enforce all laws and ordinances relating to the fire safety codes of the City, covering the following: 
(1)  The prevention of fires. 
(2)  The storage, sale, and use of combustible, flammable or explosive materials; 
(3)  The investigation of the cause, origin, and circumstances of fires; 
(4)  Building development and construction plan review and approval as it applies to fire and life safety codes. 
(5)  Review and approval of certificates of occupancy as it applies to fire and life safety codes; 
(6)  The installation and maintenance of fire alarm systems, fire extinguishing equipment, and the construction of all fire rated components and assemblies. 
(7)  The means and adequacy of exit in case of fire. 
(8)  Conduct periodic inspections as required by fire and life safety codes. 
(Ord. No. 00-12, § 1, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 01-20, § 1, 10-16-01)  
Sec. 25-77. - Investigation of fires. 
The Fire Department shall investigate the cause, origin, and circumstances of every fire occurring in the City by which property has been destroyed or damaged and, so far as possible, shall determine whether the fire is the result of carelessness or design. Such investigations shall begin immediately upon the occurrence of such a fire. The Fire Marshal shall take charge immediately of the physical evidence, shall notify the proper authorities designated by law to pursue the investigation of such matters, and shall further cooperate with the authorities in the collection of evidence and in the prosecution of the case. 
(Ord. No. 00-12, § 1, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 01-20, § 2, 10-16-01)  
Sec. 25-79. - Authority to remedy fire safety code violations. 
(a)  An inspector possesses the authority to protect property and persons whenever there is found violations of the fire and life safety codes. 
(b)  An order under this part shall be served on the occupant or person in charge of the premises or by affixing the order on the entrance door to the premises. Whenever it is necessary to serve the record owner of the premises with the order, and such owner is not available personally, then the inspector shall mail the order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner's last known address. Such mailing shall be supplemental to posting the order on the entrance door to the premises. 
(Ord. No. 00-12, § 1, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 01-20, § 4, 10-16-01)  
Sec. 25-81. - Code conflicts. 
Conflicts between fire codes and building codes shall be resolved as set forth in F.S. § 553.73(8)(a) through (e), or its successor. 
(Ord. No. 01-20, § 6, 10-16-01)  
Sec. 25-82. - Permits. 
A permit is required for but not limited to all of the following actions within the City limits. 
(1)  Installation or alteration of fixed fire suppression systems including, but not limited to, automatic sprinklers, standpipes, commercial hood extinguishing systems, or other private fire protection systems. 
(2)  The installation of any fire alarm, detection, or fire communication system. Exception: Detached one- and two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Any public fireworks display. 
Any owner, contractor, or authorized agent who desires a permit required under this code, shall first make application to the building department of the City to obtain said permit, including the necessary plans, licenses, fees, and other related documents. 
(Ord. No. 01-20, § 7, 10-16-01)  
Sec. 25-83. - Fees. 
Fees shall be established by resolution for the permits, certificates, approvals, and other functions performed under the Code and shall be payable to the City. Such fees shall accompany each application for such permit, plans, approval, certificate or other fee-related Code provision. 
(Ord. No. 01-20, § 8, 10-16-01)  
Sec. 25-84. - Codes and standards. 
The following National Fire Protection (NFPA) Codes and Standards are hereby included as part of the City's Fire Safety Code. This incorporation is to include all current editions, and includes any and all codes and standards referenced in the following codes and standards: 
N.F.P.A. Codes and Standards 
Pamphlet 
Number 	Description 
1 	Fire Prevention Code 
10 	Portable Fire Extinguishers 
12 	Carbon Dioxide Extinguishing Systems 
12A 	Halon 1301 Fire Extinguishing Systems 
13 	Installation of Sprinkler Systems 
13D 	Sprinkler Systems in One- and-Two-family Dwellings and Mobile Homes 
13R 	Sprinkler Systems in Residential Occupancies up to and including four stories in height 
14 	Installation of Standpipe, Private Hydrant and Hose Systems 
17 	Dry Chemical Extinguishing Systems 
17A 	Wet Chemical Extinguishing Systems 
20 	Installation of Centrifugal Fire Pumps 
22 	Water Tanks for Private Fire Protection 
24 	Installation of Private Fire Service Mains and Their Apparatus 
25 	Inspection, Test and Maintenance of Water Based Fire Protection Systems 
30 	Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code 
30A 	Automotive and Marine Service Station Code 
33 	Spray Application Using Flammable and Combustible Materials 
54 	National Fuel Code 
58 	Storage and Handling of Liquified Petroleum Gases 
70 	National Electrical Code 
72 	Installation, Maintenance and Use of Protective Signaling Systems 
80 	Fire Doors and Windows 
88B 	Repair Garages 
90A 	Installation of Air Conditioning and Ventilating Systems 
90B 	Installation of Warm Air Heating and Air Conditioning Systems 
96 	Installation of Equipment for the Removal of Smoke and Grease-Laden Vapors from Commercial Cooking Equipment 
101 	Safety to Life from Fire in Buildings and Structures 
110 	Emergency and Standby Power Systems 
230 	General Storage 
299 	Protection of Life and Property from Wildfire 
303 	Marinas and Boatyards 
307 	Marine Terminals, Piers and Wharves 
395 	Storage of Flammable and Combustible Liquids on Farms and Isolated Construction Projects 
407 	Aircraft Fuel Servicing 
409 	Aircraft Hangars 
410 	Aircraft Maintenance 
415 	Construction and Protection of Airport Terminal Buildings 
910 	Libraries and Library Collections 
909 	Museums, Museum Collections, Places of Worship 
914 	Historic Structures and Sites 
1123 	Outdoor Display of Fireworks 
1124 	Manufacture, Transportation, and Storage of Fireworks 
1141 	Planned Building Groups 
1142 	Water Supplies for Suburban and Rural Fire Fighting—Standard Fire Prevention Code current edition including all appendices 
 
All fire protection codes adopted to establish alternative requirements on a case-by-case basis in order to meet special situations arising from historic geographic or unusual conditions, provided the alternative requirements result in a level of protection to life safety or property equal to or greater than the applicable code or standard. The Fire Marshal shall be designated as the "authority having jurisdiction" as defined and outlined in the various adopted Codes and Standards. 
(Ord. No. 01-20, § 9, 10-16-01)  
ARTICLE IV. - WILDFIRE HAZARD MITIGATION 
 
Sec. 25-101. - Findings. 
The City Council hereby makes the following findings: 
(a)  Palm Coast is a 42,000 acre planned development situated in coastal plain flatwoods. Prior to its development the land was actively managed for southern pine timber production. Timber management included the periodic use of prescribed burns to control vegetative fuel buildup. 
(b)  Palm Coast has a densely developed core, in which homes have been built sporadically throughout the development. Prescribed fires are no longer used for timber management. 
(c)  In May 1985, a wildfire burned through the City destroying 100 homes and damaging 200 others. A study conducted by the Florida Division of Forestry concluded that fire crowning in the pine tree canopy, a buildup of brush within 30 feet of a residential structure, and a general buildup of fuels from decaying vegetation significantly correlated to the destruction or damage of a residential structure. 
(d)  In the summer of 1998 a devastating wildfire again burned through the City due to drought and the accumulation of brush, destroying and damaging many homes and community infrastructure. The same factors were associated with increased fire losses. 
(e)  Fighting fires in the intermix between pine plantation timberlands and rural residential development requires different fire suppression strategies and equipment. Relying on suppression may not be reliable because it is a minor component in determining the loss of property. More important factors are weather conditions, vegetation, structural characteristics and accessibility. 
(f)  Many homeowners and landowners do not or cannot adopt mitigation measures such as brush clearance and fire resistant roofing material. Public education is hampered because the City has a very rapid rate of population growth and a number of the homes in the community are only seasonally occupied. 
(g)  State law authorizes the Florida Division of Forestry to conduct prescribed burns as a mitigation measure on private lands. Such prescribed burning however is of limited utility because of the spreading and scattering of new homes being built in the pine plantation. 
(h)  To further promote hazard mitigation, the City is required to exercise its power in coordination with the State of Florida Division of Forestry, to address wildfire hazard mitigation. Effective hazard mitigation to address the evolution of the City's development from a pine plantation to a residential community includes selective mowing of brush where prescribed burning is not adequate or feasible. 
(i)  The state division of forestry and the City have the capability to identify areas that have a relatively severe risk of wildfire hazard and to prioritize those areas for systematic mitigation planning and implementation. 
(j)  Such systematic mitigation measures are necessary to avoid catastrophic loss to the community economically and in the quality of life. 
(k)  Such systematic mitigation, to the extent it limits wildfire damage, also will help the community conserve its natural resources for aesthetic, environmental and stormwater management purposes. 
(l)  The risk of wildfire recurrence is substantial under expected climatic conditions, weather patterns associated with increased fire activity are a part of the El Nino/La Nina Southern Oscillation phenomena that the City can expect to experience on a recurring basis. As Southern Pacific sea surface temperatures drop, fire activity in Florida increases. 
(Ord. No. 01-11, § 1, 4-17-01)  
Sec. 25-102. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings unless a different meaning is clearly intended: 
Brush shall mean plant species that by virtue of their arrangement, chemical composition, and growth pattern provide a ready path for uncontrolled fire to spread. Species included in this definition include saw palmetto, gallberry, fetterbush and wax myrtle. Pine trees less than five inches diameter breast height (four and one-half feet above grade) are included in this definition. 
Fire hazard shall mean brush or other vegetation, which by reason of their nature, location or condition may cause loss, damage, or injury to persons or property by reason of fire. Brush on undeveloped lots averaging over three feet tall within 30 feet of an existing residential structure is considered a fire hazard. 
Lot, tract or parcel includes the adjacent unpaved portions of the street right-of-way, and the property owner's adjacent properties. 
Remedies or corrective measures as referred to in this article, remedies or corrective measures shall include but not be limited to, the City removing the brush located on the property and adjacent street right-of-way, or removing the unlawful fire hazard on the property and adjacent street right-of-way. 
Street shall mean any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way or place, sidewalk, alley, court, boulevard, parkway, drive or easement now or hereafter held by the City for the purpose of public travel. 
Undeveloped vacant lot shall mean any lot or parcel that does not contain a structure and/or improvement. This shall also include adjacent property where both parcels are owned by one person or entity, but only if said adjacent property is located within 200 feet of a developed lot. 
(Ord. No. 01-11, § 2, 4-17-01)  
Sec. 25-103. - Designation of hazardous properties. 
The City Manager or designee will identify undeveloped lots determined to constitute a fire hazard. The City Manager or designee shall develop a plan for hazard mitigation for the identified area which shall include public education. The plan may include selective mowing of brush determined to constitute a fire hazard, pursuant to this article. The City shall notify owners of property within the identified area who have fire hazards and shall inform such owners of the action required to be taken. Such properties that contain fire hazards shall be public nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 01-11, § 3, 4-17-01)  
Sec. 25-104. - Unlawful fire hazard. 
Allowing brush to accumulate on any undeveloped lot, tract or parcel of land shall be unlawful where it is held by the City Manager or designee to constitute a fire hazard under section 25-103, and is hereby prohibited and declared to be a public nuisance. It shall be the owner's responsibility to remedy the violation constituting a fire hazard. This section shall include the property owner's adjacent properties, as well as the adjacent street right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 01-11, § 4, 4-17-01)  
Sec. 25-105. - Violation to permit unlawful fire hazard. 
Any owner, lessee or occupant of any lot, tract or parcel of land in the City who permits a fire hazard consisting of brush on any undeveloped lot to the extent and in the manner that it creates a fire hazard, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished according to law. 
(Ord. No. 01-11, § 5, 4-17-01)  
Sec. 25-106. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-06, § 2(a), adopted Feb. 1, 2005, repealed § 25-106, which pertained to Fire Mitigation Review Board and derived from Ord. No. 01-11, § 6, adopted April 17, 2001. Ord. No. 2005-06, § 2(b) states: "The duties of the Fire Mitigation Review Board are hereby assigned to the City of Palm Coast Code Enforcement Board with all actions pertaining to fire mitigation being taken in conformity to the provisions of Ordinance Number 2001-11 and the laws, ordinances, rules and procedures applicable to the Code Enforcement Board." At the editor's discretion, in accordance with the provisions of Ord. No. 2005-06, § 5(b), all references within this article to the Fire Mitigation Review Board have been changed to the Code Enforcement Board.  
Sec. 25-107. - Notice by City to owner of record of violation; requirement to remedy violation; copy of notice to owner. 
(a)  If property is designated a fire hazard and a public nuisance, under sections 25-103 and 25-104, a notice shall be given to the owner and/or operator of the property, at their last known address as shown upon the records of the Flagler County Property Appraiser by certified mail or hand delivery. If an attempt to reach the owner and/or operator by hand delivery or certified mail is unsuccessful, the notice shall be given by physical posting on the property in the name of the property owner, as shown upon the records of the Flagler County Property Appraiser, and notice shall also be posted at City Hall and sent by first class mail to the address shown by the property appraiser. 
(b)  The notice to the owner and/or operator shall advise of the condition found to exist on the property described in said notice, and require that the owner either cause such condition to be remedied forthwith, or that the owner authorize the City to have such work done on behalf of the owner at their cost or as a lien against the property. The notice shall detail the specific violations of which the owner is charged, shall detail the specific remedies that are necessary to correct the violations, and shall give the owner 30 calendar days from the date of the notice to remedy the violation. The notice to owner shall provide that the property owner or their agent or representative may request a hearing before the Code Enforcement Board within 30 calendar days of the posting or mailing of the notice by the City, by completing the appropriate form and paying a filing fee of $50.00. This filing fee shall be refunded if the owner is the prevailing party in the action before the Code Enforcement Board as provided in section 25-110. 
(Ord. No. 01-11, § 7, 4-17-01; Ord. No. 2005-06, § 5, 2-1-05)  
Sec. 25-108. - Failure of owner to mitigate. 
If the owner of the affected property or any agent acting on behalf of the owner thereof fails to request a hearing to protest such action before the Code Enforcement Board before the date specified in the notice to the owner, and fails to take corrective action within the time specified in the aforesaid notice, the City Manager, or designee, may direct the appropriate department of the City to remedy the violation by having the existing condition corrected. Alternatively, the City Manager may refer to the City Attorney to seek an injunction to authorize appropriate mitigation of the fire hazard, including prescribed burns. 
(Ord. No. 01-11, § 8, 4-17-01; Ord. No. 2005-06, § 5, 2-1-05)  
Sec. 25-109. - Hearing before Code Enforcement Board. 
At the hearing before the Code Enforcement Board, the owner, agent, or representative, may appear before the Code Enforcement Board to show the Code Enforcement Board that the condition mentioned in the notice does not exist, or to show why said brush does not constitute a fire hazard; or why said conditions should not be remedied by the owner, or by the City at the expense of the owner of said property. At said hearing, the City and the property owner may introduce such witnesses as are deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 01-11, § 9, 4-17-01; Ord. No. 2005-06, § 5, 2-1-05)  
Sec. 25-110. - Determination by Code Enforcement Board; time allowance for remedying the violation; appeal. 
(a)  If the property owner or duly authorized agent elects to protest the notice as set forth in the preceding sections and appears before the Code Enforcement Board, the Code Enforcement Board shall determine whether the condition described in sections 25-103 and 25-104 hereof and in the notice to owner does or does not exist. 
(b)  If the Code Enforcement Board determines that the situation and condition as set forth in sections 25-103 and 25-104 and in the notice to owner does not exist, then such notice to owner shall be considered forthwith null and void and of no effect, and no action shall be taken by any agency of the City in regard to such condition at that time, and the filing fee shall be refunded. 
(c)  If the Code Enforcement Board shall determine that the condition described in sections 25-103 and 25-104 and the notice to owner does exist, then from the date of such determination by the Code Enforcement Board, the owner shall have ten calendar days to remedy the violation in accordance with the City's instructions on the notice. Upon the failure of the owner to remedy the violation within the ten calendar days specified, the City Manager, or designee, shall direct the appropriate agency of the City to remedy such violation, as if no protest had been made. 
(d)  Appeal. An appeal shall be to the City Council, and must be taken within five calendar days after an order, decision or determination is made by the Code Enforcement Board. The appeal shall be limited to the record before the Code Enforcement Board. The appeal shall be filed on a form prescribed by the City, and shall be accompanied by a $50.00 filing fee, which shall be refunded if the owner prevails in the appeal. The City Council may, upon appeal, reverse, affirm, or modify any order or determination of the Code Enforcement Board. If the City Council affirms the decision of the Code Enforcement Board, then the owner shall have ten calendar days from date of the City Council hearing to remedy the violation. 
(Ord. No. 01-11, § 10, 4-17-01; Ord. No. 2005-06, § 5, 2-1-05)  
Sec. 25-111. - Collection of costs and records; secured property. 
After causing the violation to be remedied, the City Manager, or designee, shall certify the expense incurred in remedying the violation, whereupon such expense, plus a charge of $100.00 to cover City administrative expenses, shall become payable within 30 days from completion of the work, after which a special assessment lien and charge will be made upon the property, which shall be payable with interest at the rate allowable by law beginning 30 days from the date of such certification is made until paid. The costs shall include all expenditures by the state division of forestry, the City or their authorized agents for labor, supplies, equipment use, contractors and services related to implementing the mitigation plan for the property and the cost of filing the lien. 
Such lien shall take priority and be enforceable in the same manner as a tax lien in favor of the City, and may be satisfied at any time by payment thereof including accrued interest. Notice of such lien shall be filed in the office of the Clerk of the Circuit Court and recorded upon the public records of Flagler County, Florida. 
If the subject property is secured by locks or otherwise, the City shall have the authority to enter such property for purposes of remedying the violative condition, and any additional costs incurred by the City in gaining access to the property or in resecuring the property after cleaning shall be considered expenses of remedying the condition. 
(Ord. No. 01-11, § 11, 4-17-01)  
Sec. 25-112. - Imminent fire danger. 
Nothing in this article shall prevent the City from taking all actions necessary to fight fires when there is imminent fire danger, including, but not limited to, clearing brush from private property without notice. Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent the City from acting pursuant to F.S. § 590.02, where necessary. 
(Ord. No. 01-11, § 12, 4-17-01)  
Sec. 25-113. - No tree permit required; other restrictions and requirements applicable. 
No permit shall be required for remedying the violations as required by this article; however, the requirements, restrictions and limitations imposed by other sections of City Code and applicable provisions of the land development code pertaining to environmental preservation, tree removal permits, change of grade, etc., shall be applicable. In the event of any conflict between this section and any other provision of this Code or applicable provision of the land development code, the other sections of this Code or applicable provisions of the land development code shall prevail and govern. 
(Ord. No. 01-11, § 13, 4-17-01)  
ARTICLE V. - SPARKLERS AND FIREWORKS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-22, §§ 1—9, adopted Dec. 5, 2006, amended the Code by adding provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, said provisions were included herein as §§ 25-135—25-143. Former Art. V, § 25-135, pertained to open fires and fireworks, and derived from Ord. No. 2004-12, § 1, adopted June 1, 2004. 
 
Sec. 25-135. - Authority. 
This article is enacted pursuant to the Home Rule Charter of Palm Coast and Chapter 791, Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 06-22, § 1, 12-5-06)  
Sec. 25-136. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as and may be cited as the "City of Palm Coast Fireworks Ordinance". 
(Ord. No. 06-22, § 2, 12-5-06)  
Sec. 25-137. - Intent. 
The purpose and intent of this article is to promote, protect, and improve the health, safety, welfare and quality of life of the citizens of the City of Palm Coast, Florida by establishing regulations governing the sale, purchase and utilization of fireworks and sparklers within the City. 
(Ord. No. 06-22, § 3, 12-5-06)  
Sec. 25-138. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms shall have the meanings set out below, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Fire district means the City Fire Rescue Department, or any corporations, including Flagler County, with whom the City contracts for fire protections services. 
Fire District Official means the City Fire Chief or designee. 
Fireworks means and includes any combustible or explosive composition or substance or combination of substances, or unless otherwise exempt, any articles prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation. The term includes blank cartridges and toy cannons in which explosives are used, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, dago bombs, or any fireworks containing any explosives or flammable compound or any tablets or other device containing any explosive substance. "Fireworks" does not include any item listed in Section 791.04(4)(c), Florida Statutes. 
Manufacturer means any person, firm, partnership, or corporation engaged in the manufacture or construction of sparklers or fireworks in the City. 
Proximate audience means an audience to an indoor display and which is closer to pyrotechnic devices than allowed by National Fire Protection Association (N.F.P.A.) Code 1123, 1995 Edition. 
Pyrotechnic operator means the person responsible for pyrotechnic safety and who controls, initiates, or otherwise creates special effects. The operator is also responsible for storing, setting up and removing pyrotechnic material or devices after a performance. 
Pyrotechnic means the science of controlled exothermic chemical reactions that are timed to create the effects of heat, gas, sound, dispersion of aerosols, emission of visible electromagnetic radiation, or a combination of these effect to provide the maximum effect from least volume. 
Pyrotechnic material means a chemical mixture used in the entertainment industry to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. Such chemical mixture predominately consists of solids capable of producing a controlled, self-sustaining, and self-contained exothermic chemical reaction that results in heat, gas, sound, light, or a combination of these effects. The chemical reaction functions without external oxygen. 
Retailer means any person, firm, partnership, or corporation who at a fixed place of business, is engaged in the business of selling sparklers to consumers at retail. 
Seasonal retailer means any person, firm, partnership, or corporation engaged in the business of selling sparklers at retail from June 20 through July 5 and from December 10 through January 2 of each year from a temporary location (including, but not limited to, tents, storefronts and open air sales). 
Sparkler means a device which emits showers of sparks upon burning, does not contain any explosive compound, does not detonate or explode, is hand-held or ground-based, cannot propel itself through the air, and contains nor more than 100 grams of chemical compound which produces sparks upon burning. Any sparkler that is not approved by the State Fire Marshal is classified as fireworks. 
(Ord. No. 06-22, § 4, 12-5-06)  
Sec. 25-139. - Storage and sale of sparklers; registration and permit required. 
(a)  Sparklers shall be stored and sold in the City in accordance with the zoning laws, fire prevention code, license laws of the City and permits issued by the Fire District Official or State Division of Fire Marshal having jurisdiction and all other State and local laws. 
(b)  All manufacturers, distributors, retailers, seasonal retailers and wholesalers of sparklers shall show proof of current registration with the State Division of Fire Marshal to the Fire District Official upon request. 
(c)  All manufacturers, distributors, wholesalers, retailers, and seasonal retailers of sparklers must obtain an annual permit from the City prior to selling sparklers in the City. 
(d)  A retailer or seasonal retailer who sells sparklers at more than one retail location may submit one permit application for all locations within the City by providing the address of each location on the same permit application form, or the retailer may submit multiple application forms for each location. 
(e)  Nothing herein shall be construed to exempt manufacturers, distributors, wholesalers, retailers or seasonable retailers, from compliance with all other applicable zoning, licensing, building and fire protection requirements of the City. 
(f)  It is prohibited and unlawful to sell sparklers in the City without a permit. 
(g)  Each retailer and seasonal retailer shall keep a copy of the permit and state registration at every location where sparklers are sold. 
(Ord. No. 06-22, § 5, 12-5-06)  
Sec. 25-140. - Prohibition of fireworks; exceptions; permits and regulations. 
(a)  Except as provided in Sections 791.02, 791.04, or 791.07, Florida Statutes, it is prohibited and unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, or corporation to offer for sale at wholesale or retail, expose for sale at wholesale or retail, or use or explode any fireworks within the City without a City permit. 
(b)  The City Manager, or designee, shall develop an affidavit which all sellers of fireworks within the City shall use to determine the entitlement of any purchaser at retail or wholesale to buy fireworks. 
(c)  The purchaser of any fireworks must furnish to the seller, at the time of sale, proof of identification, and if applicable, proof that the purchaser in compliance with Chapter 791, Florida Statutes. The seller shall retain a copy of any proof of registration presented. 
(d)  The seller shall maintain a permanent on-site record of all sales, including the name and address of each purchaser, the form of the purchaser's identification presented along with any unique identifier associated with that identification (e.g., drivers license number), and, where required, proof of registration and compliance with Chapter 791, Florida Statutes. If the seller determines that registration under Chapter 791, Florida Statutes, is not required, then the basis for such exception or exemption shall be recorded on a form approved by the Fire District Official. 
(e)  Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation who is not registered with the Division of the State Fire Marshal and who, pursuant to Section 791.04, Florida Statutes, purchases fireworks for shipment directly out of the State, is prohibited from taking possession of such fireworks. The seller shall retain the possession of such fireworks and shall be responsible for shipping all fireworks purchased to the purchaser or other recipient at any out-of-State point of delivery. If an out-of-State address is not given to seller for shipment the sale shall be presumed to be unlawful under Section 791.04, Florida Statues, as a not for out-of-State use sale and is prohibited. 
(f)  It is prohibited and unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity to sell fireworks for out-of-State use and deliver possession of said fireworks to the purchaser by any means other than by shipping the fireworks to the out-of-State delivery address. 
(g)  Any person, firm, partnership or corporation who, pursuant to rules promulgated by the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services under Section 791.07, Florida Statutes, purchases fireworks for frightening birds must provide to the seller documentary evidence, stamped by the Flagler County Sheriff's Office, the City Fire District Office or other City designee, that the purchaser has complied with the regulations of the State Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services and that the purchaser has filed with the Sheriff of the County where the fireworks will be used the statement as required by the Florida Administrative Code. The purchaser shall provide to the seller a copy of any statement so filed with the Sheriff as required by the Florida Administrative Code. The seller shall maintain a copy of the proof offered in addition to the information required in subsection (e) above. 
(h)  The purchaser of fireworks to be used by a railroad or other transportation agency shall provide a copy of the business license or other government issued document evidencing that the purchaser is a legitimate railroad or transportation agency. A commercial driver's license, by itself, does not meet the requirements of this section. A copy of this document shall be maintained by the seller. 
(i)  The purchaser of fireworks to be used in quarrying or for blasting or other industrial use must produce a copy of the quarry or mine permit or business license or other governmentally issued document showing that the purchaser is operating a mine, quarry or other industrial enterprise. The seller shall maintain a copy of this proof and note the use for which the fireworks shall be used. The seller shall also record the location where the fireworks will be used. The purchaser of fireworks to be used in a public display must produce a copy of the current permit from a county or municipality and the seller must keep a copy of this permit with the record of sale. 
(j)  All appropriate local and State permits, registration, certificates and licenses must be displayed at each retail, wholesale, distributing, or manufacturing site. 
(k)  The seller shall maintain copies of the records required by this article at the location where the sale took place for a period of four years from the date of the sale. If the location of the sale was in a temporary facility, the records shall be maintained at that site for the duration of the existence of the temporary facility and thereafter for the remainder of the four years in a location within the City which location shall be listed on the application for City permit. These records shall be available and provided immediately upon request for inspection by Fire District Official or Law Enforcement. In the event that the sales location, other than a temporary site, closes or moves, the records required by this section to be retained shall be stored at a location in the City where they will be readily available for inspection by the Fire District Official, the City or its designee. The seller shall advise the City of any change in the location of these records. 
(Ord. No. 06-22, § 6, 12-5-06)  
Sec. 25-141. - Use of fireworks. 
It is prohibited and unlawful for a person or entity to use, explode, or store, fireworks in the City, unless: 
(1)  The person or entity first obtains all appropriate permits for the display of fireworks or pyrotechnics; or 
(2)  The use is by a railroad or other transporting agency for illumination or signal purposes or the use is associated with quarrying, blasting, or another industrial purpose in accordance with Section 791.04, Florida Statutes; or 
(3)  The use in conjunction with a bona fide agricultural use, as provided in Section 791.07, Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 06-22, § 7, 12-5-06)  
Sec. 25-142. - Display of fireworks. 
(a)  The supervised public display of fireworks, as contemplated in Section 791.02, Florida Statutes, is permitted if the requirements of this section have been met. All displays must be in accordance with the Code for the Display of Fireworks, as set out in NFPA Code 1123 and NFPA Code 1126, 1995 Edition. 
(b)  An application for a permit to operate a display of fireworks in accordance with this article shall be made with the Fire District Official at least 15 days prior to the scheduled date of the event. The application shall be in a form prepared by the City. 
(c)  Evidence of financial responsibility in the form of proof of insurance at a type and level approved by the City's Risk Manager shall be provided to the City at the time of application. 
(d)  Application and payment fees shall be established by resolution adopted by the City Council. 
(e)  The Fire District Official or designee will determine if the display of fireworks, as proposed by the applicant, will provide an acceptable degree of life safety based upon the terrain, available fire protection features or other requirements deemed appropriate by the Fire District Official. 
(f)  The Fire Official District Official may, as a condition of the permit, require on-site uniformed district personnel, specialized fire protection equipment or extra suppression equipment. Any costs incurred to comply with the conditions of the permit will be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(g)  A permit may be revoked by the Fire Marshal, Fire District Official or their designee at any time if the permittee fails to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit. 
(h)  Permits are not transferable. 
(Ord. No. 06-22, § 8, 12-5-06)  
Sec. 25-143. - Penalties and enforcement. 
The City may enforce the provisions of this article by any means permitted by law and the penalty for violation of this article shall be the maximum permitted by State law. 
(Ord. No. 06-22, § 9, 12-5-06)  
Sec. 25-144. - Use of fireworks and sparklers during fire bans. 
During periods of Flagler County issued fire bans, the sale, use, and/or discharge of fireworks and sparklers are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2008-08, § 1, 6-3-08)  
Chapter 26 - FLOODS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL  
Chapter 27 - FRANCHISE REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; businesses and business regulations, ch. 16; emergency services, ch. 23; environment, ch. 24; impact fees, ch. 29; streets, roads and other public places, ch. 42; traffic and vehicles, ch. 44; utilities, ch. 49; land development code, app. A. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL  
ARTICLE II. - CATV SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 27-31. - Short title. 
This division shall be known as the "City of Palm Coast Master Cable TV Regulatory Ordinance". 
(Ord. No. 00-20, § 1, 3-14-00)  
Sec. 27-32. - Purposes. 
The purpose of this article is to establish the procedures and criteria for the granting and renewal of nonexclusive cable television franchises within the City. This article further establishes the minimum standards for installation and operation of such franchises, and supplements the standards for existing cable operators. This division additionally protects and controls the use of public easements and rights-of-way by cable TV operators. These criteria and standards are enacted to promote the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City residing in the unincorporated area of the City, and to assure compliance with applicable state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 00-20, § 1, 3-14-00)  
Sec. 27-33. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cable TV system means a system of antennae, cables, wires, lines, towers, wave guides, fiber optics, conductors, converters, equipment or other facilities designed, constructed or wired for the purpose of transmitting audio signals, digital signals or visual images to and from persons and subscribers in the franchise area, except systems exempted by state law under F.S. § 166.046. 
Gross revenue means any and all compensation and other consideration derived directly by a franchise operator from subscribers for cable TV service including, but not limited to, installation fees, disconnect and reconnect fees, and fees for cable service paid by subscribers. 
Transfer means any sale, conveyance, gift or other disposition of any right, title or interest in a franchise. Any material change in the persons constituting the controlling interest of the franchise operator, for example, shareholders, shall be deemed a transfer. Transfers shall not include assignments by cable operators of their franchises to any entity that is a parent, subsidiary, or affiliate corporation of the cable operator; provided such corporation existed as of the date of the initial franchise authorization for the cable operator, or, if not, that the new subsidiary corporation receives all of the assets of the franchise holder and the same is certified to the City by a senior official of the franchise holder. 
(Ord. No. 00-20, § 1, 3-14-00)  
Sec. 27-34. - Necessity of franchise. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or operate a cable TV system in the City, excluding the area of its municipalities, without a franchise granted by the City. The issuance of a franchise shall authorize the cable TV operator to install, construct, maintain and operate a cable TV system under, over, through, across, and upon the public easements and rights-of-way in the City, subject to the requirements and restrictions provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 00-20, § 1, 3-14-00)  
Sec. 27-35. - Construction of system. 
(a)  No construction shall take place within City rights-of-way or property without the prior written approval of the City Manager or designee. 
(b)  The franchise operator shall file with the City Manager or designee for approval plans and specifications for the location or relocation of all facilities within the franchise area. Such facilities shall be located or relocated so as not to obstruct or interfere with the use of streets, alleys, easements and other public ways and places, or other utilities or structures already installed or hereafter to be installed, subject at all times to the lawful police power of the City. Street or pavement cuts to install conduit are prohibited unless the franchise operator obtains prior approval from the City Manager or designee according to the procedures and standards of the City's utility accommodation ordinance. 
(c)  The franchise operator may make attachments to poles already in existence within the City. To the extent existing poles are insufficient for its purposes or if the cable operator is unable to negotiate agreements satisfactory to it for use of existing poles, the cable operator may erect its own poles or underground conduit as necessary for the construction and maintenance of its cable TV system, subject to the approval of the City Manager or designee for all such poles or conduit to be placed within City right-of-way or City property. No poles, however, shall be allowed or installed by the cable operator in areas or neighborhoods where utilities are placed below ground. The use of City poles, towers or other electrical facilities owned by the City, if authorized by the City Manager or designee, shall not interfere with the use of such poles, towers or electrical facilities. 
(d)  All underground conduit in City rights-of-way or property shall have a minimum cover of 24 inches below ground and 30 inches below pavement. Crossings of storm drains shall be under the pipe or structure with a minimum clearance of 12 inches below the bottom of the storm drain pipe. All underground conduit off City rights-of-way to a subscriber shall be a minimum of 12 inches below ground, unless the subscriber consents otherwise in writing to less than 12 inches. Such writing need not be a formal document but may be a form used by the cable operator so long as the document establishes that the subscriber or his or her agent consents to a depth of less than 12 inches. 
(e)  All construction, installation, maintenance and repair shall conform to City building codes and ordinances, including but not limited to the tree protection provisions of the City's land development regulations, road damage ordinance and utility accommodation ordinance. 
(f)  All construction, installation and repair work shall be carried out with due regard for safety to surrounding property, whether public or private. The franchise operator shall employ safety measures relating to traffic, whether pedestrian or vehicular, during such work which are consistent with Series 600 of the Florida Department of Transportation, Standard Index, or the Uniform Traffic Control Device Manual, whichever is more stringent. Any use of safety barricades shall conform to the Uniform Traffic Control Device Manual. The franchise operator shall be responsible for any damage to bridges, sidewalks, inlets and drainage structures caused by its operations. Such damage must be repaired according to current standards. Any damage to pavement due to the franchise operator's work must be repaired by the operator with a permanent paved patch, in accordance with current standards, within five working days after the work is completed. 
(g)  All construction, installation, maintenance or repair work shall be conducted in a manner that minimizes the disruption of telephone, electric, gas, water, sewer, cable or other utility services. The franchise operator shall provide reasonable notice to the providers of such services so existing systems can be marked. 
(h)  In the performance of such work, the franchise operator shall insure that the safety, functioning and appearance of the property worked on is not adversely affected. Any property that sustains alteration or damage by reason of the construction, installation, maintenance or repair of the cable TV system shall be restored to its immediate preexisting condition, reasonably and promptly, subject to any device or equipment installed. In the event restoration is not accomplished promptly, the franchise operator shall fully and promptly compensate the owner for such damage. 
(i)  If during the term of the franchise, the City elects to alter or modify the grade or use of any City road, right-of-way or property, the franchise operator, on reasonable notice by the City, shall remove or relocate, permanently or temporarily as the circumstances require, the affected facility or equipment at the operator's expense. 
(j)  All construction, installation, maintenance or repair work shall further conform to any requirements of the State of Florida and the Federal Communications Commission. 
(k)  All obligations provided above shall apply to the employees, agents or independent contractors working for the franchise operator. The franchise operator shall be liable to assure that its employees, agents or independent contractors perform their work in accordance with this regulatory ordinance. This provision shall not be construed to create liability on the part of the cable operator to third parties. 
(Ord. No. 00-20, § 1, 3-14-00)  
Sec. 27-36. - Design and operation. 
(a)  The cable TV system shall be designed and operated so as to meet all FCC requirements. Franchise operators also are specifically subject to F.S. §§ 337.401, 337.402, 337.403, 337.404 (relating to use of right-of-way, repair to public roads and relocations); F.S. § 166.046 (cable TV franchising requirements); F.S. § 177.091(29) (prohibiting interference with other utility systems, responsibility for damage to other public utilities, and construction requirement to meet National Electrical Code); and such other Florida Statutes or their successors, as may apply to a franchise operator. 
(b)  Franchise operators shall make available and be capable of initially transmitting at least 30 channels for delivery to subscribers upon commencement of operation. This provision shall not be construed to require a franchise operator to carry, at no charge, a signal for a television station which received remuneration from or on behalf of the recipient of the signal (including signals now known as "Teletext" or "Extravision" or other similar programs) for which a charge is made by the television station. 
(c)  To the extent required by the FCC or federal law, a franchise operator shall designate channel capacity for commercial use by persons who are not affiliated with the operator. A franchise operator may use any unused channel capacity designated pursuant to this section until an agreement is reached to lease that capacity. If a person who is not affiliated with a franchise operator seeks to lease channel capacity pursuant to this section, then a franchise operator shall establish the price, terms, and conditions of such lease, which will be at least sufficient to assure that the lease will not adversely affect the operation, financial condition, or market development of the cable system. 
(d)  Franchise operators shall provide one exterior cable service connection outlet for basic service, without installation or monthly charges, to all public schools, all public libraries, all City-owned recreational buildings, the City courthouses and annexes, and all other buildings and facilities owned by the City and used by the City for the delivery of City services to the public; provided that such facilities are within the franchise area of the franchise operator, such facility is contiguous to any main lateral cable system of the operator, and the connections are specifically requested by the City Manager or designee. 
(e)  At the request of the City Manager or designee, franchise operators shall provide the City without charge, one operative television channel over the system. This channel is to be provided solely for the City and other governmental bodies within the City in order to transmit civic and school programs, lectures, shows, announcements, City meetings, or meetings of their committees, educational, amusement or recreational information and all other lawful news information which the City desires at any and all times. All such use of this channel shall be coordinated among the various government entities served by the system. Such coordination shall be through the City Manager or designee. 
(f)  Franchise operators shall furnish the City, free of charge, an emergency override capability and alert warning system by which City officials may interrupt by audio or visual (crawl message) or similar methods all cable system programs simultaneously to either broadcast emergency information directly or to direct viewers to tune to a specified channel. 
(g)  Except to the extent otherwise authorized by law, no monitoring of a terminal connected to the cable system shall be permitted by a franchise operator without the written authorization of the person to be monitored; provided, that this section does not prohibit maintenance and testing procedures designed to assure compliance with technical standards, or to detect unauthorized reception of a signal. 
(h)  All franchise operators shall conduct annual tests of their cable systems at their expense to insure that the system meets all technical guideline standards prescribed by the FCC. A franchise operator shall be responsible for ensuring full compliance with such standards. 
(i)  The franchise operator shall provide the City an accurate map showing the location of all facilities erected, constructed and maintained by the operator. Such maps may be on a scale of one inch equals 100 feet. Such maps are intended to only show locations and not proprietary information as to the technical specifications of the lines. Updated maps shall be furnished to the City Manager or designee on an annual basis. 
(j)  Access to cable service shall not be denied to any group of potential residential cable subscribers by a cable operator because of the income of the residents of the local area in which the group resides. A cable operator may not decline to extend service to a developed neighborhood where it has already extended its cable lines to an adjacent undeveloped neighborhood that, for example, is a new model community. Such an extension shall only be required if there is at least a density of 30 homes per linear mile on a proratable basis; for example, nine homes within three-tenths of a mile from existing plant. This provision shall not require a cable company to extend service to an area already served by another cable operator. There, further, shall be no discrimination among an operator's subscribers for basic cable service. Nothing herein shall be construed to preclude competitive pricing and marketing offers that are not otherwise in violation of local, state or federal law. 
(k)  Whenever it is necessary to shut off or interrupt service for the making of repairs, installations, or adjustments, the franchise operator shall do so at such times as will cause the least amount of inconvenience to its subscribers. Unless such interruption is unforeseen and immediately necessary, the operator will give reasonable notice thereof to its subscribers. The franchise operator shall prorate each subscriber's monthly charge for an interruption of services due to a system shutdown not the fault of the subscriber. Proration will be granted at the request of the subscriber pursuant to section 27-37. 
(l)  The franchise operator shall so operate its system that there will be no interference with television or radio reception through individually owned receiving antennas. The franchise operator will investigate any claim of interference to the television reception of nonsubscribers which might be attributable to the system. If the interference is determined to be attributable to the system, the operator shall make correction promptly. 
(m)  No franchise operator may utilize negative option billing for service, channels or programs to obtain fees from subscribers or potential subscribers. 
(Ord. No. 00-20, § 1, 3-14-00)  
Sec. 27-37. - Subscriber complaint procedure. 
(a)  All franchise operators shall establish procedures for receiving, acting upon and resolving subscriber complaints which shall comply at least with all FCC requirements and the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Such procedures shall be filed with the City Manager or designee, who is hereby made the designated City official under FCC requirements to administer the City's internal complaint procedures. Notice of the complaint procedures shall be furnished by the operator to its subscribers, including credit procedures for loss of service. The notice shall be given at the time of initial subscription to the system by the subscriber. 
(c)  All franchise operators shall maintain a local telephone with a listed number to receive subscriber complaints by at least an answering service or machine to record complaints on a 24-hour basis. The franchise operator shall promptly respond to such complaints, including those made in writing. 
(d)  The franchise operator shall maintain all written complaints made by subscribers and the action taken by the operator in response. Such records shall be maintained for a period of three years and shall be made available to the City for inspection. 
(e)  Any continuous total outage of a subscriber's service not attributable to the subscriber or his or her equipment which lasts at least 24 hours or more shall be credited for the outage pro rata by the franchise operator for the subscriber's billing if requested by the subscriber. Such credit shall be applied to the subscriber's next billing statement. 
(Ord. No. 00-20, § 1, 3-14-00)  
Sec. 27-38. - Applications for franchise. 
(a)  A person applying for a franchise, renewal of a franchise, or a transfer of a franchise, shall complete the forms required and pay any pertinent application fee which shall be set by resolution of the City Council. 
(b)  Completed applications shall be submitted to the City Manager or designee, who in turn will schedule the application for the City Council at a duly advertised public hearing. 
(c)  The City Council shall grant applications by a separate franchise agreement which shall include identifying information from the application, insurance requirements, effective date of the franchise and such other terms as the City Council may require. 
(d)  The terms for a franchise or a renewal of a franchise shall be for ten years. 
(e)  Franchise operators shall pay to the City a franchise fee of three percent per calendar year on the operator's gross subscriber revenue. Payment of the franchise fee shall be made by March 31 for the preceding calendar year to the City Manager or designee. The payment shall be accompanied by a sworn statement of the operator's chief financial officer or a certification by an independent certified public accountant that the gross revenues have been correctly tabulated for the franchise. Untimely payments shall be assessed a late charge of one and one-half percent per month on the amount due for each month or portion thereof that full payment has not been made. The failure to make full payment, including any late charges by June 30 shall result in a public hearing on termination of the operator's franchise after notice to the operator. A duly authorized agent of the City shall have the right, power and authority to inspect and audit the operator's records to assess the accuracy of the franchise fee paid or owed. 
(Ord. No. 00-20, § 1, 3-14-00) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 00-20, adopted March 14, 2000, states: This ordinance creates no further vested rights, and the City Council reserves the full prerogative to review, revise, amend and update its regulation of cable television franchises, whether to comport with amendments to federal law or otherwise, at or before the expiration of this ordinance. 
Further, section 4 of said ordinance states: section 27-37(e) is modified to provide for the payment of a franchise fee in the maximum amount permitted by law.  
Sec. 27-39. - Indemnification and insurance. 
(a)  Franchise operators shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City and its officers, employees and agents from all claims, damages, taxes, costs, expenses, attorney's fees, paralegal fees, expert witness fees, consultant fees, litigation expenses and any other liability of any kind arising from, in connection with, or as a result of the construction, installation, operation, maintenance, repair or any other cable TV activity associated with the franchise. Excepted from this indemnification is any liability of the City specifically and solely related to its own programming on a governmental access channel and to its actions in interrupting a broadcast to utilize its emergency override capability. The provisions of this indemnification shall survive the operator's franchise for claims arising during the term of the franchise. 
(b)  The franchise operator shall maintain in full force and effect during the life of any franchise public liability insurance and worker's compensation insurance in amounts as specified in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 00-20, § 1, 3-14-00)  
Sec. 27-40. - Compliance review of franchise. 
(a)  In the event that a present or future franchise operator is in violation of this article, its franchise agreement or a pre-existing franchise ordinance if applicable, such violation shall be handled as follows: 
(1)  The City Manager or designee shall specify the violation in writing to the franchise operator. 
(2)  The operator shall correct the violation promptly or inform the City, in writing, why it believes no violation exists or presents its justification, in writing, for the action or practice. If after 30 days from the notice of violation by the City, the franchise operator has not corrected the violation or the City does not accept the operator's reasons for believing there is no violation, the matter will be scheduled for public hearing before the City Council for the purpose of determining what action, if any, is to be taken with respect to the franchise. 
(3)  The City Council may, in its sole discretion, impose reasonable sanctions, or prescribe reasonable remedial plans, or take other reasonable action to condition the continued validity of the franchise. The City Council also may determine, in its sole discretion, to terminate the franchise for a material violation. 
(b)  The City Council may take immediate action at a public hearing if a franchise operator becomes subject to any court order concerning involuntary bankruptcy, insolvency, or other similar law adversely affecting its credit worthiness; commences a voluntary case under the federal bankruptcy laws, or other federal or state insolvency, or similar laws adversely affecting its credit worthiness; and has made a false representation as to a material fact to the City in its franchise application or a material misrepresentation in its communications with or payments to the City. 
(c)  A franchise operator shall not be deemed to be in violation of this article, its franchise agreement or a pre-existing franchise ordinance if applicable, where the alleged noncompliance is caused by labor strikes, power outages, acts of God or other events outside of the operator's ability to control. 
(d)  All remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and in addition to any other remedy provided by law. No delay or failure by the City to exercise any right shall constitute a waiver of such right. 
(e)  In the event the City must prosecute or defend against litigation, judicial or administrative, to enforce the terms of this article, a pre-existing franchise ordinance, or the franchise agreement against the franchise operator, and the City prevails, the operator shall be liable for the City's legal costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, whether through in-house attorneys or outside counsel, and litigation expenses of every kind, including paralegal, expert witness and consultant fees. This provision shall survive any termination of an operator's franchise for claims arising during the terms of the franchise. 
(f)  Venue for any actions involving this article, a preexisting franchise ordinance or a franchise agreement shall be in the circuit or City court depending on the rules of jurisdiction of said courts, or in the federal district court in which the City is located to the extent concurrent jurisdiction is conferred by the Federal Cable Communications Act or its successor or any applicable federal statute. 
(Ord. No. 00-20, § 1, 3-14-00)  
Sec. 27-41. - Supplementing existing franchises. 
All existing cable TV franchises shall remain in effect but shall be subject to the standards, terms and conditions contained in this article. Such additional standards, terms and conditions, except for the duration of the franchise and the franchise fee, shall prevail over any inconsistent provision of any existing ordinance granting a franchise for cable TV. A confirming franchise agreement will be issued to each such cable TV operator within 60 days after the effective date of this article, which shall include the procedures for payment of the franchise fee, public liability and worker's compensation insurance requirements, inspections and audit authority for payment of the franchise fee, and such other terms as are appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 00-20, § 1, 3-14-00)  
ARTICLE III. - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-18, §§ 1—42, adopted Oct. 17, 2006, amended the Code by adding provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, said provisions were included herein as §§ 27-51—27-92. 
 
Sec. 27-51. - Intent and purposes. 
The purposes of this article are to: 
(1)  Protect the public health, safety and welfare; 
(2)  Provide for the granting of one or more franchises to permit the use of City streets and other public ways for cable communication systems; 
(3)  Provide for the regulation by the City of the erection, construction, reconstruction, installation, operation, maintenance, dismantling, testing, repair and use of cable communication systems in, upon, along, across, above, over and under or in any manner connected with the streets or other public ways within the City, as it now or in the future may exist; 
(4)  Provide for the payment of fees and other valuable considerations to the City for the use of City streets and other public ways by cable communication systems as well as to compensate the City for costs associated with such use; 
(5)  Provide for the development of cable communication systems as a means to improve communications and serve the present and future needs of the citizens, government and private and public institutions, organizations and enterprises of the City; 
(6)  Provide remedies and prescribe penalties for violations of this article and any franchise agreements executed pursuant to this article; and 
(7)  Provide for a level playing field for all companies providing service. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 1, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-52. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article the following terms, phrases, words and their derivation shall have the meaning given herein: 
Basic service means service tiers which include the delivery of local broadcast stations, and access channels. The basic service does not include optional program tiers, a la carte services, per channel, per program, or auxiliary services for which a separate charge is made. However, franchisee may include other signals on the basic tier. 
Cable system or cable television system or system means a system of antennas, cables, wires, lines, towers, waveguides, optical fiber, or other conductors, converters, equipment or facilities, designed and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving, transmitting, amplifying and distributing audio, video, and other forms of electronic, electrical or optical signals, which the City legally can regulate and located in the City. The definition shall not include any such facility that serves or will serve only subscribers in one or more multiple unit dwellings under common ownership, control or management, and which does not use City rights-of-way. 
Channel means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of delivering a television channel as a television channel is defined by the Federal Communications Commission. 
City means the City of Palm Coast, Florida. 
Control and/or controlling interest shall mean actual working control of a system in whatever manner exercised. A change in the control or controlling interest of an entity which has control or a controlling interest in a franchisee shall constitute a change in the control or controlling interest of the System under the same criteria. Control or controlling interest as used herein may be held simultaneously by more than one person or entity. 
Converter means an electronic device which converts signals to a frequency not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a subscriber, and by an appropriate channel selector also permits a subscriber to view more than 12 channels delivered by the system at designated converter dial locations. 
Drop shall mean the cable or wire that connects the distribution portion of a cable system to a subscriber's premises. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed, designated or elected agent or successor. 
Franchise means the nonexclusive right granted through the authority of a franchise agreement between the City and a franchisee hereunder which allows the franchisee to own, operate, construct, reconstruct, upgrade, dismantle, test, use, and maintain a Cable System within the corporate boundaries of the City, and is not intended to include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the City as may be required by other laws or ordinances of the City. 
Franchise agreement means that certain written agreement entered into between a franchisee and the City wherein the franchise and the terms thereof are conferred upon the franchisee. 
Franchisee means a person or entity to whom or which a franchise under this chapter is granted by the City, along with the lawful successors or assigns of such person or entity. 
Gross revenues means all revenue received directly or indirectly by the franchisee, from the provision of cable services within the City, including, but not limited to, basic subscriber service monthly fees, pay cable fees, installation and reconnection fees, franchise fees, late fees and fees for cable modem service, ( in the event that cable modem service is classified as a cable service by a court of competent jurisdiction in a final ruling), leased channel fees, converter rentals, downgrade fees, advertising revenue less agency fees; provided, however, that this shall not include any taxes on services furnished by the franchisee herein imposed directly upon any subscriber or user by the state, local or other governmental unit and collected by the franchisee on behalf of the governmental unit, or the portion of the money received by the franchisee which is attainable to the franchise fee, as that term is used in applicable law. 
Service area means all areas in the City. 
Installation means the connection of the system from feeder cable to subscribers' terminals. 
May is permissive. 
Monitoring means observing a communications signal, or the absence of a signal, where the observer is neither the subscriber nor the programmer, whether the signal is observed by visual or electronic means, for any purpose whatsoever; provided monitoring shall not include system-wide, non-individually addressed sweeps of the system for purposes of verifying system integrity, controlling return paths transmissions, or billing for pay services. 
Normal business hours shall mean those hours during which most similar businesses in the community are open to serve customers, as defined by federal regulations. 
Normal operating conditions shall mean those service conditions which are within the control of the franchisee. Those conditions which are not within the control of the franchisee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the franchisee include, but are not limited to, special promotions, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of a cable system. 
Educational, or governmental access facilities means channel capacity designated for educational or governmental use, and facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity. 
Service interruption means the loss of picture or sound on one or more channels. 
Shall is mandatory. 
Street means the surface of and all rights-of-way and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way or place, sidewalk, alley, court, boulevard, parkway, drive or easement now or hereafter held by the City for the purpose of public travel and shall include other easements or rights-of-way as shall be now held or hereafter held by the City which shall, within their proper use and meaning, entitle the franchisee to the use thereof for the purposes of installing poles, wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, optical fiber, and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to a cable television system. 
Subscriber shall mean any person, firm, corporation, or association lawfully receiving basic and/or additional cable service from franchisee. 
User means a party utilizing a cable television system channel for purposes of production or transmission of material to subscribers, as contrasted with receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 2, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-53. - Conflicting provisions. 
(a)  This article is adopted pursuant to the authority of the City under the Constitutions and Statutes of the State of Florida and the United States of America, including, but not limited to, the Cable Communication Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. 521, the Cable Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and Florida Statutes 166.046 and 366.031. 
(b)  In the case of a conflict between a provision in this article and either a provision in a franchise agreement executed pursuant to this article or a provision in a franchise proposal that is incorporated by reference into such franchise agreement, this article shall control, unless the franchise agreement expresses an explicit intent to waive a requirement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 3, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-54. - Use of streets. 
(a)  Before any construction is commenced, the franchisee shall obtain all required and approved construction permits from the City and any other permits as may be required by law. Franchisee shall pay any and all inspection fees associated with obtaining such permits. The City shall have the right to inspect all construction or installation work performed by the franchisee in the City's streets. In the event of damage to property caused by franchisee, then franchisee must restore private property and public thoroughfares to their former conditions in a reasonable manner acceptable to the City or the private property owner as the case may be; if this is not done within 30 days, barring unforeseen circumstances, the City or private property owner may, after prior written notice to franchisee, cause reasonable repairs to be made at the expense of franchisee. 
(b)  The facilities shall be so located or relocated and so erected or installed so as not to obstruct or interfere with the use of streets, alleys, easements, and other public ways and places, or other utilities or structures already installed or hereinafter to be installed, subject at all times to the lawful police power of the City. Any unreasonable obstruction of any street, alley, avenue, bridge, easement or other public place or way of the City not promptly removed by the franchisee after written notice by the City demanding removal thereof, or not properly repaired by the franchisee after its work therein, after written notice by City demanding repair thereof, may be removed or repaired, as the case may be, by the City, and all reasonable costs thereof shall be charged against said franchisee and shall be collectible by the City in any lawful manner. 
(c)  Franchisee may trim trees on private property at the franchisee's expense, with prior approval of the property owner. Franchisee may trim trees on public rights-of-way at its own expense, but only after written notification to and the approval of the City. Approval will be deemed granted within three business days after written notification to the City if the City has not contacted the franchisee. In addition, removal of trees for new construction shall first require tree removal permits to be obtained by the franchisee at its expense. 
(d)  At the request of any person holding a valid building moving permit, the franchisee must temporarily raise, lower or cut its wires, as necessary to facilitate such move, upon not less than five business days advance notice. The direct expense of such temporary changes must be paid by the permit holder and the franchisee may require payment in advance. 
(e)  Franchisee must utilize existing poles, conduits, or other such facilities wherever possible, if available on reasonable terms and conditions. All transmission lines and structures must be installed to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners. Franchisee must obtain permission from the City before erecting any new poles or underground conduit at the time franchisee seeks to install any new lines. Approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(f)  On streets and roads where electrical and telephone utility wiring is installed underground, at the time of the initial cable construction, or if subsequently both go underground, cable must also be installed underground at no expense to the City, except to the extent the City bears the expenses of other parties similarly situated. If both electric and telephone utility wiring is aerial, franchisee may install aerial cable, except where a property owner or resident requests underground installation, and property owner or resident agrees to bear the additional cost over aerial construction. 
(g)  The City shall give franchisee reasonable notice of plans for street improvements when paving or resurfacing of a permanent nature is involved. Any relocation required by the City because of said improvements shall be at the expense of the franchisee. If all or part of a street within the City is closed or discontinued, franchisee shall not be entitled to damages from the City due to the closing or discontinuance of such street, because of removal or relocation of lines or cables by the franchisee in said streets. However, if funding becomes available to the City for undergrounding to reimburse users in the public rights of way, then cable franchisees will be reimbursed for their costs of relocation in the same manner as other users of the rights of way are reimbursed. 
(h)  All poles, lines, structures, and other facilities of franchisee, in, on, over and under the streets, sidewalks, alleys, easements and other public grounds or places within City shall be kept by franchisee at all times in a safe, sound and substantial condition. 
(i)  The franchisee's work, while in progress, shall be properly protected at all times with suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares, or other devices to protect all members of the public having occasion to use the portion of the streets involved or adjacent property. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 4, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-55. - Grant of authority; franchise required. 
(a)  The City may grant one or more franchises in accordance with this article. 
(b)  No person shall commence construction of a cable system on the public rights-of-way, or operate a cable system in the City, without receiving a franchise granted by the City and executing a franchise agreement with the City. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 5, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-56. - Franchise characteristics. 
(a)  A franchise authorizes use of the public rights-of-way for installing cables, wires, lines, optical fiber, and other facilities to operate a cable system within a specified area of the City, but does not expressly or implicitly authorize the franchisee to provide service to, or install cables, wires, lines, optical fiber, or any other equipment or facilities upon private property without owner consent (except for use of compatible easements pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 541(a)(2) or as otherwise provided by law), or to use publicly or privately owned utility poles or conduits without a separate agreement with the owners. 
(b)  A franchise is nonexclusive, and will not expressly or implicitly preclude the issuance of other franchises to operate cable systems within the City or affect the City's right to authorize use of public rights-of-way to other persons as it determines appropriate. A franchise shall not be granted on terms or conditions more favorable or less burdensome than those in any existing franchise. 
(c)  Once a franchise agreement has been accepted and executed by the City and a franchisee, such franchise agreement shall constitute a contract between the franchisee and the City, and the terms, conditions and provisions of such franchise agreement, together with all duly enacted and applicable laws, ordinances, codes, rules, regulations and orders, shall define the rights and obligations of the franchisee and the City relating to the franchise, except as set forth in section 27-90(a). 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 6, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-57. - Franchise subject to other laws. 
(a)  A franchisee is subject to, and must comply with, all generally applicable local, City, State and Federal laws, ordinances, codes, rules, regulations, and orders. 
(b)  Except as may be specifically provided in this article or under the terms of a franchise agreement, the failure of the City, upon one or more occasions, to exercise a right, or to require compliance, or performance under the article or a franchise agreement shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver of such right or waiver of compliance or performance in the future. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 7, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-58. - Interpretation of franchise terms. 
(a)  Subject to provisions of section 27-90, the provisions of this article will apply to a franchise agreement, and the express terms of this article will prevail over conflicting or inconsistent provisions in a franchise agreement, unless such franchise agreement expresses an explicit intent to waive a requirement of the article. 
(b)  The provisions of a franchise agreement will be liberally construed to effectuate its purposes and objectives consistent with this article and the public interest. Except where federal law or regulation is controlling, a franchise agreement will be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the State of Florida. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 8, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-59. - Grant of franchises. 
(a)  Generally, the City may grant a franchise for a period not to exceed ten years, although a longer franchise term up to a 15 year term may be granted if the City Council finds it would better meet community needs and interests. 
(b)  The City may make the grant of a franchise conditioned upon the completion of construction within a prescribed time or upon the performance of other specific obligations, which are to be set forth in the franchise agreement, specifying that failure to timely comply with the condition will cause the franchisee to be in material breach of its franchise agreement, and become subject to penalties pursuant to this article and the franchise agreement. Violations listed in section 27-84 shall be considered material breaches of this article. 
(c)  In evaluating an application for a new franchise, the City shall consider among other things, the following factors: the applicant's character, its technical, financial, and legal qualifications to construct and operate the proposed system; the nature of the proposed facilities, equipment and services; the applicant's record in other communities, if any; the economic impact on private property within the proposed service area; the capability of the public rights-of-way to accommodate the proposed system; potential disruption to existing users of the public rights-of-way and the public; and whether the proposal will meet reasonably anticipated community needs and serve the public interest. Where an applicant proposes an overbuild of an existing cable system, the City shall also consider, pursuant to Florida Statutes Section 166.046, the economic feasibility of multiple cable operators, the impact on the existing franchisee, including whether the operations of an existing cable franchisee will be interfered with or disrupted, and whether any adverse consequences to the public interest will result if the application is granted. 
(d)  The Council shall hold a public hearing to consider any new application. Based upon the application, the testimony presented at the public hearing, any recommendations of the City Manager, and any other information it deems relevant to the application, the Council shall decide whether to grant or deny a franchise application and the terms and conditions of a grant. Any grant of a franchise shall be under terms and conditions that are not more favorable or less burdensome than those in an existing franchise. 
(e)  If the Council grants an initial franchise application, the City Manager and the applicant must agree on the terms of a franchise agreement within 90 calendar days from the date City Council approves the grant. This time period may be extended for good cause by the City. If agreement is not reached with the City within 90 calendar days or if the period is not extended by the City, the franchise grant will be null and void without further action by the City. 
(f)  After complying with the above requirements, the Council, following a public hearing, and considering the testimony presented at the public hearing, any recommendations of the City Manager, and any other relevant information, shall approve or disapprove the proposed franchise agreement by resolution. 
(g)  A franchisee must demonstrate compliance with the surety, insurance and similar provisions of the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 9, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-60. - Complaints. 
(a)  Franchisee shall maintain and operate its system and render efficient service in accordance with the rules and regulations which are or which may be set forth by the City from time to time in the exercise of its authority under applicable law, and subject to section 27-90(a) of this article. 
(b)  Whenever it is necessary to shut off or interrupt service for the making of repairs, installations, or adjustments, franchisee shall do so at such times as will cause the least amount of inconvenience to its customers and unless such interruption is unforeseen and immediately necessary, it will give reasonable notice thereof to its customers. 
(c)  The franchisee shall maintain an office located convenient to the City which shall be open at reasonable hours for receiving complaints from subscribers and non-subscribers. Said complaints shall be investigated and if attributable to the system, corrected within the time frames set forth in section 27-73 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 10, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-61. - Rates. 
(a)  Before any service is sold to any customer, a franchisee shall file with the City Manager its schedule of rates for installation and monthly service charges and any other information required by the Federal rules. 
(b)  Subsequent additions or amendments to rates, service charges and rights and obligations statements shall likewise be filed with the City Manager at least 30 days before the same become effective. Simultaneously, a franchisee shall also provide subscribers to the cable system with written notification of any such additions or amendments at least 30 days before the same become effective. 
(c)  In the event that any state or federal law or regulation is at any time after the effective date of this article, enacted, changed, modified, interpreted, amended, repealed or invalidated so as to allow for the City's regulation of rates paid by cable subscribers, the City may, at its option, regulate such rates as permitted by law. 
(d)  Rate regulation proceedings shall be conducted at a duly noticed public hearing to ensure that all interested parties have a reasonable opportunity to present their views. The Council may conduct such hearings at its regularly scheduled meeting or at a meeting scheduled solely for the purpose of regulating rates. 
(e)  To the extent allowed by state and federal law, nothing in this section shall prevent a franchisee from applying a surcharge or late payment penalty to subscriber bills to reflect balances due the franchisee which are delinquent for 20 days or more. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 11, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-62. - Indemnification. 
(a)  Prior to the beginning of any work by the franchisee within the prescribed limits of the City, the franchisee shall file with the City and shall keep in force and effect at all times during the effective period hereof, insurance certification evidencing a commercial general liability insurance policy, in the amount of $2,000,000.00 per occurrence, combined single limit, the terms and conditions whereof shall be such as to provide for the protection and indemnification of the City with respect to claims of any person or corporation suffering injury, loss or damage to person or property by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of its cable television system within the prescribed limits of the City. Both the City and franchisee shall be named as insured and there shall be no right of subrogation against the City. Such insurance policy shall be subject to the acceptance and approval of the City which shall not be unreasonably withheld. Franchisee must have management rating in Best's Insurance Guide of BB or better. Franchisee shall obligate itself to notify the City in writing at least 30 days before any alteration, modification, or cancellation of such policy is to become effective, which would result in non-compliance with this provision. 
(b)  A franchisee shall, at its sole costs and expense, indemnify, save harmless and defend the City, and all its agents, officials and employees from any and all claims, demands, actions or causes of action, proceedings, judgments for damages or equitable relief brought against the City based on personal injury, bodily injury (including death), the conduct of a franchisee's business in the City, or property damages (including destruction) received or claimed to be received or sustained by any person or persons arising from or in connection with the franchisee's performance of its franchise agreement with the City. This provision shall include, but is not limited to, the City's reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in defending against any such claim, suit or proceedings; claims arising out of copyright infringements or a failure by a franchisee to secure consents from owners, authorized distributors, or providers or programs to be delivered by the cable system; claims against a franchisee for invasion of the right of privacy, defamation of any person, firm or corporation, or the violation or infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent, or of any other right of any person. Franchisee shall defend the City in any action or proceeding commenced for the purpose of asserting any claim arising under a franchisee's performance of its franchise agreement, except for any claim asserted by a franchisee or asserted by the City against a franchisee. City shall receive advance consent in writing before settling any dispute that is subject to indemnification by the franchisee. Nothing herein shall be construed as consent by an agency or subdivision of the State of Florida to be sued by third parties in any matter arising out of this article, or a franchise agreement; or as a waiver of sovereign immunity by any party to which sovereign immunity applies. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 12, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-63. - Service area. 
The franchisee shall provide service to the entire City, in accordance with the requirements of section 27-72(b). The City Council may hold a public hearing as provided in section 27-83(c) and (d) if, after receiving complaints and making an investigation, it is determined that the franchisee is not endeavoring to expand its service in the franchise area. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 13, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-64. - Franchise fee. 
(a)  A franchisee shall pay the communications services tax provided in the Communications Services Tax Simplification Law, Chapter 202, Florida Statutes, as that law has been and may hereinafter be amended or renumbered and any City of Palm Coast Ordinances or resolutions enacted pursuant to such law. In the event that Chapter 202, Florida Statutes, is held to be unconstitutional, invalid, or unenforceable, a franchisee, as compensation for the privilege granted under a franchise for the use of the public rights-of-way to construct, maintain and operate a cable system, shall pay the City a franchise fee in an amount of either (1) five percent of the franchisee's gross revenues; or (2) in the event 47 U.S.C. § 542 or other applicable law is amended to permit the City to assess a franchise fee of a greater percentage or amount than that specified in subsection (1) above, or on a broader revenue basis than defined in this chapter, the franchisee shall during the remaining term of any existing franchise or in a renewal franchise pay the City the new percentage or amount as established at any time by the commission after a public hearing of which the franchisee has received notice, provided that the percentage of revenue and the revenue base for the franchise fee do not exceed those paid by franchisee to any other franchising authority in Volusia, Orange, Osceola, Brevard or Seminole Counties. Sections 27-64(b) through (i) and all references to franchise fees, gross revenues and associated reporting requirements mentioned in this article or a franchise agreement do not apply as long as the communications services tax (or similar regulatory provisions) are in effect. 
(b)  A franchisee shall pay the franchise fee due to the City on a quarterly basis. Payment for each quarter shall be made to the City not later than 45 calendar days after the end of each calendar quarter. All payments shall be accompanied by a calculation of gross revenue certified by a certified public accountant or the franchisee's chief financial officer. 
(c)  A franchisee shall file with the City, on a quarterly basis, a financial statement setting forth the computation of gross revenues used to calculate the franchise fee for the preceding quarter and a detailed explanation of the method of computation showing the revenue derived from each category of the franchisee's operations. The statement shall be verified by a financial representative of franchisee or the franchisee's chief financial officer. The franchisee shall bear the cost of the preparation of such financial statements. 
(d)  Subject to applicable law, no acceptance by the City of any franchise fee payment shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of payment be construed as a release of any claim the City may have for additional sums payable. 
(e)  The franchise fee payment is not a payment in lieu of any other tax, fee or assessment. 
(f)  In the event that Florida law so permits, the City may, from time to time, and upon reasonable notice, but in no event not less than seven days prior notice, inspect and audit any and all books and records of the franchisee relevant to the determination of gross revenues and the computation of franchise fees due. Inspections, audits, and recomputations may be performed by either the City or an independent firm selected by the City and qualified for such purposes. No audit of a franchisee's records relating to gross annual revenues shall take place later than 36 months following the close of each of the franchisee's fiscal years. The cost of the audit shall be borne by the franchisee if, as a result of the audit, the City determines that the franchisee has underpaid the franchise fees owed in an amount equal to or exceeding four percent of the franchise fees actually paid. A franchisee shall make all books and records necessary to satisfactorily perform the audit readily available for inspection to the auditors in the City, or in the alternative, the franchisee shall pay all costs necessary for the City to perform the audit at a location outside the City. Any additional amount due to the City as a result of the audit shall be paid within 30 days of notice by the City, unless the franchisee disputes, within 15 days, the results of the audit. In the event the franchisee disputes the results, the franchisee will meet with the City and will attempt in good faith to resolve any differences. Thereafter, the additional amount due shall be subject to payment within 30 days after said additional amount is determined to be due by the franchisee and the City. 
(g)  In the event that a franchise fee payment is not received by the City on or before the due date set forth in subsection (b) above, or is underpaid, the franchisee shall pay a late charge equal to the prime interest rate as published in the Wall Street Journal plus two percent of the amount of the unpaid or underpaid franchise fee payment, provided, however, that such rate does not exceed the maximum amount allowed under Florida law, and that the franchisee shall not be responsible for paying interest on delinquent franchise fees resulting from erroneous database information provided by the City. Any interest and/or late charge paid by the franchisee is intended to be a charge incidental to the enforcement of a franchise within the meaning of 47 U.S.C. § 542(g)(2)(D), and may not be deducted from the franchise fee imposed by this article or any franchise agreement. Furthermore, the City may invoke all rights and remedies available under applicable law and this article. 
(h)  When a franchise terminates for whatever reason, the franchisee shall file with the City within 60 calendar days of the date its operations in the City of Palm Coast cease, a financial statement, verified by a financial representative or the franchisee's chief financial officer, showing the gross revenues received by the franchisee since the end of the previous fiscal year. Adjustments shall be made at that time for franchise fees due to the date that the franchisee's operations ceased. 
(i)  Any transaction or arrangement which has the effect of circumventing payment of franchise fees and/or evasion of payment of franchise fees (for example, by non-collection of revenues, non-reporting of revenues, collection of revenues by parents, affiliates or subsidiaries, bartering, or any other means) from the operation of the franchisee's cable system to provide cable service in the City of Palm Coast is strictly prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 14, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-65. - Maps. 
The franchisee shall at all times keep an accurate "as-built" map showing the location of all facilities erected, constructed and maintained by the franchisee under the provisions of this franchise, and the maps shall be made available for inspection by the City during normal business hours, upon request. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 15, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-66. - Reports and records. 
(a)  As soon as available, and upon the request of the City, a franchisee shall provide the City an annual report that includes the following information: 
(1)  A summary of the previous calendar year's activities in development of the system, including, but not limited to, services begun or dropped, number of subscribers (including gains and losses), homes passed, and miles of cable distribution lines in service. The summary shall also include a comparison of any construction, including system upgrades during the year, with any projections previously provided to the City. 
(2)  If franchisee pays franchise fees directly to the City, a franchisee shall submit to the City, and bear the cost of, an annual gross revenue report prepared according to generally accepted accounting principles. Such reports shall be certified by the corporate officer responsible for the preparation of the gross revenue report expressing an opinion thereon. At any other time, upon request of the City, the franchisee shall submit any further information regarding the franchisee's performance of the franchise agreement as may be required by the City. 
(3)  A summary of written subscriber or consumer complaints, or those complaints requiring a service call, identifying the number and nature of complaints and their disposition. Where complaints involve one or more recurrent system problems, the nature of each problem and what steps have been taken to correct it, shall be identified. When available, more detailed information on complaints shall be submitted upon request of the City. 
(4)  If the franchisee is a corporation, a list of officers and members of the board and the local officers and board members of any parent corporation; and where a parent corporation's stock is publicly traded, a copy of its most recent annual report. 
(5)  A list of all partners or known stockholders holding five percent or more ownership interest in the franchisee and any parent corporation; provided, however, when any such entity has more than ten persons holding five percent ownership interest, the ten largest such holders shall be listed. Alternatively, the annual ownership information required by the FCC for broadcast licensees may be supplied, or if a parent corporation's stock is publicly traded, a copy of its most recent annual report shall suffice. 
(6)  A copy of customer notifications provided under section 27-73. 
(7)  A report on the number of senior citizens or economically disadvantaged groups of subscribers receiving rate discounts, if any. 
(b)  Within 30 days of a request by the City, a franchisee shall make available to the City books and records adequate to enable the franchisee to demonstrate that it is in compliance with the requirements of this article and the franchise agreement. This provision shall not be deemed as a waiver of a franchisee's right to assert that the information sought by the City is proprietary and should not be disclosed, and to withhold such information upon the agreement of the City. If the City Manager does not concur with such assertion, then the franchisee may appeal such decision to the City Council in accordance with applicable laws and procedures. If the City Council finds the books and records should be disclosed, and if the franchisee does not appeal such decision to a court of law, then the franchisee shall promptly provide such documents, including the alleged proprietary portion thereof, to the City. The City shall maintain confidentiality of information provided by the franchisee when franchisee has designated such information as proprietary if legally possible. The City shall provide franchisee with notice of any request by a third party for such information. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 16, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-67. - Discrimination prohibited. 
(a)  Unless approved by the City, or to the extent consistent with federal law, no franchisee may in its rates or charges, or in the availability of the services or facilities of its system, or in any other respect, make or grant illegal preferences or advantages to any subscriber or potential subscriber to the system, or to any user or potential user of the system, nor subject any such persons to any illegal prejudice or any disadvantage; provided, however, a franchisee may offer discounts in order to attract or maintain subscribers, so long as such discounts are offered on a legally non-discriminatory basis within the service area. A franchisee must not deny, delay or otherwise burden service or discriminate against subscribers or users on the basis of age, race, creed, religion, color, sex, disability status, national origin, marital status, except for discounts for senior citizens or economically disadvantaged groups of subscribers that are applied in a uniform and consistent manner. 
(b)  A franchisee must not deny cable service to any potential subscribers because of the income of the residents of the area in which the subscribers reside. 
(c)  Franchisee may offer services to commercial subscribers at rates different than those charged residential subscribers and may enter into separate contracts with multiple dwelling unit buildings. Franchisee may also charge different rates for services based upon single point billing or other contractual considerations. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 17, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-68. - Waiver. 
Nothing in this franchise shall be construed as a surrender by the City of its right or power to pass ordinances regulating the use of its streets and other public ways; neither shall the franchisee be relieved from paying a reasonable annual business license fee and such taxes as may be levied from time to time by appropriate government entities. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 18, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-69. - Taxes. 
Nothing herein shall be construed as affecting in any manner the right of City to levy or collect taxes payable by the consumer for services provided by the franchisee as now authorized under the laws of the State of Florida. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 19, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-70. - Transfers. 
(a)  A transfer of a franchise shall not occur without prior approval of the City. 
(b)  An application to transfer a franchise must provide complete information on the proposed transaction, including details on the legal, character, financial, technical and other pertinent qualifications of the transferee. At minimum, the information required in FCC Form 394 must be provided by the transferor and transferee. The information required in section 27-71(e)(5)—(10) must also be provided whenever the proposed transferee expects material changes to occur in those areas. 
(c)  An application for approval of a transfer to an entity under common control with franchisee shall be considered granted on the 31st calendar day following its filing with the City, unless prior to that date, the franchisee is notified to the contrary. An application for approval of such a pro forma transfer shall clearly identify the application as such. 
(d)  The City Manager shall make recommendations to the Council on each transfer application submitted to the Council for final action. The Council shall hold a public hearing before taking final action on an application for transfer of a franchise. 
(e)  In making a determination on whether to grant an application to transfer a franchise, the Council will consider the legal, financial, technical and character qualifications of the transferee to operate the system and whether operation by the franchisee would adversely affect the cable services to subscribers. The franchisee will provide all information necessary to this determination. The transferee will take on all the obligations of the franchisee under this article and the franchise agreement. 
(f)  Approval by the City of a transfer of a franchise does not constitute a waiver or release of any of the rights of the City under this article or a franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 20, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-71. - Application for grant, modification or transfer of franchises. 
(a)  An application must be filed with the City for grant of a new franchise, modification of a franchise agreement, or a transfer of a franchise. An applicant shall provide the City with such information as the City may reasonably request to demonstrate compliance with all requirements of the article and of federal law. 
(b)  To be acceptable for filing, an application must be submitted in the number of copies required by the City, conform to any applicable request for proposals, and contain all required information. All applications must include the names and addresses of persons authorized to act on behalf of the applicant with respect to the application. 
(c)  All applications accepted for filing must be made available by the City for public inspection. 
(d)  An application for the grant of a new franchise may be filed pursuant to a request for proposals issued by the City or on an unsolicited basis. The City, upon receipt of an unsolicited application, may issue a request for proposals. If the City elects to issue a request for proposals upon receipt of an unsolicited application, the applicant may submit an amended application in response to the request for proposals, or may inform the City that its unsolicited application should be considered in response to the request for proposals, or may withdraw its unsolicited application. An application which does not conform to the requirements of a request for proposals may be considered non-responsive. 
(e)  An application for the grant of an initial franchise must contain, at minimum, the following information, provided however that any party providing cable services in the City as of the effective date of this article shall not be required to provide the information specified in subsections (4), (5), (6), (10) and (13) below: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant and identification of the ownership and control of the applicant, including: the names and addresses of the ten largest holders of an ownership interest in the applicant, and all persons with five percent or more ownership interest; the persons who control the applicant; all local officers and directors of the applicant; a description of the applicant's other business affiliations and cable system ownership interests. Where the applicant or the parent corporation of the applicant issues stock which is publicly traded, a copy of its most recent annual report shall suffice in lieu of the above information; 
(2)  An indication of whether the applicant, or any person controlling the applicant, or major stockholder of the applicant, has been adjudged bankrupt, had a cable franchise revoked, or been found guilty by any court or administrative agency of a violation of a security or antitrust law, or a felony, or any crime involving moral turpitude; and, if so, identification of any such person or entity and a full explanation of the circumstances; 
(3)  A demonstration of the applicant's technical, legal and financial ability to construct and operate the proposed cable facility, including identification of key personnel; 
(4)  A description of applicant's prior experience in cable operations and identification of communities in which applicant or its principals have, or had, a cable franchise or an interest therein, including the identification of any litigation between any such franchisees and their franchising authorities; 
(5)  A detailed description of the physical facility proposed, including channel capacity, technical design, performance characteristics, headend, and access facilities to be provided to satisfy the requirements of this article; 
(6)  A description of the construction of the proposed system, including an estimate of above-ground and below-ground mileage and its location, the proposed construction schedule, a description, where appropriate, of how services will be converted from existing facilities to new facilities, and information on the availability of space on poles and conduits including, where appropriate, an estimate of the cost of rearrangement of facilities to accommodate such use; 
(7)  For informational purposes, a description of the services to be provided initially, including all broadcast and non-broadcast signals to be carried and all non-television services to be delivered over the cable system, and, if services will be offered by tiers, identification of the signals and/or services to be included on each tier; 
(8)  For informational purposes, the proposed rate structure including charges for each service tier, installation, and other equipment or services; 
(9)  A demonstration of how the proposal will reasonably meet the future cable-related needs and interests of the community, including a description of how the proposal will meet the needs described in any recent community needs assessment conducted by or for the City; 
(10)  Pro forma financial projections for the franchise term, including statement of projected income and expenses, and a schedule of planned capital additions, with all significant assumptions explained in notes or supporting schedules; 
(11)  An affidavit of the applicant or authorized officer certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the application, and acknowledging the enforceability of application commitments, and certifying that the proposal meets all federal and state requirements; 
(12)  If an applicant proposes to provide cable service to an area already served by an existing cable franchisee, the identification of the area where the overbuild would occur, the potential subscriber density in the area which would encompass the overbuild, and other information as necessary for the City to make its determination pursuant to section 27-59(c); 
(13)  If the applicant does not propose to provide institutional services, an explanation of why it does not; and 
(14)  Any other information as may be reasonably necessary to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this article or any information that the City may request of applicant that is relevant to the City's consideration of the application. 
(f)  An application for modification of a franchise must include, at minimum, the following information: 
(1)  The specific modification requested; 
(2)  The justification for the requested modification, including the impact of the requested modification on subscribers and others, and the impact on the applicant if the modification is not approved; 
(3)  A statement whether the modification is sought pursuant to Section 625 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 545, and, if so, a demonstration that the requested modification meets the legal standards of 47 U.S.C. § 545; and 
(4)  Any other information necessary for the City to make a determination. 
(g)  An application for renewal of a franchise must comply with the requirements of section 27-75. 
(h)  An application for approval of a transfer of a franchise must comply with the requirements of section 27-70. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 21, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-72. - Minimum facilities and services. 
(a)  The following minimum requirements for facilities and services apply to all franchises, except where expressly specified in a franchise document. The City may require in a franchise agreement that a franchisee exceed these minimum requirements where it determines, under circumstances existing at the time of the application, that the higher requirements are necessary to meet reasonable public needs, taking into account the costs thereof, and that such requirements are consistent with current state-of-the-art capabilities and are economically feasible. 
(1)  Any cable system construction occurring after the effective date of this article shall have a minimum capacity of 78 video channels, available for immediate or potential use, and have the capability for two-way communications. 
(2)  A franchisee shall be required to make available, without charge, unlimited time on up to two channels, as follows: 
a.  A local government access channel for non-commercial local governmental use, the allocation and use of such to be determined by the Council. To the extent permitted by applicable law, a franchisee shall be required to make this local government access channel available as part of its lowest basic service level. Franchisee shall provide to the City a switch to permit the City to insert the programming of the Flagler County government channel onto the City government access channel. Some customers may not receive the City of Palm Coast access channel due to the fact that the technical design of the cable system does not precisely correspond to municipal boundaries; but in all events, the franchisee shall, within a reasonable period of time, provide the City of Palm Coast access channel to City residents/subscribers on any node on which the majority of subscribers are residents of the City of Palm Coast. 
b.  Provide an educational access channel, if specified in the franchise agreement. 
c.  Contribute a capital grant and/or access equipment for such access channel for educational and/or governmental use that will be specifically defined in a franchise agreement. 
d.  Submit to the City on an annual basis a plan for publicizing, if specified in a franchise agreement. 
(3)  A franchisee shall be required to provide basic and standard service offering without charge to facilities within the City passed by the cable system which are owned and occupied by the local governmental entity and all Flagler County public schools (excluding home schools) for educational or governmental use. Such service shall be provided by means of a single drop extending to the facility or, in the event the facility consists of more than one building, to a single building within such facility selected by the governmental entity. The franchisee shall not be required to extend such single drop more than 125 feet from the cable distribution line with the expense of any additional extension to be borne by the entity being served. Such single drop may be internally extended by the governmental entity without cost to, or responsibility of the franchisee, subject to such internal distribution meeting all FCC requirements relative to signal leakage. In the event of the addition of a new building eligible for service under this subsection during the life of a franchise agreement, the franchisee may be required to provide such service within 90 days of a request by the City to do so, excluding circumstances beyond franchisee's control. 
(4)  A franchisee shall comply with FCC requirements for emergency alert services. 
(5)  A franchisee shall make available to its subscribers equipment capable of decoding closed circuit captioning information for the hearing impaired. A franchisee may charge for such equipment. 
(b)  A franchisee shall make cable service available to every dwelling within the City where the dwelling is in an area with a minimum density of 20 dwellings per cable mile as measured from the franchisee's existing cable plant. Density per cable mile shall be computed by dividing the number of residential dwelling units in the area by the length, in miles or fractions thereof, of the total amount of aerial or underground cable necessary to make service available to the residential dwelling units in such area in accordance with franchisee's system design parameters. The cable length shall be measured from the nearest technically feasible point of access to the then-existing system, which is located within the public rights-of-way. The total cable length shall exclude the drop cable necessary to serve individual Subscriber premises. Where potential subscribers reside in a portion of the service area with dwelling density below the prescribed minimum, the franchisee shall extend service to such potential subscribers under the following conditions: (1) if they are willing to pay a one time charge equivalent to the franchisee's construction cost per dwelling in each cable mile area; or (2) if 15 potential subscribers per cable mile measured from the existing cable feeder plan commit themselves to taking service in a manner reasonably satisfactory to the franchisee. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 22, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-73. - Minimum customer service standards. 
(a)  Cable system office hours and telephone availability: 
(1)  The franchisee will maintain a local, toll-free or collect call telephone access lines which will be available to its subscribers 24 hours a day, seven days a week. 
a.  Trained franchisee representatives will be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries during normal business hours. 
b.  After normal business hours, the access line may be answered by a service or an automated response system, including an answering machine. Inquiries received after normal business hours must be responded to by a trained franchisee representative on the next business day. 
(2)  Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a customer representative, including wait time, shall not exceed 30 seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed 30 seconds. These standards shall be met no less than 90 percent of the time under normal operating conditions, measured on a quarterly basis. 
(3)  The franchisee will not be required to obtain equipment or perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards above unless an historical record of the complaints taken by the franchising authority indicates a clear failure to comply. 
(4)  Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a busy signal less than three percent of the time. 
(5)  Customer service center and bill payment locations will be open at least during normal business hours and will be an office location convenient to Palm Coast in Flagler County, Florida. 
(b)  Installations, outages and service calls. Under normal operating conditions, each of the following four standards will be met no less than 95 percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis: 
(1)  Standard installations will be performed within seven business days after an order has been placed. "Standard" installations are those that are located up to 125 feet from the existing distribution system. 
(2)  Excluding conditions beyond the control of the operator, the cable operator will begin working on "service interruptions" promptly and in no event later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes known. The franchisee must begin actions to correct other service problems the next business day after notification of the service problem. 
(3)  The "appointment window" alternatives for installations, service calls, and other installation activities will be either a specific time or, at maximum, a four-hour time block during normal business hours. (The operator may schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of normal business hours for the express convenience of the customer). 
(4)  A franchisee may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. 
(5)  If a franchisee's representative is running late for an appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer will be contacted no later than 30 minutes after the scheduled time. The appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the customer provided it is within the franchisee's normal time frame for service calls. 
(c)  Communications between franchisees and cable subscribers: 
(1)  Notifications to subscribers: 
a.  The franchisee shall provide written information on each of the following areas at the time of installation of service, and at least annually to all subscribers, or at any time upon request: 
1.  Products and services offered; 
2.  Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services; 
3.  Installation and service maintenance policies; 
4.  Instructions on how to use the cable service; 
5.  Channel positions of programming carried on the system; and, 
6.  Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and telephone number of the local franchise authority's cable office. 
b.  Customers will be notified of any changes in rates, programming services or channel positions as soon as possible in writing. Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of 30 days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the cable operator. In addition, the franchisee operator shall notify subscribers 30 days in advance of any significant changes in the other information required by the preceding paragraph. 
(d)  Billing: 
(1)  Bills will be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills also will clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and credits. 
(2)  In case of a billing dispute, the franchisee must respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days. 
(e)  Refunds. Refund checks will be issued promptly, but not later than either: 
(1)  The customer's next billing cycle following resolution of the request or 30 days, whichever is earlier, or 
(2)  Thirty days after the return of the equipment supplied by the cable operator if service is terminated. 
(f)  Credits. Credits for service will be issued no later than the customer's next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. Subscriber credit for outages: upon service interruption of a subscriber's cable service, and upon subscriber request, the following shall apply: Grantee shall provide a credit for lost cable service of not less than the value of the actual time without service, due to an outage or interruption of cable service lasting at least four or more hours. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 23, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-74. - Customer complaints. 
(a)  All complaints against a franchisee relating to its performance including, but not limited to, those concerning quality of service, equipment malfunction, and billing disputes, shall be received at the cable office. A franchisee shall endeavor to respond to any complaints by the next business day. 
(b)  Excluding conditions beyond its control, the franchisee will begin working on "service interruptions" promptly and in no event later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes known. The franchisee must begin actions to correct other service problems the next business day after notification of the service problem. The standards of this subsection will be met no less than 95 percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis. 
(c)  Upon request, a franchisee shall deliver to the City Manager, or other City official duly designated by the City Manager, a report regarding any complaints which have not been timely dealt with by a franchisee as required by regulations. The City shall have the authority to investigate complaints of subscribers and nonsubscribers. Franchisee shall maintain a complete file of all written complaints made during the immediately preceding two years. Attached to each complaint shall be an appropriate written document showing the disposition or satisfaction thereof. This file is subject to review by the City. The City Manager may establish procedures for the speedy resolution of such complaints. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 24, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-75. - Renewal or renegotiation of franchise; opt into Federal or State video franchising. 
(a)  Renewal process shall be in compliance with applicable law. 
(b)  If renewal of a franchise is denied and the City does not purchase the cable system or otherwise effect a transfer, the City may require the former franchisee to remove its facilities and equipment. If the former franchisee fails to do so within a reasonable period of time, the City may have the removal done at the former franchisee's and/or surety's expense. 
(c)  Should any change in federal or state law occurring during the term of any franchise agreement have the lawful effect of materially altering the regime of cable franchising, then any franchisee shall have the option of terminating any franchise agreement in order to opt into such new regime. Alternatively, in the event of a material change in federal or state law(s) or Federal Communications Commission rules, the City and a franchisee may mutually agree to renegotiate those particular terms of the franchise affected by changes in said law(s) or rules(s). Any franchise agreement and this article shall remain in full force and effect (1) until a change in law materially alters the regime of cable franchising, allowing franchisees to opt to terminate; or (2) until any negotiated amendments to the franchise agreement and, if applicable, this article have been duly approved by both the City and a franchisee. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 25, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-76. - City rights. 
(a)  Subject to section 27-90(a), the City reserves the right to further amend this article, or adopt additional ordinances, if it finds it necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  In the event that the federal government or any other governmental agency allows the City to exercise powers which the City does not have with respect to rates and other matters at the time a franchise is granted under this article, the City reserves the right to exercise those powers. 
(c)  During the term of a franchise the City may, where aerial construction exists, maintain free-of-charge upon any poles owned by the franchisee, wire and pole fixtures necessary for the provision of a police, and/or fire alarm system and emergency medical services, so long as such fixtures shall not interfere with franchisee's operation of its cable system. Such wires and fixtures shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with all applicable safety standards and laws. 
(d)  The City may inspect all construction or installation work in the rights of way during such construction or installation, or at any time after completion thereof, in order to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article and all other governing ordinances or laws. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 26, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-77. - Franchisee rules. 
A franchisee may promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable the franchisee to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under the franchise and to assure uninterrupted service to all its subscribers. However, such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this article, other City ordinances or state or federal statutes. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 27, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-78. - Performance bond. 
Any franchise agreement with the City shall require the franchisee to maintain throughout the term of the franchise, or any renewal or extension thereof, a faithful performance bond running to the City with one good and sufficient surety approved by the City, or some other type of security acceptable to the City, which acceptance shall not be unreasonably denied. The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the franchisee and upon the further condition that, in the event the franchisee shall fail to comply with any law, ordinance, or regulation governing the franchise, there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally, from the principal and the surety of the bond any damage or loss suffered by the City as a result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the franchisee, plus an allowance for attorneys' fees and costs up to the full amount of the bond. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 28, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-79. - Security fund. 
(a)  Prior to a franchise becoming effective, the franchisee may have to post with the City a cash security deposit or an irrevocable letter of credit in an amount specified in a franchise agreement to be used as a security fund to ensure the faithful performance of all provisions of law and the franchise agreement and compliance with all orders, permits and directions of the City, and the payment by the franchisee of any claims, liens or taxes due the City which arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the system. The security deposit shall be in the amount a franchise agreement specifies, taking into account the effects of inflation, and the extent of the franchisee's operations in the City. If the franchisee does not post the amount within 30 calendar days after the franchise agreement is signed, the entire security fund remaining may be forfeited if the City can prove damages, and/or such failure may be considered a material breach of this article and may be used as grounds for revocation of the franchise, consistent with the procedures set forth herein. 
(b)  Following the revocation and termination of a franchise, the franchisee is entitled to the return of that portion of the security fund that remains, provided that there is no outstanding default or unpaid amounts owed to the City by the franchisee. Any such unpaid amounts due the City shall be withdrawn from the security fund prior to its release. 
(c)  Rights reserved to the City with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the City whether reserved by this article or authorized by other law; and no action, proceeding, or exercise of a right with respect to such security fund will affect any other right the City may have. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 29, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-80. - Subscriber privacy. 
A franchisee shall protect the privacy of all subscribers pursuant to the provisions of Section 631 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. § 551. A franchisee shall not condition subscriber service on the subscriber's grant of permission to disclose information, which, pursuant to federal law, cannot be disclosed without the subscriber's explicit consent. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 30, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-81. - Technical standards. 
(a)  Any cable system constructed within the City shall meet requirements established by the FCC. 
(b)  All construction, installation and maintenance must comply with the National Electrical Safety Code, the National Electric Code, all state and local regulations, and good and accepted industry practices. 
(c)  The franchisee must perform, at its expense, proof of performance tests as required by the FCC regulations. The franchisee must provide the proof of performance test results promptly to the City, upon request. The City shall have the right to inspect the cable system facilities during and after their construction to ensure compliance with the requirements of the franchise agreement and this article provided the City gives franchisee reasonable notice, a representative from franchisee is present, and such inspection does not interfere with the operation of the system. 
(d)  Consistent with FCC rules an annual proof of performance or other tests shall be performed at the expense of the franchisee. The franchisee must provide test results promptly to the City upon request. 
(e)  Upon request, a franchisee must advise the City when a proof of performance test required in subsections (c) and (d) above is scheduled so that the City may have an observer present. 
(f)  A franchisee must not design, install or operate its facilities in a manner that will interfere with the signals of any broadcast station, the electrical system located in any building, the cable system of another franchisee, or individual or master antennas used for receiving television or other broadcast signals in violation of applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 31, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-82. - Enforcement remedies. 
(a)  The City has the right to apply any one or combination of the following remedies in the event a franchisee violates any material provision of the law, this article, or its franchise agreement: 
(1)  Impose liquidated damages in such amount, on a per day, incident, or other measure of violation basis pursuant to the procedures of this article. Violations listed in section 27-84 shall be considered material breaches of this article. Payment of liquidated damages by the franchisee will not relieve the franchisee of its obligation to meet the franchise requirements. 
(2)  Revoke the franchise pursuant to the procedures specified in section 27-84(3). 
(b)  In determining which remedy or remedies are appropriate, the City must take into consideration the nature of the violation, the person or persons bearing the impact of the violation, the nature of the remedy required in order to prevent further violations, and such other matters as are appropriate. 
(c)  In addition to or instead of any other remedy, the City may seek legal or equitable relief from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 32, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-83. - Revocation of franchise. 
(a)  A franchise may be revoked by the Council for material failure to construct, operate or maintain the cable system, as required by this article or the franchise agreement, or for other material breach of this article or the franchise agreement. If, within 30 calendar days following written notice from the City to the franchisee that it is in material breach of this article or the franchise agreement, the franchisee has not taken corrective action or corrective action is not being actively and expeditiously pursued, the Council may give written notice to the franchisee of its intent to consider revocation of the franchise, stating its reasons. 
(b)  The Council may initiate an administrative proceeding to investigate facts and make recommendations. Such a proceeding shall be commenced by the issuance of a hearing order, which establishes the issues to be addressed in the hearing and the procedures to be followed, and the Council shall appoint a hearing officer for the hearing. Upon completion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a recommended decision. The franchisee and any members of the public shall have 30 calendar days, or such other greater period of time as the hearing order may specify, to comment on the recommended decision after its issuance. 
(c)  Within 30 calendar days after receipt of any such comments, or such other period, as the hearing order may specify, the Council shall hold a public hearing, at which time the franchisee and members of the public shall be given an opportunity to present evidence and make argument. Following the public hearing, the Council shall determine whether or not to revoke the franchise based on any recommended decision, the evidence and argument presented at the hearing, or any recommendations of the City Manager. The Council's determination shall be reflected in a written opinion setting forth the reasons for its decision. Such decision may be appealed by either party to a court of competent jurisdiction within 30 days after issuance of the Council's written decision. 
(d)  Any franchise may, following a public hearing before the Council, be revoked 120 calendar days after an assignment for the benefit of creditors or the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over the business of the franchisee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, or other action or proceeding, unless within that 120 day period: 
(1)  Such assignment, receivership or trusteeship has been vacated; or 
(2)  Such assignee, receiver or trustee has fully complied with the terms and conditions of this article, and has executed an agreement, approved by the court having jurisdiction, assuming and agreeing to be bound by the terms and conditions of a franchise agreement. 
(e)  In the event of foreclosure or other judicial sale of any of the facilities, equipment or property of a franchisee that affects the operation of the system, the City Council may revoke the franchise, following a public hearing before the Council, by serving notice upon the franchisee and the successful bidder at the sale, in which event the franchise and all rights and privileges of the franchise will be revoked 30 calendar days after serving such notice, unless: 
(1)  The City Council has approved the transfer of the franchise to the successful bidder; and 
(2)  The successful bidder has covenanted and agreed with the City to assume and be bound by the terms and conditions of the franchise ordinance. 
(f)  If the City Council revokes a franchise, or if for any other reason a franchisee abandons, terminates or fails to operate or maintain service to its subscribers, the following procedures and rights are effective: 
(1)  The City may require the former franchisee to remove its facilities and equipment. If the former franchisee fails to do so within a reasonable period of time, the City may have the removal done at the franchisee's and/or surety's expense. 
(2)  The City reserves any rights it may have to purchase the system under Federal law. 
(g)  Where the City Council has issued a franchise specifically conditioned in the franchise agreement upon the completion of construction or other specific obligation by a specified date pursuant to section 27-59, failure of the franchisee to complete construction or comply with other specific obligation, as required, will result in the automatic forfeiture of the franchise without further action by the City where it is so provided in the franchise agreement, unless the City Council at its discretion and for good cause demonstrated by the franchisee, grants an extension of time. 
(h)  No adverse action against a franchisee may be taken by the City pursuant to this section, except after a noticed public hearing, at which the franchisee is given an opportunity to be represented by counsel, to present evidence, to cross examine witnesses, and to make argument. 
(i)  The City reserves any rights it may have under applicable law to own or operate a cable system. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 33, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-84. - Penalties. 
For the violation of any of the following provisions of this article, penalties shall be chargeable to the letter of credit or performance bond, as applicable, as follows: 
(1)  Failure to provide cable service to any potential subscribers because of the income of the residents of the area in which subscribers reside: $200.00 per day; 
(2)  Failure to obtain required insurance, construction bond, performance bond, or other required financial security or provide evidence thereof upon request: $200.00 per day for each day such failure occurs or continues; 
(3)  Failure to provide access to data, documents, records, or reports to the City, as required by section 27-66, upon order of the City: $100.00 per day for each day such failure occurs or continues; 
(4)  Failure to comply with applicable construction, operation, or maintenance standards: $300.00 per day for each day such failure occurs or continues; 
(5)  Failure to comply with a rate decision or refund order issued by the FCC unless stayed: $500.00 per day for each day such a violation occurs or continues; 
(6)  Any violations for non-compliance with the customer service standards of section 27-74: The franchisee shall pay $100.00 per day for each day that such noncompliance continues; and 
(7)  City may impose any or all of the below enumerated measures against franchisee, which shall be in addition to any and all other legal or equitable remedies it has under the franchise or under any applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 34, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-85. - Procedures. 
(a)  Whenever the City believes that the franchisee has violated one or more terms, conditions or provisions of this article, and wishes to impose penalties, a written notice shall be given to the franchisee informing it of such alleged violation or liability. The written notice shall describe in reasonable detail the specific violations so as to afford the franchisee an opportunity to remedy the violation. The franchisee shall have 30 days subsequent to receipt of the notice in which to correct the violation before the City may impose penalties unless the violation is of such a nature so as to require more than 30 days and the franchisee proceeds diligently within the 30 days to correct the violation, or as promptly as possible thereafter to correct the violation. Even if the violation is of such a nature so as to require more than 30 days to correct, but the violation is not cured within 60 days of notice from the City, or at such other time as the franchisee and the City may mutually agree, the City may impose a penalty under section 27-84. 
(b)  The franchisee may, within 20 days of receipt of notice, notify the City that there is a dispute as to whether a violation or failure has, in fact, occurred. Such notice by the franchisee to the City shall specify with particularity the matters disputed by the franchisee, and shall stay the running of the 30 day cure period pending Council decision as required below. The Council shall hear the franchisee's dispute. Franchisee must be given at least 30 days notice of the hearing. At the hearing, the franchisee shall be entitled to be represented by counsel, the right to present evidence, to cross examine witnesses, and to make argument. After the hearing, the City shall provide franchisee a copy of its action, along with supporting documents. In the event the City upholds the finding of a violation, the franchisee shall have 30 days subsequent to such determination, or such other time period as the franchisee and the City mutually agree, to correct the alleged violation before penalties may be imposed. No penalty shall be assessed until the City has determined that a violation has occurred in accordance with the above procedures. Franchisee shall have the right to appeal any adverse decision of the Council to a court of competent jurisdiction within 30 days of the Council's written decision. 
(c)  The rights reserved to the City under this section are in addition to all other rights of the City whether reserved by this franchise or authorized by law or equity, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to penalties shall affect any other right the City may have. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 35, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-86. - Continuity of service mandatory. 
(a)  It is the right of all subscribers to receive all available services from the franchisee as long as their financial and other obligations to the franchisee are satisfied. 
(b)  In the event of a termination or transfer of the franchise for whatever reason, the franchisee must do everything in its power to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service regardless of the circumstances. The franchisee shall cooperate with the City to operate the system for a temporary period following termination or transfer as necessary to maintain continuity of service to all subscribers. The temporary period will not exceed six months without the franchisee's written consent. During such period the cable system must be operated under such terms and conditions, as the City and the franchisee may agree, or such other terms and conditions that will continue, to the extent possible, the same level of service to subscribers and that will provide reasonable compensation to the cable operator. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 36, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-87. - Performance evaluation. 
(a)  The City may conduct periodic performance evaluations of a franchisee as the City determines is necessary. The franchisee shall cooperate fully with these evaluations. 
(b)  The performance evaluation process is conceived as a dialogue process that should include discussions between the City and a franchisee for the purpose of reviewing the franchisee's performance in all aspects of its franchise agreement. 
(c)  The City Manager shall issue a report to the Council of the results of any performance evaluation together with, if necessary, any recommendations for methods to improve a franchisee's performance under the franchise agreement or the article. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 37, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-88. - Administration. 
(a)  The City Manager or a designee shall have the responsibility for overseeing the day-to-day administration of this article and all franchise agreements. The City Manager shall be empowered to take all administrative actions on behalf of the City except for those actions specified in this article which are reserved to the Council. The City Manager may recommend that the Council take certain actions with respect to the franchise and shall keep the Council apprised of developments in the cable industry and provide the Council assistance, advice and recommendations as appropriate. 
(b)  The Council has the sole authority to: grant franchises, enter into franchise agreements, modify franchise agreements, renew franchises, revoke franchises, and authorize the transfer of franchises; provided however, the Manager may act on pro forma transfer applications. 
(c)  All filings and reports required of franchisees or applicants pursuant to this article or a franchise agreement shall be made with the City Manager unless otherwise specified. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 38, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-89. - Personal liability of City officials. 
Any officer or employee charged with the enforcement or administration of this article or a franchise agreement, acting for the applicable governing body in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee because of such authorized act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of this article shall be defended by the City or its representatives until the final termination of the proceedings. Nothing in this article shall be interpreted as a waiver of sovereign immunity per Section 768.28, Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 39, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-90. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article shall be applicable to all cable franchises granted by the City simultaneous with, or after the effective date of this article. Further, any amendments to this article occurring after such effective date shall not be applicable unless agreed to in writing by franchisee or enacted by the City pursuant to its police powers. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 40, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-91. - Timeliness by franchisee. 
As further consideration for the grant of this franchise, the franchisee agrees to, and shall, upon final acceptance, promptly make and pursue with all due and reasonable diligence its application for Federal Communication Commission (FCC)'s, and any other required regulatory governmental agencies' approval, license or permit to so engage in business as provided herein. If the franchisee's application is approved as provided herein and the franchisee fails to begin substantial construction or installation of the cable television system, hereinafter sometimes referred to as "cable television service", within 120 days from the date of the approved licenses and permits, then this franchise shall be declared to be void and repealed. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 41, 10-17-06)  
Sec. 27-92. - Force majeure. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the franchisee shall not be liable for delay in performance of, or failure to perform, in whole or in part, its obligations pursuant to this article or its franchise due to strike, unavailability of materials, or equipment, war or act of war (whether an actual declaration of war is made or not), insurrection, riot, civil disturbance, sabotage or vandalism, customer tampering or interference, act of public enemy, accident, fire, flood, or other events, to the extent that such causes or other events are beyond the control of the franchisee. 
(Ord. No. 06-18, § 42, 10-17-06)  
Chapter 28 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; alcoholic beverages, ch. 7; animals, ch. 8; businesses and business regulations, ch. 16; emergency services, ch. 23; enviroment, ch. 24; nuisances, offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 35; solid waste, ch. 41; streets, roads, bridges and other public places, ch. 42; traffic and vehicles, ch. 44. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL  
ARTICLE II. - SPECIAL EVENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Sections 1—16 of Ord. No. 2010-01, adopted Feb. 2, 2010, repealed the former art. II, divs. 1 and 2, §§ 28-31, 28-33, 28-35, 28-36, 28-51 and 28-52, and enacted new provisions as set out herein. At the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as a new art. II, §§ 28-31—28-46. The former art. II pertained to outdoor gatherings and derived from Ord. No. 00-21, adopted March 14, 2000. 
 
Sec. 28-31. - Legislative and administrative findings. 
The above recitals (whereas clauses) are hereby adopted as the legislative and administrative findings of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 2-2-10)  
Sec. 28-32. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Event shall mean a social gathering or activity that happens at a given place and times likely to attract a crowd, and is unlike the customary activity offered by the individual or organization. 
Exhibitor shall mean any person who, while occupying a temporary location, does not sell from stock, but provides samples and informational material. 
Parades shall mean a "demonstration," as defined as any formation, procession or assembly of persons which, for the purpose of expressive activity, is: (i) to assemble or travel in unison on any street in a manner that does not comply with normal or usual traffic regulations or controls; or (ii) to gather at a public park or other public area. 
Special event means a preplanned event, parade, or series of related consecutive daily gatherings or events of entertainment, cultural, recreational, educational, political, religious, or sporting nature, or of any nature, expected to draw 500 or more persons at any session as participants or spectators, and sponsored by an individual or entity. Events expected to draw less than 500 persons which include risk factors, as set forth in section 28-44 herein, may be deemed a special event as determined by the City Manager. A special event shall not include events hosted at a venue designed for the event, such as sporting events at designated fields, or musical/theatrical productions at any amphitheater or auditorium, which do not exceed parking criteria or fire occupancy. 
Special Event Review Committee shall consist of a staff committee composed of representatives of Public Works, the Fire Department, Flagler County Sheriff, Community Development Department, and other members appointed by the City Manager. 
Temporary Vendors Permit shall mean a permit issued by the City of Palm Coast allowing a specific seller/vendor to offer for sale wares or services at a special event. Temporary vendors permits are for one specific special event and are nontransferable. 
Vendor shall mean any person who distributes or offers to distribute, or sells or offers to sell food, beverages, merchandise, or services. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 2, 2-2-10)  
Sec. 28-33. - Event disclosure. 
All applicants to hold an event shall be required to disclose the event on the City's event request form for determination whether the event is a special event requiring a special event permit. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 3, 2-2-10)  
Sec. 28-34. - Special event permit application. 
(a)  All applicants for a special event shall submit an application for a special event permit to the City Manager. The application shall contain information as to the estimated attendance at the special event, and the time and place of the special event. To ensure that the public health, welfare, and safety are protected, applicants shall provide for compliance with all City plumbing and electrical code requirements; sanitation and sewage disposal facilities, as provided in Section 28-46; police services for security, crowd and traffic control as provided in section 28-43; fire rescue personnel for EMS coverage or Fire Apparatus standby as provided in section 28-43; and insurance and indemnification as provided in sections 28-37 and 28-38; and if the special event will be held during hours of darkness, compliance with lighting standards prescribed in the Unified Land Development Code for streets and public property. The City will complete its review of the special event permit application within ten business days from submission of a complete application. 
(b)  Each applicant shall submit a nonrefundable application fee with the special event application, to help defray the City's cost of processing the application and coordinating the relevant City services and personnel. 
(c)  Each applicant shall provide confirmation of the names of all persons or groups who will perform at the special event; names of those who will provide or furnish products, materials, goods, or services other than entertainment; and names of those who will furnish or provide rides, mechanical entertainment, or amusement devices. Mechanical amusement devices shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 5F-8, Florida Administrative Code. 
(d)  Each applicant will provide sign information as outlined in Chapter 12 of the Unified Land Development Code. 
(e)  Special events will not be permitted on any property in a residential zoning district, as per Section 3.02.01 of the Unified Land Development Code or in the residential component of any Master Planned Development (MPD) Zoning District(s). This restriction also applies to properties zoned MPD with an underlying Planned Unit Development (PUD), Golf Course Community (GCC), Village Center (VGC), and/or Planned Rural Development (PRD) if approved for residential development. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 4, 2-2-10)  
Sec. 28-35. - Exemption. 
(a)  An event is exempt from a special event permit if: 
(1)  The applicant files an affidavit that his or her best estimate of probable attendance and number of participants at the event is less than 500 persons, provided, however that the event has not been deemed to be a special event by the City Manager due to risk factors; and 
(2)  The City Manager concurs in the estimate in writing and issues an exemption to the applicant. 
(b)  The applicant's attendance estimate shall be based upon all the relevant factors known at the time, including, without limitation, past attendance at similar functions having the same and similar performers, both in the City and comparable communities, the price of admission and the extent of advertising and promotion contemplated. The City Manager shall accept the applicant's affidavit unless it clearly appears to the City Manager from the written statements that the estimate is understated by a factor of at least ten percent. 
(c)  No special event permits shall be required to be obtained for any events to be held on property owned or leased by any federal or state governmental entity. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 5, 2-2-10)  
Sec. 28-36. - Parades. 
All parades held within City limits shall be held in the Town Center area. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 6, 2-2-10)  
Sec. 28-37. - Indemnification. 
The applicant for a special event shall be required to provide to the City Manager an agreement pursuant to which the applicant assumes full responsibility and liability for and indemnifies, defends, and saves the City harmless against all liability, claims for damages, and suits for or by reason of any injury to any person, including death, and damage to any property, connected to the holding of the special event. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 7, 2-2-10)  
Sec. 28-38. - Insurance. 
(a)  The applicant also shall be required to deliver to the City Manager, within ten business days after approval of a special event application as provided in subsection 28-40(a), proof of the following types and amounts of insurance: 
(1)  Without limiting its liability, the applicant shall procure and maintain at its sole expense, insurance of the types and in the minimum amounts stated below: 
Commercial General Liability (including property damage, products/comp. operations aggregate, premises, operations and blanket contractual liability) 	$1,000,000.00 Each Occurrence 

$2,000,000.00 General Aggregate 
 
The City shall be named as an additional insured under the above Commercial General Liability coverage. In the event that motor vehicles are used for any activity associated with the special event: 
Automobile Liability (all automobiles; owned, hired, or nonowned) 	$1,000,000.00 

Combined Single Limit 
 
(2)  Applicant will provide evidence of workers' compensation insurance or exemption as required by Florida Workers Compensation Law as defined in F.S. ch. 440. Such evidence will include evidence of employer's liability insurance for the following minimum limits of coverage: 
Employer's Liability 	$100,000.00 Each Accident 
	$500,000.00 Disease Policy Limit 
	$100,000.00 Each Employee/Disease 
 
Such insurance will include coverage for appropriate Federal Acts (Longshore and Harbor Workers Compensation Act, 33 USC §§ 901-952, and the Jones Act, 46 USC § 688 et seq.) where activities include liability exposures for events or occurrences covered by these statutes. The applicant shall grant the City a waiver of subrogation in favor of the City. 
(b)  Additional riders in the amount of $1,000,000.00 may be required to include, but not be limited to, the following: 
Liquor Liability, Professional Liability (Errors and Omissions), Aircraft Liability (Bodily Injury and Property Damage including passengers), Watercraft Liability, Sexual Molestation Liability, and Assault and Battery. 
(c)  (1)  An insurer holding a current certificate of authority pursuant to F.S. ch. 624, shall write the insurance. Such insurance shall be endorsed to provide for a waiver of underwriter's rights of subrogation in favor of the City. 
(2)  Prior to commencing any work on the event, certificates of insurance, approved by the City's Risk Manager, demonstrating the maintenance of the required insurance shall be furnished to the City. The certificates shall provide that no material alteration or cancellation, including expiration and nonrenewal, shall be effective until 15 days after receipt of written notice by the City. 
(3)  In the event that one or more cranes or similar heavy equipment pieces are used for any activity associated with the special event, the proof of insurance will clearly demonstrate that the general liability coverage includes coverage for such equipment, and has no limitation specific to use of the equipment. 
(4)  In the event that fireworks displays or pyrotechnic displays are included in the special event, the proof of insurance will clearly demonstrate that general liability coverage as defined in subsection (a) [of this section] is provided to include coverage for such display(s) with no limitation specific to the display(s). Such evidence must be provided by the organization(s) responsible for such display(s). 
(d)  All coverages are to be provided on an occurrence form. In the event that coverage is only available on a claim form, the insured shall agree to maintain extended reporting coverage for a minimum of two years past the expiration of the annual policy term. 
(e)  Anything to the contrary notwithstanding, the liabilities of the applicant for obtaining and maintaining the coverage(s) required under this section, shall survive and not be terminated, reduced, or otherwise limited by any expiration or termination of particular policies for insurance coverages. 
(f)  State and federal agencies eligible for sovereign immunity as evidenced by the applicable state or federal statutes may submit a statement of self-insurance and liability as allowed by the applicable state or federal statute. Such statement will be acceptable in place of insurance requirements defined herein. 
(g)  An applicant may be authorized or required to provide up to 50 percent greater or down to 50 percent lesser amounts of insurance coverage under this section if the special event is of a demonstrated high or low risk category according to recognized insurance and risk management industry standards. Such reduction or increase shall be determined, by the Risk Manager or designee using recognized insurance and risk management standards, and the Risk Manager shall state the reasons for any adjustment in writing. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 8, 2-2-10)  
Sec. 28-39. - General guidelines and information for special event vending. 
(a)  All vendors that do not possess a current City Local Business Tax Receipt will be required to purchase a temporary vendors permit from the City. 
(b)  Vendors of food shall have all applicable licenses to be considered for participation in a special event. It is the responsibility of the applicant to ensure that participating food vendors comply with the rules and regulations of the State of Florida Health Department and any other government body with jurisdiction over the special event. 
(c)  All food vendors who do not have a Florida Department of Business and Professional Regulation (DBPR) annual food vendor's license shall apply for and purchase a DBPR temporary event license. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 9, 2-2-10)  
Sec. 28-40. - Issuance of permit; approval; grounds for denial. 
(a)  Upon submission and approval of the items and information required by sections 28-34, 28-37, and 28-38 to the City Manager, the Committee shall issue the special events permit. 
(b)  An application for a permit may be denied if: 
(1)  The applicant has made any false material representation in the application. 
(2)  The applicant fails to provide any of the items or information required by this article. 
(3)  The special event will substantially interfere with any other special event for which a permit has already been granted, or with the provision of public safety or other City services in support of such other previously scheduled events, or will have an nonmitigable adverse impact upon residential or business access and traffic circulation in the area in which it is to be conducted. 
(4)  The applicant failed to comply with approved event or special event requirements from a previous event or special event, such as sign requirements, vendor requirements, or violations of federal, state, and local codes and regulations. 
(5)  The conduct of the special event will substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of aerial or marine navigation, or of public transportation or other vehicular and pedestrian traffic in the area of the special event; or will cause irresolvable conflict with construction or development in public rights-of-way or at the public facility where the special event is held so as to cause unsafe conditions for the public; or the expected attendance at the special event will exceed the lawful capacity of the facility under the City's Fire Code; or the parking available at the facility will be inadequate to accommodate the expected attendance at the special event. 
(c)  If a permit is denied, the Committee shall provide the applicant with written reasons for denial. The applicant, within five business days after denial, may appeal the denial to the City Manager for a final decision, by filing a written petition with the City Clerk detailing the grounds for appeal, which appeal shall be heard within five days of submission of the appeal. 
(d)  In the event that an applicant alleges that a permit denial is a First Amendment prior restraint, and any appeal under this section is denied, the applicant can appeal, by filing a request within five days from the denial to the City Council, to be heard at their next available regular meeting. The permit denial, in the face of such review, will continue only to preserve the status quo until review is complete. The applicant may then appeal to the appropriate court. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 10, 2-2-10)  
Sec. 28-41. - Use of alcoholic beverages. 
If alcohol is to be served at an event or special event, that fact must be disclosed to the City Manager at the time of filing an application for a permit, and all applicable requirements of state beverage laws and City Codes must be met. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 11, 2-2-10)  
Sec. 28-42. - Revocation or suspension of permit. 
The City Manager, after consultation with the Sheriff, Fire Chief, Risk Manager, Building Official, Code Enforcement Manager, and Public Works Director, or their designees, may summarily suspend or revoke a permit issued under this section for violation of this section; for violating any other federal, state, or local laws or ordinances during the special event; or for making any material false representation in an application for a permit or for an exemption certificate. In the event of suspension or revocation, the appeal provisions in subsection 28-40(c) shall apply. The five-day appeal period shall commence from the date the suspension or revocation notice is provided to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 12, 2-2-10)  
Sec. 28-43. - Public safety at special events. 
The following requirements for public safety will be observed at all special events: 
(1)  The Flagler County Sheriff's Office shall be the primary provider of personal safety and property security at special events. The number of required providers shall be based on event risk factors set forth in section 28-44. If the applicant for a special event wishes to use private sector entities for personal safety or property security at special events, such entities will be supplemental or in addition to the services provided by the Sheriff. 
(2)  Fire protection services shall be provided by the City of Palm Coast Fire and Rescue Department. 
(3)  Applicants may be required to provide emergency medical services, including transportation, as specified in section 28-34, if the Director/Fire Chief finds a need for these services based on Event Risk Factors as defined in section 28-31. In the event that the City Fire and Rescue Department determines that it is unable to provide any aspect of emergency medical services, including transportation, such services may be provided by Flagler County. 
(4)  Fire codes and standards compliance will be verified by the City Fire Marshal to ensure the event complies with Florida Fire Prevention Code, NFPA 1, NFPA 101 Life Safety Code. 
(5)  All special events must maintain adequate handicap parking in compliance with ADA (Americans with Disabilities Act) thresholds in regards to the number of spaces required and surface requirement. Existing handicap spaces must be utilized for their intended purpose. 
(6)  The Committee may allow overflow parking for a special event on the public right-of-way, as long as safe pedestrian access is provided to the special event. Any overflow parking that is allowed on the right-of-way or on public or private property may require improvements at the applicant's expense. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 13, 2-2-10)  
Sec. 28-44. - Event risk factors for public safety and emergency medical personnel at special events. 
Event risk factors include the number of projected attendees, service of alcoholic beverages, lots of movement of people or vehicles, and/or any event that includes safety risks such as mosh pits, concerts, or any events using pyrotechnics, explosives, and stunts with special rescue potentials, or other similar activities which may result in physical stress or injury. Events considered passive, such as the Fall Festival or Arbor Day, will require fewer public safety personnel. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 14, 2-2-10)  
Sec. 28-45. - Costs for personnel at special events. 
(a)  The fees for provision of Flagler County Sheriff's Office, City Fire and Rescue Department, and City personnel at special events shall be established by resolution of the City Council. 
(b)  Applicants shall be responsible for costs the City incurs for personnel necessary for set up for the event, maintenance during, and clean up after the event in accordance with a resolution adopted by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 15, 2-2-10)  
Sec. 28-46. - Standards for sanitary facilities. 
Sanitary facilities are required to be provided for all special events, in the form of toilets and hand washing stations, based on the projected number of attendees and participants, in a proportion of two restroom facilities to every 250 attendees/participants. Restrooms shall be maintained in a sanitary condition, and shall be serviced at least once daily. Out of the total number of restrooms, five percent of the restrooms shall be handicap accessible. Hand washing facilities shall be provided in a proportion of one hand wash facility to every ten portable restrooms, and must be provided at special events where food is served or picnic areas are provided. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 16, 2-2-10)  
Chapter 29 - IMPACT FEES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 15; franchise regulations, ch. 27; streets, roads, bridges and other public places, ch. 42. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL  
ARTICLE II. - TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-17, § 1—8, adopted September 21, 2004, effective October 1, 2004, is being treated as superceding the current Art. II, §§ 29-31—29-42 in its entirety, at the discretion of the editor. Former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 00-14, § 1, adopted March 7, 2000. 
 
Sec. 29-31. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this article are: 
A.  To establish uniform procedures for the imposition, calculation, collection, expenditure, and administration of transportation impact fees imposed on impact-generating development; 
B.  To assure that impact-generating development contributes its fair and proportionate share towards the costs of capital transportation improvements reasonably necessitated by such impact-generating development; 
C.  To ensure that impact-generating development benefits from the provision of the capital transportation improvements provided with the proceeds of transportation impact fees; 
D.  To ensure that impact fees collected pursuant to this article are expended only on capital transportation improvements the demand for which is generated by the impact-generating development against which the fees are assessed; 
E.  To ensure that impact fees assessed pursuant to this article are proportionate in amount to the degree of demand impact-generating development creates for new capital transportation improvements; and 
F.  To ensure that all applicable legal standards and criteria are properly incorporated in these procedures. 
(Ord. No. 2004-17, § 1, 9-21-04)  
Sec. 29-32. - Transportation impact fee report. 
The City Council has reviewed and accepted, and incorporates into this article by reference, the transportation impact fee report, titled, "City of Palm Coast 2018 Transportation Impact Fee Technical Report," dated March 2018, and prepared by LTG Inc., and NUE Urban Concepts, LLC, which establishes the need for impact fees for capital transportation improvements and sets forth a reasonable methodology and analysis for the determination of the impact fees for capital transportation improvements. 
(Ord. No. 2004-17, § 2, 9-21-04; Ord. No. 2011-6, § 2, 5-17-11; Ord. No. 2018-10 , § 2, 4-17-18)  
Sec. 29-33. - Definitions. 
In this article words and terms have the meanings set forth in this section. Words and terms not specifically defined herein have the meanings set forth in the City Code, as amended: 
Applicant means any person who files an application with the City for a building permit to undertake impact-generating development within the City. 
Appropriation means to obligate funds for use by the City. Appropriation includes inclusion of a capital transportation improvement in the annual City budget, execution of a contract or other legal encumbrance for construction or acquisition of a capital transportation improvement using transportation impact fee funds in whole or in part; and/or the expenditure or transfer of transportation impact fee funds from a transportation impact fee account for the financing of capital transportation improvements that provides or will provide a reasonable benefit to impact-generating development. 
Building permit means evidence of the City's approval to undertake impact-generating development pursuant to the City's building code. 
Capital improvements program means a schedule of capital transportation improvements to be undertaken by the City as determined from time to time by the City Council or as set forth in the capital budget and/or the comprehensive plan. 
Capital transportation improvement means the planning, design, engineering, surveying, land acquisition, permitting, and construction costs of all features and facilities necessary for road construction projects including those relied upon in the transportation impact fee report, the need for which is created by and the provision of which will reasonably benefit impact-generating development. 
City means the City of Palm Coast, Florida. 
City Code means the City Code of the City of Palm Coast, Florida, as amended from time to time. 
City Council means the Mayor and City Council of the City of Palm Coast, Florida. 
City Manager means the City Manager for the City of Palm Coast, Florida. 
Comprehensive plan means the City of Palm Coast 2035 Comprehensive Plan, as amended from time to time. 
Department means the Community Development Department of the City of Palm Coast, Florida. 
Director means the Director of the Community Development Department of the City of Palm Coast, Florida or the Director's designee. 
Director of Financial Services means the Director of the Financial Services Department of the City of Palm Coast, Florida. 
Existing land use means the most intense lawful use of land within the twelve (12) months prior to the time of payment of the impact fee pursuant to this article. 
Fee schedule means the list of transportation impact fees set forth in Exhibit A to this article. [Located at the end of this article.] 
Group fee means transportation impact fee codes that are grouped together with the same fee amount and is under one classification category. 
Impact-generating development means any construction, reconstruction, redevelopment, rehabilitation, structural alteration, structural enlargement, structural extension, or use undertaken pursuant to a building permit issued after the effective date of this ordinance, which attracts or produces vehicular trips over and above that produced by the existing land use. 
Non-residential means a use or development that is not a residential use. 
Post-incorporation structures means structures with a certificate of occupancy on or after the City of Palm Coast's incorporation on December 31, 1999. 
Pre-incorporation structures means structures with a certificate of occupancy prior to the City of Palm Coast's incorporation on December 31, 1999. 
Residential means a use or development that includes or results in the creation of a dwelling unit. 
Transportation impact fee means an impact fee imposed on residential and non-residential development to fund the proportionate share of the costs of capital transportation improvements created by impact-generating development for capital transportation improvements. 
Transportation impact fee report means a report titled, "City of Palm Coast 2018 Transportation Impact Fee Technical Report," dated March 2018, and prepared by LTG, Inc. and NUE Urban Concepts, LLC, which sets forth the methodology and rational basis for the transportation impact fees and the mechanisms for ensuring that a rational nexus exists between the fee amount and the impact of impact-generating development on capital transportation improvements and the reasonable benefits that accrue to impact-generating development paying the impact fee. 
(Ord. No. 2004-17, § 3, 9-21-04; Ord. No. 2011-6, § 3, 5-17-11; Ord. No. 2018-10 , § 2, 4-17-18)  
Sec. 29-34. - Applicability. 
A.  Term. This article and the procedures established herein shall remain in effect unless and until repealed, amended, or modified by the City Council in accordance with applicable state law and the City Code. 
B.  Affected area. Transportation impact fees will be imposed by the City on impact-generating development proposed within the corporate boundaries of the City. 
C.  Type of development affected. Except as provided in D. below, this ordinance applies to all impact-generating development. 
D.  Type of development not affected; exemptions. This articles does not apply to: 
1.  Previously-issued building permits. No additional transportation impact fee may be imposed on impact-generating development for which a building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this article, except that if such building permit expires, the development will be treated as impact-generating development and be subject to the provisions of this amended article. 
2.  No net increase in floor area. Provided there is no intensification of use, no transportation impact fee may be imposed on an impact-generating development that does not result in the creation of additional floor area, unless the Director makes a written determination that the impact-generating development increases the demand for capital transportation improvements for which transportation impact fees are being imposed. 
3.  Replacements. No transportation impact fee may be imposed on the replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed building or structure, provided that there is no change in use and no net increase in the number of dwelling units or amount of floor area. 
4.  Temporary uses. No transportation impact fee may be imposed on a temporary use. 
5.  Development agreements. No transportation impact fee may be imposed on impact-generating development that is the subject of a duly executed and lawful development agreement entered into prior to the effective date of this article, which agreement contains provisions in conflict or inconsistent with this article, but only to the extent of the conflict or inconsistency. 
6.  Public education. No transportation impact fee may be imposed on impact-generating development related to a public education use constructed by a district school board or a community college district board of trustees, pursuant to Section 1013.371(1)(a), Florida Statutes or related to a charter school facility, pursuant to Section 1002.33(18)(d), Florida Statutes. 
7.  Other uses. No transportation impact fee may be imposed on a use, development, project, structure, building, fence, sign or other activity, whether or not a building permit is required, which does not result in an increase in the demand for capital transportation improvements. 
8.  Pre-incorporation structures. No transportation impact fee shall be imposed on changes of use within a pre-incorporation structure where no additional square feet are added, however the exemption does not apply to any other post-incorporation impact-generating development as defined in section 29-33 of this article. 
E.  Effect of payment of transportation impact fees on other regulations. 
1.  The payment of transportation impact fees shall not entitle the applicant to a building permit unless all applicable land use, zoning, planning, dedication, platting, subdivision, or other related requirements, standards, and conditions of the city code have been met. Such other requirements, standards, and conditions are independent of the requirement for payment of a transportation impact fee. 
2.  This article shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property, density/intensity of development, design and improvement standards, or other applicable standards or requirements of the City Code, which shall remain operative and in full force and effect without limitation. 
F.  Amendments. This article may be amended from time to time by the City Council; provided, however, that no such amendment may be adopted without a written report detailing the reasons and need for the transportation impact fee revision nor without proper notice and public hearing as required by state law and the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 2004-17, § 4, 9-21-04; Ord. No. 2011-6, § 4, 5-17-11)  
Sec. 29-35. - Procedures for imposition, calculation, collection, reimbursement, and credit of transportation impact fees. 
A.  Generally. The Director must calculate the applicable transportation impact fee and administrative fee at the time of application for a building permit. The City may not issue a certificate of occupancy until the applicant has paid all transportation impact fees and administrative fees due pursuant to this article. 
B.  Early payment incentive. Administrative fee set forth in subsection C. shall be waived when transportation impact fee is paid at the time of building permit issuance. 
C.  Calculation. 
1.  Upon receipt of an application for a building permit, the Director must determine whether the proposed development is an impact-generating development; the specific category of residential or non-residential use proposed; and the amount of additional residential dwelling unit or non-residential square footage associated with the proposed use. 
2.  If the application for a building permit involves a change in use, the Director is required to base the transportation impact fee on the incremental increase in capital transportation improvement capacity created by the proposed change in use. 
3.  After making these determinations, the Director must calculate the applicable transportation impact fee by multiplying the amount of additional residential based on dwelling unit or non-residential square footage proposed by the amount of the applicable transportation impact fee per unit of development, incorporating any applicable exemptions or credits, based on the impact fees in effect at the time of building permit application. 
4.  The fee schedule is intended to consolidate a number of non-residential land uses into broad land use categories defined in section 29-33. The Director, in consultation with other City staff and consultants, as necessary, shall determine the closest applicable land use based on the definitions in section 29-33 and a comparison of trip generation rates with the rates established in the Transportation Impact Fee Report; or the Director may calculate the transportation impact fee based on an independent impact analysis pursuant to subsection D. below. 
5.  The calculation of transportation impact fees due from a multiple-use impact-generating development must reflect the aggregated demand for capital transportation improvements generated by each land use type within the proposed impact-generating development. 
6.  The calculation of transportation impact fees due from a phased impact-generating development must reflect the demand generated by each land use type within the phase of development for which a separate building permit is requested. 
7.  An administrative fee not to exceed actual cost to administer the transportation impact fee program may be assessed by the Director for the expenses of collecting and administering this article. The Director may develop application and review fees that reflect actual cost to review special studies and requests for credits, or to reconsider an applicable land use designation. 
D.  Independent impact analysis. 
1.  Criteria for use of an independent impact analysis. The impact fee may be computed by the use of an independent impact analysis if: 
a.  The Director determines that the proposed impact-generating development is not one of the land use types listed on the fee schedule; or 
b.  The applicant chooses to have the amount of the fee determined by the use of an independent impact analysis; or 
c.  The Director determines that the nature, timing, or location of the proposed impact-generating development makes it likely to generate impacts costing substantially more or less to mitigate than the amount of the fee that would be generated by the use of the fee schedule. 
2.  Preparation of independent impact analysis. 
a.  The applicant is responsible for preparation of the independent impact analysis if the applicant chooses to conduct the analysis. The Director is responsible for preparation of the independent impact analysis if the proposed impact-generating development is interpreted not to be one of those types listed in the fee schedule or analysis of the proposed impact-generating development indicates that the nature, timing, or location of the proposed land use make it likely to generate impacts costing substantially more or less than the amount of the fee generated by the use of the fee schedule. 
b.  The person who prepares the independent impact analysis is required to be a qualified professional in the preparation of impact analyses, and is required to be approved by the Director on the basis of professional training and experience. If the Director is responsible for preparation of the independent impact analysis, the Director may request the applicant prepare the analysis, and credit the cost of the preparation against the impact fee due. 
3.  Independent impact analysis standard. The independent impact analysis is required to be based on the same standards and unit costs for transportation capital improvements used in the transportation impact fee report. The applicant has the burden of demonstrating that the assumptions, unit costs, or other data used in the independent impact analysis are more accurate than those used in the transportation impact fee report and reflected in the fee schedule. 
4.  Independent impact analysis procedure. 
a.  Submission of application. An independent impact analysis may be undertaken through the submission of a form provided by the City or upon the Director's determination that an independent impact analysis is appropriate as described above. 
b.  Determination of completeness. Within 20 days of receipt of an application, the Director is required to determine if the application is complete. If it is determined that the application is not complete, a written statement is required to be sent to the applicant, by mail, specifying the deficiencies. If no deficiencies are specified the Director is required to deem the application complete. The Director may not take further action on the application until it is deemed complete. 
c.  Review of application. 
i.  Within 30 days of the date the application is determined complete, the Director will render a written decision on (a) whether the transportation impact fee should be modified based on the independent impact analysis, and if so, the amount of the fee due or (b) what fee should be charged based on a proposed use not listed on the fee schedule. If the independent impact analysis fails to satisfy the requirements of this section, the fee established in the fee schedule applies. 
ii.  If, based on generally-recognized principles of transportation impact analysis, the Director determines that the proposed impact-generating development will create impacts upon capital transportation improvements substantially different than those assumed under the transportation impact fee report and fee schedule or if the proposed use is not listed in the fee schedule, the fee established pursuant to the independent impact analysis is to be imposed. 
E.  Non-binding transportation impact fee estimate. An applicant may request a non-binding estimate of transportation impact fees due for a particular impact-generating development by filing a request on a form provided for that purpose; provided, however, that the estimate may be subject to change when a formal application for a building permit for impact-generating development is made. Non-binding estimates are for the sole benefit of the prospective applicant and neither bind the City nor preclude it from making amendments or revisions to any provisions of this article. No vested rights, legal entitlements, or equitable estoppel accrue by reason of a non-binding estimate. A non-binding fee estimate does not constitute a final decision and may not be appealed pursuant to section 29-377 of this article. 
F.  Reimbursements and credits. 
1.  Eligibility for a reimbursement. The City may reimburse transportation impact fee funds paid by an applicant in exchange for the dedication or construction of capital transportation improvements made necessary by impact-generating development and upon which transportation impact fee funds may be appropriated pursuant to subsection 29-36B. Transportation impact fees may be reimbursed only at or reasonably close to the time the proffered transportation capital improvement is scheduled for construction or completion in the City's capital budget or capital improvements program. Reimbursements are appropriate only where the proffered transportation capital improvement adds capacity made necessary by and to be provided for the reasonable benefit of impact-generating development. The City and an applicant may enter into a development agreement to facilitate the acceptance by the City of proffered capital transportation improvements and reimbursements to the applicant. 
2.  Additional provisions. 
a.  In order to be eligible for a reimbursement, the applicant must receive approval by the Director pursuant to the provisions of this article, prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
b.  The City may not reimburse the applicant in an amount exceeding the amount of the transportation impact fee due pursuant to this article. 
c.  The City may not reimburse the applicant until a proffered land dedication is finalized or the construction project is at least 50 percent complete, as determined by the City. Reimbursement may then occur based on the percent completion of the project. 
d.  As provided in subsection F.4., below, if an applicant proposes to dedicate or construct a capital transportation improvement valued at an amount greater than the amount of the transportation impact fee due, then the applicant may be reimbursed by future developers for costs incurred over and above those reimbursed by the City. 
3.  Calculation of the value of dedication or construction. The amount of the reimbursement to be paid by the City is to be calculated as follows: 
a.  Construction of facilities. The reimbursement must be equal to the actual cost of construction as evidenced by receipts and other sufficient documentation or the amount of transportation impact fees due pursuant to this ordinance, whichever is less. 
b.  Dedication of land. At the option of the applicant, the reimbursement is to be based on either the assessed value of the proffered land, based on the most recent appraisal by the Flagler County Property Appraiser, or the fair market value of the land as determined by a certified property appraiser hired and paid for by the applicant. If the latter option is chosen and the City rejects the applicant's appraisal, the City may hire and pay for a second appraiser to appraise the property. If either party rejects the second appraisal, a third appraisal may be performed by an appraiser chosen by the first and second appraisers, the costs of which are to be shared equally by the City and the applicant. The third appraisal is binding on both parties. All appraisals must be consistent with generally-accepted appraisal techniques and the date of valuation must be the date of transfer to the City. 
4.  Eligibility for credits for excessive dedication or construction. 
a.  Generally. An applicant may be given a credit against a transportation impact fee upon demonstration that, after the date of this article, a capital transportation facility was dedicated or constructed by a previous applicant with sufficient excess capacity to offset the impacts of the applicant's proposed impact-generating development. In order for a credit to be accepted, the applicant must demonstrate that the dedicated or constructed capital transportation improvement will reduce the overall need for capital transportation improvements and that the applicant has secured from the previous applicant a contractual right to an allocation of capacity equal to the transportation impact fee due pursuant to the fee schedule. Any approved credit must be consistent with the City's capital budget, capital improvements program, comprehensive plan, and the transportation impact fee report. 
b.  Transferability. Credit for contributions, payments, construction or dedications of a capital transportation improvement may not be applied to impact fees due for a capital facility other than transportation, although credit against a transportation impact fee may be transferred within the same subdivision, site plan, development of regional impact, or planned unit development or an adjacent subdivision, site plan, development of regional impact, or planned unit development in common ownership. 
c.  Calculation of credit. No credit may exceed the total amount of the transportation impact fee imposed in the fee schedule. 
G.  Collection. The Director must collect all transportation impact fees in the amounts set forth in this ordinance prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and must issue a receipt to the applicant for such payment unless: 
1.  The applicant is not subject to the payment of a transportation impact fee; 
2.  The applicant has filed an appeal as required by Section 29-37 of this article and has filed a bond or other surety in the amount of the transportation impact fee as calculated by the Director and approved by the City Attorney and Director of Financial Services; 
3.  The applicant has received a credit as provided in subsection F., above; or 
4.  An independent impact analysis has been approved as provided in subsection D., above. 
(Ord. No. 2004-17, § 5, 9-21-04; Ord. No. 2011-6, § 5, 5-17-11; Ord. No. 2018-10 , § 2, 4-17-18)  
Sec. 29-36. - Establishment of a transportation impact fee account; use and appropriation of transportation impact fee funds; and refunds. 
A.  Establishment of transportation impact fee account. The Director of Financial Services is required to establish a designated transportation impact fee account for transportation impact fees. The account must be identified clearly and distinctly as the transportation impact fee account. All transportation impact fee funds collected by the City must be deposited into the transportation impact fee account and all interest earned on monies deposited must be credited to and considered funds of the transportation impact fee account. Transportation impact fee funds must be capable of being accounted for separately from all other City funds. The Director of Financial Services must establish and implement necessary accounting controls to ensure that transportation impact fee funds are properly deposited, accounted for, and appropriated in accordance with this article and other applicable legal requirements. 
B.  Use of transportation impact fee funds. 
1.  Generally. Transportation impact fee funds may be appropriated only for: 
a.  Capital transportation improvements, the need for which is created by and the provision of which will reasonably benefit impact-generating development; 
b.  The payment of principal, interest, and other financing costs on contracts, bonds, notes, or other obligations issued by or on behalf of the City to finance capital transportation improvements as provided above; 
c.  Financing of reimbursements as set forth in subsection 5.E.; 
d.  Financing of refunds as set forth in subsection 6.D.; 
e.  Financing the costs of updating this ordinance and the transportation impact fee report. 
2.  Restrictions on use. Transportation impact fee funds may not be appropriated for repair or maintenance of capital transportation improvements, or for operational or personnel expenses associated with the provision of capital transportation improvements. Additionally, transportation impact fees must be appropriated within six (6) years of the beginning of the City's fiscal year immediately succeeding the date of collection, unless such time period is extended as provided in subsection 3 below. Transportation impact fee funds must be spent on a first in/first out basis. 
3.  Extension of time for appropriation. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 2. above, transportation impact fee funds may be appropriated beyond six (6) years from the beginning of the City's fiscal year immediately succeeding the date of collection, if the appropriation is for a capital transportation improvement that requires more than six (6) years to plan, design, and construct. The City must document compliance with the provisions of this paragraph. 
4.  Benefit district. The extent of current City limits shall form the boundaries of the transportation impact fee benefit district. All fees collected within the limits of the benefit district shall be expended within the boundaries of the district to ensure that the entities paying the fee receive the benefit from improvements constructed by the fee. The limits of the benefit district shall extend to areas annexed into the City, unless a new benefit district is established by the City for the annexed areas. The need for updated benefit district boundaries shall be evaluated during updates of the transportation impact fee. 
5.  New benefit districts. The City may establish new benefit districts for an area within the City where a development agrees to fund and construct significant capital transportation improvements, and the City elects to reimburse the development with future transportation impact fees paid by the owners of other land uses within the development. The City shall have sole discretion regarding establishing the limits of any new benefit district. 
C.  Capital improvements program. Each year, the City will update its five-year capital improvements program to include capital transportation improvements to be funded in full or in part with transportation impact fee funds. 
D.  Refunds. 
1.  Eligibility. 
a.  Expiration or revocation of building permit. On a form provided by the City, an applicant who has paid a transportation impact fee for an impact-generating development for which construction has not begun, and the necessary building permit has expired or has been revoked, may apply for a refund of impact fees paid. 
b.  Failure to make timely appropriation. On a form provided by the City, a current property owner may apply for a refund of transportation impact fee funds paid by an applicant if the City has failed to appropriate the transportation impact fee funds collected from the applicant within the time limit established in subsection B.2. above. 
c.  Abandonment of impact-generating development. An applicant who has paid an impact fee for an impact-generating development for which a building permit has been issued and pursuant to which construction has been initiated but abandoned prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy is eligible for a refund if the partially constructed building is demolished. 
2.  Administrative fee. The City may deduct an administrative fee equivalent to the cost to process a refund from the total amount of any refund, to defray the administrative expenses associated with processing a refund application. 
3.  Processing of refund applications. 
a.  Application made to the Director. Applications for a refund must be made on a form provided by the Director for such purposes. Upon receipt of a complete application for a refund, the Director must review the application and documentary evidence submitted by the applicant, as well as such other information and evidence as may be deemed relevant, and must make a final decision to approve or deny the proposed refund. 
b.  Due to expiration or revocation. Applications for refunds due to expiration or revocation of a building permit must be made on forms provided by the City and made within sixty (60) days following expiration or revocation of the building permit. Failure to apply for a refund within sixty (60) days following expiration or revocation of the building permit constitutes a waiver of entitlement to a refund. In order for the refund application to be deemed complete, the applicant must submit: (a) evidence that the person applying for the refund was the initial applicant who paid the fee, or the authorized agent of the initial applicant, (b) the amount of the transportation impact fees paid and receipts evidencing such payments, and (c) documentation evidencing the expiration or revocation of the building permit. No interest must be paid by the City in calculating the amount of a refund pursuant to this paragraph. 
c.  Due to timeliness. Applications for refunds, including interest earned, due to the failure of the City to appropriate transportation impact fees collected from the applicant within the time limits established in subsection B.2. above must be made on forms provided by the Director and must be made within one (1) year following the expiration of such time limit. Failure to apply for a refund within one (1) year following expiration of the time limit constitutes a waiver of entitlement to a refund. In order for the refund application to be deemed complete, the applicant must submit: (a) evidence that the applicant is the current property owner or the authorized agent of the current property owner, (b) the amount of the transportation impact fees paid and receipts evidencing such payments, and (c) a description and documentation of the City's failure to appropriate transportation impact fee funds pursuant to subsection B.2. above. 
d.  Due to abandonment. Applications for refunds due to abandonment of an impact-generating development prior to completion must be on a form provided by the Director and made within sixty (60) days following the date of abandonment. Failure to apply for a refund within sixty (60) days following the date of abandonment constitutes a waiver of entitlement to a refund. The application must include: (a) evidence that the person applying for the refund is the initial applicant who paid the fee, or the authorized agent of the initial applicant, (b) the amount of the transportation impact fees paid and receipts evidencing such payments, and (c) documentation evidencing the demolition of the building partially constructed pursuant to payment of the impact fees to be refunded. No interest must be paid by the City in calculating the amount of the refund pursuant to this paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 2004-17, § 6, 9-21-04; Ord. No. 2018-10 , § 2, 4-17-18)  
Sec. 29-37. - Appeals. 
A.  Generally. An applicant may appeal from a decision of the Director or other City official under this ordinance, to the City Manager, by filing an appeal in writing, with the City Manager, within thirty (30) calendar days of the decision being appealed from. The appeal must include a written notice stating and specifying the grounds of the appeal. Within thirty (30) days of the filing of an appeal, the City Manager shall determine the reasonableness of the decision of the Director or other City official, and shall sustain, reverse, or modify the decision being appealed from. 
B.  City Council. If the applicant does not agree with the determination of the City Manager, the applicant may file within thirty (30) days of the post date of the decision of the City Manager, a written request to have the appeal heard by the City Council. Upon such request, the City Manager shall place the appeal on the City Council's agenda and forward the record of the matter to the City Council for a hearing. 
C.  Record. The record considered by the City Manager and the City Council must be limited to the record related to the decision being appealed from. 
D.  Notice. The City Manager must provide the applicant at least fifteen (15) calendar days notice of the appeal before the City Council by mail or hand delivery. 
E.  Hearing on appeal. At the hearing on the appeal before the City Council, the City Council must provide the appellant an opportunity to identify the grounds for the appeal and the basis for the Director's or other City official's error on the decision, based on the record. To the extent relevant, the Director or a representative, other City staff involved in the decision, and the appellant must be allowed to respond, based on the record. After the presentations, the City Council may hear from any other person it deems appropriate, and then based on the testimony heard at the hearing and the record affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the Director or other City official based on the standards in F. below. 
F.  Standards. To reverse a decision of the Director or other City official, the City Council must find that there is a clear and demonstrable error in the application of the facts in the record to the standards for review of the decision being appealed from. If the City Council reverses or modifies the decision, it must provide the Director or other City official clear direction on the proper decision. In no case may the City Council negotiate the amount of the transportation impact fees or waive the fees. The decision of the City Council will be final. 
G.  Form of decision. The City Council's decision on the appeal must be in writing, and include findings of fact and the application of those facts to the relevant standards. 
H.  Effect of appeal on building permit eligibility. The filing of an appeal does not stay the imposition or the collection of the transportation impact fee as calculated by the Director unless a cash bond or other sufficient surety has been provided. If the appeal form is accompanied by a cash bond or letter of credit, in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney and the Director of Financial Services, in an amount equal to the transportation impact fee calculated to be due, a building permit may be issued to the applicant pending resolution of the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2004-17, § 7, 9-21-04)  
Sec. 29-38. - Annual adjustments five-year update; and impact fee schedule. 
A.  Annual adjustments. The City will increase the transportation impact fees to keep pace with inflation. In August of each year, the City will review the projected rate of inflation for the upcoming calendar year as determined by the most recent FDOT Transportation Cost Report Construction Cost Inflation Factors. If inflation is projected to increase, the City will provide notice of the corresponding increase in the transportation impact fees no later than September 30, in the manner required by law. The impact fee increase will go into effect on January 1st of the following year. 
B.  The annual notice referenced in subsection A is provided as a courtesy. The notice of this Code amendment is intended to provide notice of the inflationary adjustments and satisfy the requirement in F.S. § 163.31801 that notice be provided 90 days prior to an increase in an impact fee. 
C.  Five-year update. At least once every four years beginning in 2022, the Director, after consultation with appropriate providers of capital transportation improvements, is required to recommend to the City Council whether changes to this section or the fee schedule are necessary, due to changes in facility needs, land use characteristics, cost assumptions, projected growth, and impacts on capital transportation improvements. The update should be completed within five-years from date of adoption of the last fee update, not counting the annual inflation adjustment. The purpose of the five-year update is to ensure that impact generating development does not pay more than its proportionate share for the costs of growth-induced capital transportation improvements. 
D.  Fee schedule. The Transportation Impact Fee Schedule is provided in Table 3-1 below. For non-residential uses, the fees are illustrated per 1,000 square feet, but calculated on a gross square footage (floor area) basis. All other fees are assessed based on an applicable unit of measure. 
E.  Additive fees. The transportation impact fee schedule includes separate fees for pharmacy drive-thru lane(s), bank drive-thru lane(s), restaurant drive-thru lane(s), ATM drive-thru lanes, fueling positions and free standing ATM's. The fees for these uses are additive to any fees assessed for a pharmacy, bank, restaurant, convenience store, or retail uses. For example, a bank would pay per gross square foot based on the applicable fee rate for each bank and/or ATM drive-thru lane. Likewise, a 5,000-square foot convenience store with eight gas pumps would pay a fee per square foot for the convenience market, and a fee per vehicle fueling position (eight pumps × two vehicle fueling positions = 16 vehicle fueling positions). The fee schedule contains applicable notations for additive fees. 
F.  Conversions. Several land uses require the calculation of useable acreage or gross floor area that includes unenclosed acreage. For example, a home improvement store would include all areas used for sale, storage or display of goods (includes all outside garden center areas), plus all areas under roof in the calculation of gross floor area. The acreage for a golf course or outdoor commercial recreation use would be the acreage for all structures along with all acreage used to carry out the primary function on the land use. For example, the area for a golf driving range would include the acreage for any buildings, concessions, sale of merchandise, bathrooms, clubhouse or areas devoted to customer service, along with all acreage used for the driving range. The gross acreage would exclude parking areas. 
Table 18. Palm Coast Transportation Impact Fee Schedule 	Unit of Measure 	Proposed Impact
Fee 
Residential Use 		
Single Family Detached/Mobile Home 	Dwelling Unit 	$       2,981 
Vested Single Family Platted Lot * 	Dwelling Unit 	$       1,632 
Single Family Attached (includes Duplex, Townhomes, Villas, Condominiums) 	Dwelling Unit 	$       2,311 
Vested Duplex Platted Lot * 	Dwelling Unit 	$       1,266 
Multi-Family Apartment 	Dwelling Unit 	$       1,718 
Active Adult & Independent Living (55+) (Attached or Detached Units) 	Dwelling Unit 	$       1,260 
Institutional Use 		
Adult Congregate Living Facility 	Bed 	$       796 
Cemetery 	Acre 	$       2,085 
Day Care 	1,000 sq. ft. 	$       4,863 
Places of Worship 	1,000 sq. ft. 	$       2,155 
Private School (Pre K-12) 	1,000 sq. ft. 	$       2,340 
Private College or University 	1,000 sq. ft. 	$       3,988 
Industrial Use 		
Manufacturing/Warehousing/Production 	1,000 sq. ft. 	$       1,684 
Retail Fulfillment/Distribution 	1,000 sq. ft. 	$       3,240 
Mini-Warehouse/Boat/RVs & Other Outdoor Storage 1 	1,000 sq. ft. 	$       429 
Entertainment, Recreation & Lodging Use 		
Movie Theater/Performing Arts 	per Seat 	$       245 
Marina (including dry storage) 	per Berth 	$       670 
Golf Course 	per Hole 	$       8,450 
Outdoor Commercial Recreation 2 	per Acre 	$       3,982 
Multi-Purpose Commercial Recreation 	1,000 sq. ft. 	$       1,395 
Health Club/Fitness/Gym 	1,000 sq. ft. 	$       8,893 
Recreational Vehicle (RV) Park 	per Space 	$       758 
Hotel/Motel/Lodging 	Room/Unit 	$       1,759 
Community Center/Civic/Gallery/Lodge 	1,000 sq. ft. 	$       3,235 
Office Use 		
Office/Office Park/Medical/Clinic/Bank/Financial 	1,000 sq. ft. 	$       3,608 
Retail Use 		
Multi-Tenant Retail Center 3 	1,000 sq. ft. 	$       4,266 
Pharmacy (Free Standing) 	1,000 sq. ft. 	$       7,635 
Pharmacy Drive-Thru (fee is in addition to fee per 1,000 sq. ft. for pharmacy) 	per lane 	$       7,547 
General Retail (Free Standing) 	1,000 sq. ft. 	$       6,589 
Furniture/Mattress Store (Free Standing) 	1,000 sq. ft. 	$       1,780 
Supermarket/Grocery Store (Free Standing) 	1,000 sq. ft. 	$       11,169 
Sit Down Restaurant 4 (Retail Center, Free Standing or Outparcel) 	1,000 sq. ft. 	$       12,034 
Fast Food/Fast Casual Restaurant 4 (Retail Center, Free Standing or Outparcel) 	1,000 sq. ft. 	$       19,740 
Restaurant Drive-Thru 4 (based on number of lanes at point of ordering) 	per lane 	$       21,889 
Discount Superstore (Free Standing) 1 	1,000 sq. ft. 	$       14,324 
Home Improvement/Building Materials/Garden Center 1 	1,000 sq. ft. 	$       8,903 
Nursery (Wholesale or Retail) 2 	per Acre 	$       7,090 
Bank Drive-Thru Lane, Free Standing ATM or ATM Drive-Thru Lane 5 	per drive thru lane and/or per ATM 	$       11,674 
Vehicle & Boat - Sales or Dealership 	1,000 sq. ft. 	$       8,725 
Vehicle & Boat - Service/Repair/Parts (current fee under industrial use) 	1,000 sq. ft. 	$       8,810 
Vehicle & Boat - Cleaning/Detailing/Wash (current fee per bay) 	1,000 sq. ft. 	$       13,605 
Convenience Store 6 	1,000 sq. ft. 	$       22,637 
Vehicle Fueling Position 6 	per Vehicle Fueling Position 	$       12,673 
Personal Services 	1,000 sq. ft. 	$       3,311 
* Residential lot with final plat approval as of December 30, 1977. 
1 Acreage for any unenclosed material and vehicle storage, sales and display shall be converted to gross floor area. 
2 The gross floor area for any buildings shall be converted to acreage. 
3 Excludes all outparcels. The fee for any outparcel shall be based on the applicable land use. Also excludes any type of drive-thru, vehicle fueling positions or free-standing ATM, which are additive fees in addition to the fee for the multi-tenant retail center. 
4 Areas for outdoor seating shall be converted to gross floor area. Any drive-thru associated with a restaurant will be an additive fee to the fee per square foot for the restaurant. The number of drive-thru lanes will be based on the number of lanes present when an individual places an order. The restaurant drive-thru rate applies for any building, whether a multi-tenant, free standing or convenience land use. 
5 Bank building square footage falls under office and is an additive fee beyond the fee due for bank/ATM drive-thru lanes or free standing ATM's. These rates are per drive-thru lane for the bank and per drive-thru lane with an ATM. The free standing ATM is for an ATM only and not an ATM within or part of another non financial building, such as an ATM within a grocery store. 
6 Convenience Store rates are separate and an additive fee beyond the fee due for vehicle fueling positions. Rates per vehicle fueling position also apply to gas stations and service stations with fuel pumps. The fee for any restaurant square footage or restaurant drive-thru in a convenience store will be based on the individual fee rate for the land use, not the convenience store rate. 
 
(Ord. No. 2004-17, § 8, 9-7-04; Ord. No. 08-20, § 2, 9-16-08; Ord. No. 2011-6, § 6, 5-17-11; Ord. No. 2018-10 , § 2, 4-17-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-10 , § 2, adopted April 17, 2018 amended § 29-38 and in so doing changed the title of said section from "Annual adjustments; five-year phase in; six-year update; and impact fee schedule" to "Annual adjustments five-year update; and impact fee schedule," as set out herein.  
ARTICLE III. - PARK SYSTEM IMPACT FEE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-27, §§ 1—15, adopted Sept. 25, 2001, included herein as §§ 29-71—29-85, was treated as superseding the provisions of Ord. No. 00-14, § 1, adopted March 7, 2000. Formerly, said superseded provisions pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 29-71. - Definitions. 
When used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly otherwise requires: 
Accessory building or structure: A detached, subordinate building, the use of which is clearly indicated and related to the use of the principal building or use of the land and which is located on the same lot as the principal building or use. 
Activity-based: District, community, and neighborhood parks with facilities that use more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total area of the park. 
Apartment: A rental dwelling unit located within the same building as other dwelling units. 
Applicant: The person who applies for a building permit. 
Alternative park system impact fee: Any alternative fee calculated by an applicant and approved by the City Manager pursuant to this article. 
Building: Any structure, either temporary or permanent, built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, chattels or property of any kind. This term shall include tents, trailers, mobile homes or any vehicles serving in any way the function of a building. This term shall not include temporary construction sheds or trailers erected to assist in construction and maintained during the term of a building permit. 
Building permit: An official document or certificate issued by the City under the authority of law, authorizing the construction or siting of any building. For purposes of this Ordinance, the term "building permit" shall also include tie-down permits for those structures or buildings, such as a mobile home, that may not require a building permit in order to be occupied. 
Capital improvement: Includes, but is not limited to, preliminary engineering, engineering design studies, land surveys, real property and other property purchase and acquisition, engineering, permitting and construction of all the necessary features for district and local neighborhood parks project including, but not limited to, walking paths, ballfields, picnic pavilions, equipment for children's play areas, irrigation systems, lighting systems, fencing, bleachers, roads, parking facilities, restrooms, concession and community buildings, manager quarters and storage buildings. 
Certificate of occupancy: An official document or certificate issued by the City under the authority of law authorizing the occupancy of a building, or any portion thereof, for its intended use on a permanent basis. 
City: The City of Palm Coast, Florida. 
City Attorney: The person appointed as City Attorney pursuant to the City Charter, or the designee of such person. 
City Council: The City Council of the City of Palm Coast, Florida. 
City park system: The lands, buildings, facilities, property, and associated structures and materials provided by the City that are used primarily for the passive and active recreational and outdoor and indoor recreational uses of the public. 
City Manager: The Chief Administrative Officer of the City, appointed by the City Council or the designee of such person. 
Collection agency: The City or the City Financial Services Department. 
Comprehensive plan: The comprehensive plan of the City adopted and amended pursuant to State law. 
Dwelling unit: One (1) or more rooms designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single family maintaining a household. 
Encumbered: Monies committed by contract or purchase order in a manner that obligates the City to expend the encumbered amount upon delivery or completion of goods, services or real property provided by a vendor, supplier, contractor or owner. 
Feepayer: A person commencing a land development activity which requires the payment of a fee under the provisions of this article. 
Land development activity: The carrying out of any residential building activity. 
Land development ordinance: The land development codes, regulations and ordinances of the City, as amended and supplemented, or its successor in function. 
Multi-family dwelling: A building containing three (3) or more dwellings intended to be occupied primarily by permanent residents. 
Owner: The person holding legal title to the real property upon which park system impact construction is to occur. 
Park system impact construction: Land development activity designed or intended to permit a use of the land which will contain more dwelling units than the existing use of land. 
Park system impact fee: The impact fee imposed by the City pursuant to this article which relates to both district and local parks. 
Park system impact fee trust account: The separate trust account created pursuant to this article. 
Person: An individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity. 
Resource-based: Environmentally sensitive lands, conservation areas, and open space that has less than twenty-five (25) percent of the area developed for activities. 
(Ord. No. 01-27, § 1, 9-25-01; Ord. No. 2004-27, § 2, 9-7-04)  
Sec. 29-72. - Rules of construction. 
For the purposes of administration and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise stated in this article, the following rules of construction shall apply: 
(1)  In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this article and any caption, illustration, summary table, or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
(2)  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
(3)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(4)  The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "maintained for," or "occupied for". 
(5)  Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction "and", "or" or "either... or", the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
a.  "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
b.  "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
c.  "Either ... or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination. 
(6)  The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
(7)  The provisions of this article shall be liberally construed to effectively carry out its purposes in the interest of public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the citizens of the City. 
(Ord. No. 01-27, § 2, 9-25-01)  
Sec. 29-73. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-1 , § 2, adopted Jan. 24, 2014, repealed former § 29-73 which pertained to legislative findings, and derived from Ord. No. 01-27, § 3, adopted Sept. 25, 2001; and Ord. No. 2004-27, § 1, adopted Sept. 7, 2004.  
Sec. 29-74. - Adoption of impact fee formula; amount of park impact fee. 
(a)  The City Council hereby adopts the assumptions, conclusions and findings as set forth in Subsection (b) with regard to the determination of anticipated costs of the acquisition of capital improvements for the City park system required to accommodate growth contemplated in the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
(b)  The formula set forth in the report entitled "Parks and Recreation Impact Fee Study," dated December 30, 2013, was approved and adopted by the City Council as set forth in the recitals to this article. 
(c)  The amount of park impact fee is established by City Council resolution consistent with the formula and Impact Fee Alternative Scenarios set forth in the report entitled "Parks and Recreation Impact Fee Study," dated December 30, 2013. 
(d)  The City may assess an administrative fee, as set by resolution, for the purpose of recovering the costs of administering the impact fee program established in this article. The administrative fee may be waived if impact fees are paid at the time of the issuance of the building permit. 
(e)  The amount of park impact fee as established by City Council Resolution consistent with the formula set forth in the above-referenced report, as well as the impact fee study shall be reviewed by the City Council at least every three years, unless other[wise] directed by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 01-27, § 4, 9-25-01; Ord. No. 2004-27, § 3, 9-7-04; Ord. No. 2014-1 , § 3, 1-24-14) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-1 , § 3, adopted Jan. 24, 2014, changed the title of § 29-74 from "Adoption of impact fee formula" to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 29-75. - Imposition; credits for donations. 
(a)  Any person who makes or causes the making of an improvement to land, which requires the issuance of a building permit for a residential structure, or any person who changes the use of any structure for residential purposes, shall pay a park impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this article. In the event the impact fee rate for a particular land use is changed subsequent to the issuance of a building permit and before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the impact fee shall be the amount in effect on the date payment is received. 
(b)  No person shall commence or continue construction or allow commencement or continuation of construction of an improvement for which the fee imposed by this article is applicable without first having obtained the required building permit and paid the proper impact fee imposed by this article. No person shall change the use or allow a change in use of any structure where the fee imposed by this article is applicable without having paid the proper park system impact fees imposed by this article. 
(c)  Persons subject to paying the park impact fee may, upon written agreement with the City, be awarded park system impact fee credits for the donation of parkland, recreational facilities or equipment or other capital improvement. The amount of such credit and the method of drawing down such credits shall be provided for in the written agreement. Park impact fee credits shall only be granted for capacity adding improvements. 
(1)  The amount of developer contribution credit shall be determined according to the following: 
a.  The value of land shall be based upon a written appraisal of fair market value by a Member of the Appraisal Institute (MAI) appraiser, selected and paid for by the applicant, utilizing accepted appraisal techniques. City reserves the right to engage another appraiser and the value of the land donation shall be an amount equal to the average of the two appraisals; and 
b.  The anticipated construction costs shall be based upon cost estimates certified by a registered professional engineer and approved by the City. 
(Ord. No. 01-27, § 5, 9-25-01; Ord. No. 2004-27, § 4, 9-7-04; Ord. No. 2014-1 , § 4, 1-24-14) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-1 , § 4, adopted Jan. 24, 2014, changed the title of § 29-75 from "Imposition; amount of park impact fee; credits for donations" to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 29-76. - Use of proceeds. 
(a)  The City Council hereby establishes a separate trust account for the park system impact fees, to be designated as the "park system impact fee trust account" which shall be maintained separate and apart from all other accounts of the City. All such impact fees shall be deposited into such trust fund immediately upon receipt. 
(b)  The monies deposited into the park system impact fee trust account shall be used solely for the purpose of improving the City park system, including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Capital improvements; 
(2)  Repayment of monies transferred or borrowed from any budgetary fund of the City, subsequent to the adoption of this article, which were used to fund any capital improvement; and 
(3)  Payment of principal and interest, necessary reserves and costs of issuance under any bonds or other indebtedness issued by the City to provide funds to acquire contemplated capital improvements, subsequent to the adoption of this article. 
(c)  Any funds on deposit which are not immediately necessary for expenditure shall be invested by the City. All income derived from such investments shall be deposited in the park system impact fee trust account and used as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 01-27, § 6, 9-25-01; Ord. No. 2014-1 , § 5, 1-24-14)  
Sec. 29-77. - Alternative impact fee calculation. 
(a)  In the event an applicant believes that the impact to the City park system necessitated by its park system impact construction is less than the impact fee established in this article, such applicant may, prior to issuance of a building permit for such park system impact construction, submit a calculation of an alternative park system impact fee to the City Manager pursuant to the provisions of this section. The City Manager shall review the calculations and make a determination within 15 calendar days of submittal as to whether such calculation complies with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Alternative park system impact fee calculations shall be based on data, information or assumptions contained in this article or independent sources, provided that: 
(1)  The independent source is a generally accepted standard source of socioeconomic or demographic information, or 
(2)  The independent source is a local study supported by a database that the City Manager finds adequate for the conclusions contained in such study performed according to a generally accepted methodology. 
(c)  If the City Manager determines that the data, information and assumptions utilized by the applicant to calculate the alternative park system impact fee complies with the requirements of this section, the alternative park system impact fee shall be paid in lieu of the fee set forth in this article. 
(d)  If the City Manager determines that the data, information and assumptions utilized by the applicant to calculate the alternative park system impact fee do not comply with the requirements of this section, then the City shall provide to the applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notification of the rejection of the alternative park system impact fee and the reason therefore. The applicant shall have 15 days from the receipt of the written notification of rejection to request a hearing before the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 01-27, § 7, 9-25-01)  
Sec. 29-78. - Exemptions. 
The following shall be exempted from payment of the impact fees: 
(1)  Alterations or expansion or replacement of an existing dwelling unit which does not increase the number of families when such dwelling unit is arranged, designed or intended to accommodate for the purpose of providing living quarters. 
(2)  The construction of accessory buildings or structures which will not create additional dwelling units. 
(3)  The replacement of an existing dwelling unit where no additional dwelling unit(s) is/are created. 
(Ord. No. 01-27, § 8, 9-25-01)  
Sec. 29-79. - Changes of size and use, mixed uses. 
(a)  Park system impact fees shall be imposed and calculated for the alteration, modification, expansion or replacement of a building or dwelling unit, the redevelopment of property, or the construction of an accessory building if the alteration, expansion or replacement of the building or dwelling unit or the construction of an accessory building results in a land development activity determined to increase the number of dwelling units. 
(b)  If application is made for a building permit for a mixed use (residential and other use(s)), the park system impact fee shall be determined by apportioning the space within the mixed use development and determining the number of park system impact construction that will occur. 
(Ord. No. 01-27, § 9, 9-25-01)  
Sec. 29-80. - Payment. 
(a)  An applicant shall pay the appropriate park impact fees as set forth in this article prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
(b)  The park system impact fee shall be paid directly to the collection agency. 
(c)  The payment of the park system impact fee shall be in addition to any other fees, charges, or assessments due for the issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy. 
(d)  The obligation for payment of the park system impact fee shall run with the land. However, this section shall not be construed to relieve an applicant of any responsibility or liability whatsoever. 
(e)  If a building permit expires and no construction has been commenced, then the feepayer shall be entitled to a refund of the impact fee paid as a condition for its issuance. 
(Ord. No. 01-27, § 10, 9-25-01; Ord. No. 2011-5, § 2, 5-17-11; Ord. No. 2014-1 , § 6, 1-24-14)  
Sec. 29-81. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-1 , § 7, adopted Jan. 24, 2014, repealed former § 29-81 which pertained to collection of impact fees when not paid by mistake or inadvertence or by agreement, and derived from Ord. No. 01-27, § 11, adopted Sept. 25, 2001; and Ord. No. 2011-5, § 3, adopted May 17, 2011.  
Sec. 29-82. - Administrative review procedures. 
(a)  An applicant or owner who is required to pay a park system impact fee pursuant to this article shall have the right to request a special review by the City Manager. 
(b)  Such review shall be for the purpose of the City Manager rendering a determination concerning the application or calculation of the appropriate park system impact fee pursuant to this article. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, such review shall be requested by the applicant or owner within 15 calendar days, including Sundays and legal holidays, of the date the applicant or owner learns of the assessment of the park system impact fee for the proposed park system impact construction. Failure to request a review within the time provided shall be deemed a waiver of such right. 
(d)  A written request for review shall be filed with the City Manager and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant or owner; 
(2)  The telephone number at which the applicant or owner may be reached during daytime hours; 
(3)  The legal description of the property in question; 
(4)  If issued, the date the building permit was issued and the building permit number; 
(5)  A brief description of the nature of the construction being undertaken pursuant to the building permit; 
(6)  If paid, the date the park system impact fee was paid; and 
(7)  A statement of the reasons why the applicant or owner is requesting the review, including any supporting information and site or construction plan and the amount that the applicant or owner asserts would be the appropriate park system impact fee. 
(e)  Within 15 calendar days of receipt of such request, the City Manager shall forward to the applicant and owner a written review of and determination concerning the park system impact fee. 
(f)  The applicant or owner shall have 15 calendar days from the receipt of the written special review or; in the event of lack of response by the City Manager, 30 days from filing of the request for review, whichever is later, to request a hearing before the City Council if the applicant or owner desires to appeal the decision of the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 01-27, § 12, 9-25-01)  
Sec. 29-83. - City council review hearing. 
(a)  An applicant or owner who is required to pay a park system impact fee pursuant to this article, shall have the right to timely request a review hearing of decision of the City Manager rendered in accordance with the provisions of section 29-82. 
(b)  Such hearing shall be limited to the review of the determination made by the City Manager concerning the application or calculation of the appropriate park system impact fee or, in the event of non-response of the City Manager, direct review concerning the application or calculation of the appropriate park system impact fee. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, such hearing shall be requested by the applicant or owner within 15 calendar days, including Sundays and legal holidays, of the date of first receipt of the following, whichever is applicable: (i) The impact fee special review determination, or (ii) the determination as to an alternative park system impact fee. Failure to request a hearing within the time provided shall be deemed a waiver of such right. 
(d)  The request for hearing shall be filed with the office of City Manager and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant or owner; 
(2)  The legal description of the property in question; 
(3)  If issued, the date the building permit was issued and building permit number; 
(4)  A brief description of the nature of the construction being undertaken pursuant to the building permit; 
(5)  If paid, the date the park system impact fee was paid; and 
(6)  A statement of the reasons why the applicant or owner is requesting the hearing and a statement of the amount that the applicant or owner asserts would be the appropriate park system impact fee. 
(e)  Upon receipt of such request, the City Manager shall schedule a hearing before the City Council at a regularly scheduled meeting or a special meeting called for the purpose of conducting the hearing and shall provide the applicant and owner written notice of the time and place of the hearing. Such hearing shall be held within 30 days of the date the request for hearing was filed. 
(f)  Such hearing shall be before the City Council and shall be conducted in a manner designed to obtain all information and evidence relevant to the requested hearing. Formal rules of civil procedure and evidence shall not be applicable; however, the hearing shall be conducted in a fair and impartial manner with each party having an opportunity to be heard and to present information and evidence. 
(Ord. No. 01-27, § 13, 9-25-01)  
Sec. 29-84. - Review requirements. 
(a)  The City Manager shall each fiscal year prepare a preliminary capital improvement program for park facilities to be funded from the park impact fee trust fund. The City Manager shall present to the City Council the proposed capital improvement program for park facilities, the status of funds, including any accrued interest from the trust fund, the expenditures for park improvements and related expenses. Monies, including any accrued interest, not assigned in any fiscal period shall be retained in the park impact fee trust fund until the next fiscal period except as provided by the refund provisions of this article. 
(b)  The formula used to calculate parks impact fee along with the impact fee shall be reviewed periodically and established by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 01-27, § 14, 9-25-01; Ord. No. 2004-27, § 5, 9-21-04; Ord. No. 2014-1 , § 8, 1-24-14)  
Sec. 29-85. - Declaration of exclusion from Administrative Procedures Act. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed or interpreted to include the City in the definition of agency contained in F.S. § 120.52, or to otherwise subject the City to the application of the Administrative Procedure Act, F.S. ch. 120. This declaration of intent and exclusion shall apply to all proceedings taken as a result of or pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-27, § 15, 9-25-01) 
EXHIBIT A 
Reserved 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-1 , § 9, adopted Jan. 24, 2014, repealed former Exhibit A, which pertained to park impact fee formula, and derived from Ord. No. 01-27, exh. A, adopted Sept. 25, 2001; and Ord. No. 04-27, exh. A, adopted Nov. 2, 2004.  
ARTICLE IV. - FIRE AND RESCUE SYSTEM IMPACT FEE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-23, §§ 1—15, adopted Nov. 19, 2002, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion as Art, IV, §§ 29-99—29-113 was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 29-99: - Definitions. 
When used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly otherwise requires: 
Accessory building or structure: A detached, subordinate building, the use of which is clearly indicated and related to the use of the principal building or use of the land and which is located on the same lot as the principal building or use. 
Apartment: A rental dwelling unit located within the same building as other dwelling units. 
Applicant: The person who applies for a building permit. 
Alternative fire and rescue system impact fee: Any alternative fee calculated by an applicant and approved by the City Manager pursuant to this article. 
Building: Any structure, either temporary or permanent, built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, chattels or property of any kind. This term shall include but is not limited to tents, trailers, mobile homes or any vehicles serving in any way the function of a building. This term shall not include temporary construction sheds or trailers erected to assist in construction and maintained during the term of a building permit. 
Building permit: An official document or certificate issued by the City under the authority of law, authorizing the construction or siting of any building. For purposes of this article, the term "building permit" shall also include tie-down permits for those structures or buildings, such as a mobile home, that may not require a building permit in order to be occupied. 
Capital improvement: Includes, but is not limited to, preliminary engineering, engineering design studies, land surveys, real property and other property purchase and acquisition, engineering, permitting and construction of all the necessary features for fire and rescue including, but not limited to, equipment bays, sleeping quarters, kitchen facilities, training facilities, office space, fire apparatus, irrigation systems, lighting systems, fencing, roads, parking facilities, restrooms, and storage buildings. 
Certificate of occupancy: An official document or certificate issued by the City under the authority of law authorizing the occupancy of a building, or any portion thereof, for its intended use on a permanent basis. 
City fire and rescue system: The lands, buildings, facilities, property, and associated structures, materials and equipment provided by the City that are used primarily for the provision of fire and rescue services to the public. 
Collection agency: The City or the City Development Services Department. 
Comprehensive plan: The comprehensive plan of the City adopted and amended pursuant to state law. 
Dwelling unit: One or more rooms designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single family maintaining a household. 
Encumbered: Monies committed by contract or purchase order in a manner that obligates the City to expend the encumbered amount upon delivery or completion of goods, services or real property provided by a vendor, supplier, contractor or owner. 
Fee payer: A person commencing a land development activity which requires the payment of a fee under the provisions of this article. 
Fire and rescue system impact construction: Land development activity designed or intended to permit a use of the land which will contain more intensity than the existing use of land. 
Fire and rescue system impact fee: The impact fee imposed by the City pursuant to this article which relates to both fire and rescue facilities and equipment. 
Fire and rescue system impact fee trust account: The separate trust account created pursuant to this article. 
Land development activity: The carrying out of any building activity. 
Land development ordinance: The land development codes, regulations and ordinances of the City, as amended and supplemented, or its successor in function. 
Multi-family dwelling: A building containing three or more dwellings intended to be occupied primarily by permanent residents. 
Owner: The person holding legal title to the real property upon which fire and rescue system impact construction is to occur. 
(Ord. No. 2002-33, § 1, 11-19-02)  
Sec. 29-100. - Rules of construction. 
For the purposes of administration and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise stated in this article, the following rules of construction shall apply: 
(a)  In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this article and any caption, illustration, summary table, or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
(b)  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary: the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(d)  The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "maintained for," or "occupied for". 
(e)  Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two (2) or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either...or", the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)  "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  "Either...or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination. 
(f)  The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
(g)  The provisions of this article shall be liberally construed to effectively carry out its purposes in the interest of public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the citizens of the City of Palm Coast. 
(Ord. No. 2002-33, § 2, 11-19-02)  
Sec. 29-101. - Legislative findings. 
In addition to the recitals set forth above, which are ratified and affirmed by the City Council, it is hereby ascertained, determined and declared by the City Council that: 
(a)  Future growth represented by fire and rescue system impact construction should contribute its fair share to the cost of acquiring additional capital improvements for the City fire and rescue system that are required to accommodate the use of the fire and rescue system by such growth. 
(b)  Implementation of an impact fee structure and formula to require future City fire and rescue system impact construction to contribute its fair share of the cost of the acquisition of capital improvements for the City fire and rescue system is an integral and vital element of the regulatory plan of growth management incorporated in the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
(c)  The standards of service set forth in this article are hereby ratified, approved and adopted by the City and found to be in conformity with the Comprehensive Plan. 
(d)  Fire and rescue system planning is an evolving process and the standard of service of the City fire and rescue system constitutes a projection of anticipated need for capital improvements based upon present knowledge and judgment. Therefore, in recognition of changing growth patterns and the dynamic nature of population growth, it is the intent of the City Council that the standard of service for the City fire and rescue system and the fire and rescue system impact fee imposed in this article be reviewed and adjusted periodically to insure that the City fire and rescue system impact fees are imposed equitably and lawfully, based upon actual and anticipated growth at the time of their imposition. 
(e)  The City fire and rescue system provides services for all citizens of the City and the presence of the City fire and rescue system enhances and benefits the health, safety, well being and general welfare of all citizens of the City. Therefore, the City fire and rescue system impact fee shall be imposed and collected from all fire and rescue system impact construction. 
(f)  The existing City fire and rescue system and other improvements and additions, contemplated by the council and which are or will be funded by revenues other than impact fees, shall eliminate any deficiency between the existing City fire and rescue system and the established standard of service, and shall be sufficient for the needs of the existing population of the City. Therefore, the revenue derived from the fire and rescue system impact fee shall be utilized only for capital improvements for the City fire and rescue system which are necessitated by new construction. 
(g)  This article is adopted pursuant to Article VIII, Section 1(g), Constitution of the State of Florida; Chapters 166 and 163, Florida Statutes; the City of Palm Coast Charter and other applicable law. 
(h)  The recitals to this article are hereby ratified, adopted and incorporated into this section by this reference thereto as if fully set forth herein verbatim. 
(Ord. No. 2002-33, § 3, 11-19-02)  
Sec. 29-102. - Adoption of impact fee formula. 
(a)  The City Council hereby adopts the City Manager's assumptions, conclusions and findings as set forth in subsection (b) with regard to the determination of anticipated costs of the acquisition of capital improvements for the City fire and rescue system required to accommodate growth contemplated in the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
(b)  The formula set forth in Exhibit "A" to this article is hereby incorporated herein as is adopted by the City Council as set forth in the recitals to this article. 
_____
EXHIBIT A 
FIRE AND RESCUE IMPACT FEE SCHEDULE 
1.  Residential fee (per dwelling unit) 
(R)(VA)/N = Fee/dwelling unit 
Where: 
R = Ratio of service responses to residences 
VA = Value of fire assets 
N = Number of dwelling units in City 
2.  Non-residential fee (per square foot) 
(NR)(VA)/SF = Fee/sq. ft. 
Where: 
NR = Ratio of service responses to non-residential 
VA = Value of Fire assets 
SF = Square footage of non-residential structures within the City 
(Ord. No. 2002-33, § 4, 11-19-02) 
_____ 
Sec. 29-103. - Imposition/amount of fire and rescue impact fee/credits for donations. 
(a)  Any person who makes or causes the making of an improvement to land which requires the issuance of a building permit, or any person who changes the use of any structure, shall pay a fire and rescue impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this article. In the event the impact fee rate for a particular land use is changed subsequent to the issuance of a building permit and before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the impact fee shall be the amount in effect on the date payment is received. 
(b)  No person shall commence or continue construction or allow commencement or continuation of construction of an improvement for which the fee imposed by this article is applicable without first having obtained the required building permit and received the proper impact fee calculation imposed by this article. No person shall change the use or allow a change in use of any structure where the fee imposed by this article is applicable without having paid the proper fire and rescue system impact fees imposed by this article. Fees shall be payable for all construction for which a certificate of occupancy is issued on or after January 1, 2003. 
(c)  The fire and rescue system impact fee shall be one hundred sixty dollars and thirty cents ($160.30 per) per dwelling unit and 44.44/100 dollars ($0.4444) per square foot for all non-residential construction. 
(d)  The City shall assess a three (3) percent administrative fee upon the amount of the impact fee for the purpose of administering the impact fee program established in this article. 
(e)  Persons subject to paying the fire and rescue impact fee may, upon written agreement with the City, be awarded impact fee credits for the donation of land, facilities or equipment or other capital improvement. The amount of such credit and the method of drawing down such credits shall be provided for in the written agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2002-33, § 5, 11-19-02)  
Sec. 29-104. - Use of proceeds. 
(a)  The City Council hereby establishes a separate trust account for the fire and rescue system impact fees, to be designated as the "fire and rescue system impact fee trust account" which shall be maintained separate and apart from all other accounts of the City. All such impact fees shall be deposited into such trust fund immediately upon receipt. 
(b)  The monies deposited into the fire and rescue system impact fee trust account shall be used solely for the purpose of improving the City fire and rescue system, including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Capital improvements; 
(2)  Repayment of monies transferred or borrowed from any budgetary fund of the City, subsequent to the adoption of this article, which were used to fund any capital improvement; and 
(3)  Payment of principal and interest, necessary reserves and costs of issuance under any bonds or other indebtedness issued by the City to provide funds to acquire contemplated capital improvements, subsequent to the adoption of this article. 
(c)  Any funds on deposit which are not immediately necessary for expenditure shall be invested by the City. All income derived from such investments shall be deposited in the fire and rescue system impact fee trust account and used as provided herein. 
(d)  The fire and rescue system impact fee collected pursuant to this article may be returned by the City to the then current owner of the property on behalf of which such fee was paid if such fees have not been expended or encumbered prior to the end of the fiscal year immediately following the seventh anniversary of the date upon which such fees were paid. Refunds shall be made with interest paid at the rate of six (6) percent per annum or the average net interest rate earned by the City in the fire and rescue system impact fee trust account during the time such refunded impact fee was on deposit, whichever is less. For the purposes of this section, fees collected shall be deemed to be spent or encumbered on the basis of the first fee in (collected) shall be the first fee out (expended). 
(Ord. No. 2002-33, § 6, 11-19-02)  
Sec. 29-105. - Alternative impact fee calculation. 
(a)  In the event an applicant believes that the impact to the City fire and rescue system necessitated by its construction is less than the impact fee established in this article, such applicant may, prior to issuance of a building permit for such construction, submit a calculation of an alternative impact fee to the City Manager pursuant to the provisions of this section. The City Manager shall review the calculations and make a determination within fifteen (15) calendar days of submittal as to whether such calculation complies with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Alternative fire and rescue system impact fee calculations shall be based on data, information or assumptions contained in this article or independent sources, provided that: 
(1)  The independent source is a generally accepted standard source of socioeconomic or demographic information, or 
(2)  The independent source is a local study supported by a database that the City Manager finds adequate for the conclusions contained in such study performed according to a generally accepted methodology. 
(c)  If the City Manager determines that the data, information and assumptions utilized by the applicant to calculate the alternative impact fee comply with the requirements of this section, the alternative impact fee shall be paid in lieu of the fee set forth in this article. 
(d)  If the City Manager determines that the data, information and assumptions utilized by the applicant to calculate the alternative impact fee do not comply with the requirements of this section, then the City shall provide to the applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notification of the rejection of the alternative impact fee and the reason therefore. The applicant shall have fifteen (15) days from the receipt of the written notification of rejection to request a hearing before the City Council. 
(e)  Council shall be advised of all such agreements. 
(Ord. No. 2002-33, § 7, 11-19-02)  
Sec. 29-106. - Exemptions. 
The following shall be exempted from payment of the impact fees: 
(a)  Alterations or expansion or replacement of an existing dwelling unit which does not increase the number of families when such dwelling unit is arranged, designed or intended to accommodate for the purpose of providing living quarters. 
(b)  The replacement of an existing dwelling unit where no additional dwelling unit(s) is/are created. 
(c)  Accessory structures to dwelling units, such as storage sheds, screen enclosures or garages. 
(Ord. No. 2002-33, § 8, 11-19-02)  
Sec. 29-107. - Changes of size and use/mixed uses. 
(a)  Fire and rescue system impact fees shall be imposed and calculated for the alteration, modification, expansion or replacement of a building or dwelling unit, the redevelopment of property, or the construction of an accessory building if the alteration, expansion or replacement of the building or dwelling unit or the construction of an accessory building results in a land development activity determined to increase the number of dwelling units. 
(b)  If application is made for a building permit for a mixed use building (residential and other use[s]), the impact fee shall be determined by apportioning the space within the mixed use development and determining the number of dwelling units and amount of square footage of non-dwelling unit construction that will occur. 
(Ord. No. 2002-33, § 9, 11-19-02)  
Sec. 29-108. - Payment. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, an applicant shall pay the appropriate impact fee as set forth in this article. 
(1)  The three-percent administrative fee shall be waived when fire and rescue system impact fee is paid at the time of the issuance of the building permit. 
(b)  The impact fee shall be paid directly to the collection agency. 
(c)  The payment of the impact fee shall be in addition to any other fees, charges or assessments due for the issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy. 
(d)  The obligation for payment of the impact fee shall run with the land. However, this section shall not be construed to relieve an applicant of any responsibility or liability whatsoever. 
(e)  If a building permit expires and no construction has been commenced, then the fee payer shall be entitled to a refund of the impact fee paid if paid at time of permit issuance. 
(Ord. No. 2002-33, § 10, 11-19-02; Ord. No. 2011-4, § 2, 5-17-11)  
Sec. 29-109. - Collection of impact fees when not paid by mistake or inadvertence or by agreement. 
(a)  In the event the fire and rescue system impact fee is not paid prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the affected impact construction because of mistake or inadvertence, the City shall proceed to collect the impact fee as follows: 
(1)  The City shall serve, by certified mail, return receipt requested or by hand delivery, an "impact fee notice" upon the applicant at the address set forth in the application for building permit, and the owner at the address appearing on the most recent records maintained by the Property Appraiser of Flagler County. Service of the impact fee notice shall be deemed notice of the impact fees due and service shall be deemed effective on the date the return receipt indicates the notice was received by either the applicant or the owner or the date said notice was hand delivered to either the applicant or owner, whichever occurs first; provided, however, that should none of these methods of service be successful, service shall be deemed effective on the date the copy of the impact fee notice was filed in the official records of the county. The impact fee notice shall contain the legal description of the property and shall advise the applicant and the owner as follows: 
(2)  The amount due and the general purpose for which the impact fee was imposed. 
(b)  The administrative review pursuant to this article may be requested no later than fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of receipt of the impact fee notice, by making application to the City Manager. 
(c)  The City shall file a release of impact fee notice in the official records of the County upon collection of payment in full. 
(d)  The impact fee shall be delinquent if not paid and received by the City within thirty (30) calendar days of the date the impact fee notice is received, excluding the date of receipt. Upon becoming delinquent, the applicant shall be subject to the imposition of a delinquent fee and interest on the unpaid amount until paid. 
(e)  In the event the impact fee becomes delinquent, a lien against the property for which the building permit was secured shall be recorded in the official record book of the County. 
(1)  The fire and rescue system impact fee shall be delinquent if not paid within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of receipt of the impact fee notice by either the applicant or owner. Upon becoming delinquent, a delinquency fee equal to ten percent (10%) of the total impact fee imposed shall be assessed. Such total impact fee, plus delinquency fee, shall bear interest at the statutory rate for final judgments calculated on a calendar day basis, until paid. 
(2)  Should the fire and rescue system impact fee become delinquent as set forth in this section, the City shall serve, by certified mail return receipt requested, a "notice of lien" upon the delinquent applicant if the building is under construction at the address indicated in the application for the building permit, and upon the delinquent owner at the address appearing on the most recent records maintained by the Property Appraiser of Flagler County. The notice of lien shall notify the delinquent applicant and owner that due to their failure to pay the impact fee, the City shall record a claim of lien. 
(3)  Upon the mailing of the notice of lien, the City Attorney shall record a claim of lien in the official records of Flagler County. The claim of lien shall contain the legal description of the property, the amount of the delinquent impact fee and the date of its imposition. Once recorded, the claim of lien shall constitute a lien against the property described therein. The City Attorney shall proceed expeditiously to collect, foreclose or otherwise enforce said lien. 
(4)  Foreclosure proceedings shall be instituted, conducted and enforced in conformity with the procedures for the foreclosure of municipal special assessment liens, as set forth in Chapter 173, Florida Statutes, which provisions are hereby incorporated herein in their entirety to the same extent as if such provisions were set forth herein verbatim. 
(f)  The liens for delinquent impact fees imposed hereunder shall remain liens, coequal with the lien of all State, County, district and municipal taxes upon which this lien is on parity, superior in dignity to all filed liens and claims, until paid as provided herein. 
(g)  The collection and enforcement procedures set forth in this section shall be cumulative with, supplemental to and in addition to, all other applicable procedures provided in any other ordinances or administrative regulations of the State of Florida. Failure of the City to follow the procedure set forth in this section shall not constitute a waiver of its rights to proceed under any other ordinances or administrative regulations of the City or any applicable law or administrative regulation of the State of Florida. 
(Ord. No. 2002-33, § 11, 11-19-02)  
Sec. 29-110. - Administrative review procedures. 
(a)  An applicant or owner who is required to pay a fire and rescue system impact fee pursuant to this article shall have the right to request a special review by the City Manager. 
(b)  Such review shall be for the purpose of the City Manager rendering a determination concerning the application or calculation of the appropriate impact fee pursuant to this article. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, such review shall be requested by the applicant or owner within fifteen (15) calendar days, including Sundays and legal holidays, of the date the applicant or owner learns of the assessment of the impact fee for the proposed impact construction. Failure to request a review within the time provided shall be deemed a waiver of such right. 
(d)  A written request for review shall be filed with the City Manager and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant or owner; 
(2)  The telephone number at which the applicant or owner may be reached during daytime hours; 
(3)  The legal description of the property in question; 
(4)  If issued, the date the building permit was issued and the building permit number. 
(5)  A brief description of the nature of the construction being undertaken pursuant to the building permit; 
(6)  If paid, the date the impact fee was paid; and 
(7)  A statement of the reasons why the applicant or owner is requesting the review, including any supporting information and site or construction plan and the amount that the applicant or owner asserts would be the appropriate impact fee. 
(e)  Within fifteen (15) calendar days of receipt of such request, the City Manager shall forward to the applicant and owner a written review of and determination concerning the impact fee. 
(f)  The applicant or owner shall have fifteen (15) calendar days from the receipt of the written special review or; in the event of lack of response by the City Manager, thirty (30) days from filing of the request for review, whichever is later, to request a hearing before the City Council if the applicant or owner desires to appeal the decision of the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 2002-33, § 12, 11-19-02)  
Sec. 29-111. - City council review hearing. 
(a)  An applicant or owner who is required to pay a fire and rescue system impact fee pursuant to this article, shall have the right to timely request a review hearing of the decision of the City Manager rendered in accordance with the provisions of section 29-110. 
(b)  Such hearing shall be limited to the review of the determination made by the City Manager concerning the application or calculation of the appropriate impact fee or, in the event of non-response of the City Manager, direct review concerning the application or calculation of the appropriate impact fee. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, such hearing shall be requested by the applicant or owner within fifteen (15) calendar days, including Sundays and legal holidays, of the date of first receipt of the following, whichever is applicable: 
(1)  The impact fee special review determination, or 
(2)  The determination as to an alternative impact fee. Failure to request a hearing within the time provided shall be deemed a waiver of such right. 
(d)  The request for hearing shall be filed with the office of City Manager and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant or owner; 
(2)  The legal description of the property in question; 
(3)  If issued, the date the building permit was issued and building permit number. 
(4)  A brief description of the nature of the construction being undertaken pursuant to the building permit; 
(5)  If paid, the date the impact fee was paid; and 
(6)  A statement of the reasons why the applicant or owner is requesting the hearing and a statement of the amount that the applicant or owner asserts would be the appropriate impact fee. 
(e)  Upon receipt of such request, the City Manager shall schedule a hearing before the City Council at a regularly scheduled meeting or a special meeting called for the purpose of conducting the hearing and shall provide the applicant and owner written notice of the time and place of the hearing. Such hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days of the date the request for hearing was filed. 
(f)  Such hearing shall be before the City Council and shall be conducted in a manner designed to obtain all information and evidence relevant to the requested hearing. Formal rules of civil procedure and evidence shall not be applicable; however, the hearing shall be conducted in a fair and impartial manner with each party having an opportunity to be heard and to present information and evidence. 
(Ord. No. 2002-33, § 13, 11-19-02)  
Sec. 29-112. - Review requirements. 
(a)  The City Manager shall each fiscal year prepare a preliminary capital improvement program for fire and rescue facilities to be funded from the impact fee trust fund. The City Manager shall present to the City Council the proposed capital improvement program for fire and rescue facilities, the status of funds, including any accrued interest from the trust fund, the expenditures for improvements, equipment and related expenses. Monies, including any accrued interest, not assigned in any fiscal period shall be retained in the impact fee trust fund until the next fiscal period except as provided by the refund provisions of this article. 
(b)  The fire and rescue impact fee formula and schedules shall be adjusted annually. The total value of the assets will be adjusted based on annual percentage changes in the Consumer Price Index (CPI). Annual changes shall be effective on April 1 of each year, based upon the index change for the twelve (12) months ending on December 31 of the previous year. 
(c)  This article and the impact fee study of the City Manager shall be reviewed by the City Council every six (6) years unless otherwise directed by the council. Each review shall consider, at a minimum, new estimates of population per household, costs related to the acquisition of capital improvements and equipment necessitated by growth, and adjustments to the assumptions, the conclusions and findings set forth in this article. The purpose of this review is to ensure that the impact fees do not exceed the reasonably anticipated costs associated with the capital improvements necessary to offset the demand generated by new construction on the City's fire and rescue system. In the event the review of this article materially alters or changes the assumptions, conclusions and findings of this article, this article shall be appropriately amended. If, upon the conclusion of the review of this article, the City Council determines in its legislative discretion that a rebate of impact fees previously collected is appropriate because of an alteration or change in the amount of impact fees previously collected, the ordinance amending this article shall establish the procedures and determinations for any such rebate. 
(d)  Simultaneous with the review of this article, the City Council shall review the capital improvements element of the Comprehensive Plan for the availability and adequacy of revenue sources to construct improvements and additions to the City fire and rescue system necessary to accommodate existing development. 
(Ord. No. 2002-33, § 14, 11-19-02)  
Sec. 29-113. - Declaration of exclusion from administrative procedures act. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed or interpreted to include the City in the definition of agency contained in Section 120.52, Florida Statutes, or to otherwise subject the City to the application of the Administrative Procedure Act, Chapter 120, Florida Statutes. This declaration of intent and exclusion shall apply to all proceedings taken as a result of or pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2002-33, § 15, 11-19-02)  
Chapter 35 - NUISANCES, OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 15; businesses and business regulations, ch. 16; emergency services, ch. 23; health and sanitation, ch. 28; solid waste, ch. 41; streets, roads, bridges and other public places, ch. 42. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL  
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 35-31. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 2010-03 repealed § 35-31, which pertained to nuisances affecting property values, and derived from Ord. No. 99-15, adopted Dec. 29, 1999.  
DIVISION 2. - NOISE 
 
Sec. 35-51. - Loud and raucous noise prohibited—General. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud and raucous noise, which term shall mean any sound which, because of its volume level, duration, and nature, annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, health, peace or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities within the City. The term shall be limited to loud and raucous noise heard upon the public streets, in any public park, in any school or public building or upon the grounds thereof while in use, in any church or medical care facility or upon the grounds thereof while in use, upon any parking lot open to members of the public, or in any occupied residential unit which is not the source of the noise or upon the grounds thereof, and, in any event, from any location not less than 50 feet from the source of any noise, measured in a straight line from the radio, loudspeaker, motor, horn, or other noise source. 
(Ord. No. 99-15, § 1, 12-29-99)  
Sec. 35-52. - Same—Specific. 
The following specific acts are declared to be unlawful and are prohibited: 
(1)  The sounding of any horn, whistle, or other audible signaling device so as to create a loud and raucous noise, except when sounded as a danger warning. 
(2)  The use or operation of any radio, amplifier, television, musical instrument, phonograph, tape or compact disc player, or other device for the production or reproduction of sound in such a manner as to cause loud and raucous noise. 
(3)  The keeping of any animal which causes a long-continuous loud and raucous noise. 
(4)  Yelling, shouting, whistling, or singing so as to create a loud and raucous noise between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(5)  The use of any motor vehicle without a muffler, the operation of which causes a loud and raucous noise. 
(6)  The use of any blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes loud and raucous noise, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled or such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to prevent loud and raucous noise. 
(7)  The operation between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any construction equipment or appliance, the use of which is attended by loud and raucous noise, except in cases of urgent necessary, the restoration of interrupted public utilities, or where a permit or written agreement authorizing such operation has been issued or is in effect. 
(Ord. No. 99-15, § 1, 12-29-99)  
Sec. 35-53. - Sound level limits. 
(a)  No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, any source of sound from any occupancy in such a manner as to create a sound level which exceeds the limits set forth for the use occupancy category in Table I, more than ten percent of any measurement period. The measurement period shall not be less than ten minutes when measured at or beyond the property boundary of the land use from which the sound emanates. 
TABLE I 
Use Occupancy 
Category 	Time 	Sound Level 
Limit (dBA) 
Residential 	7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m. 	60 
	After 10:00 p.m. to 
before 7:00 a.m. 	55 
Commercial 
or Tourist 	7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m. 	65 
	After 10:00 p.m. to 
before 7:00 a.m. 	60 
Manufacturing 	At all times 	75 
Agricultural 	At all times 	75 
 
(b)  "Tourist use" shall mean, for the purpose of this division, all premises containing transient commercial sleeping quarters. 
(c)  No person shall operate or give permission for the operation of any vessel on any City waters in such a manner as to exceed a maximum sound level of 90 dBA at a distance of 50 feet from the vessel. 
(d)  "dBA" means the composite abbreviation for the A-weighted sound level and the unit of sound level, the decibel. 
(Ord. No. 99-15, § 1, 12-29-99)  
Sec. 35-54. - Exempted noises. 
The term "loud and raucous noise" shall not include noise generated by the following, and the following shall be exempt from noise decibel level regulations: 
(1)  Air conditioners, when functioning with the manufacturer's standard mufflers and noise-reducing equipment in use and when functioning in proper operating condition according to the manufacturer's standards. The same exemption shall apply to lawn mowers and agricultural equipment used during daylight hours. 
(2)  Nonamplified crowd noises resulting from activities or sports events planned by government, school, church, or community groups. 
(3)  Construction operations for which building permits have been issued or where a written agreement is in effect with the City authorizing such activity, providing all equipment is operated in accord with the manufacturer's specifications and with all standard manufacturer's mufflers and noise reducing equipment in use and in proper operating condition, and such operations occur between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(4)  Any noise resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle responding to an emergency or acting in time of emergency. 
(5)  Cries for emergency assistance and warning calls, noises of safety signals and warning devices, and sounds of bells and chimes of churches. 
(6)  Fire alarms and burglar alarms, prior to the giving of notice and a reasonable opportunity for the owner or tenant in possession of the premises served by any such alarm to turn off the alarm. 
(7)  Parades, fireworks displays, and other special events for which a permit has been obtained, within such hours as may be imposed as a condition for the issuance of the permit. 
(8)  Any other noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration permitted by law and for which a license or permit or written agreement therefor has been issued. 
(9)  Noises made by persons having obtained a permit to use the streets or sidewalks. 
(10)  All noises coming from the normal operation of railroad trains. 
(11)  All noise coming from the normal operation of aircraft (not including model aircraft). 
(12)  Those motor vehicles which have noise emissions controlled by Florida Statutes, up to the decibel levels allowed by law. 
(13)  Construction, installation or repair by any utility which serves the general public. 
(Ord. No. 99-15, § 1, 12-29-99)  
Sec. 35-55. - Permit for relief from maximum allowable noise level limits. 
(a)  Applications for a permit for relief from the noise restrictions for a parade, a special event, or use of the streets or sidewalks may be made in writing to the City Manager or designee. Any permit granted by the City Manager or designeemust be made in writing and shall contain all conditions upon which such permit shall be effective. The City Manager or designee may prescribe any reasonable conditions or requirements as he deems necessary to minimize adverse effects upon the community or the surrounding neighborhood, including use of mufflers, screens or other sound-attenuating devices. All functions must be staged between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. 
(b)  Any permit issued by the City for a fireworks display will be considered a permit for relief from the maximum noise restrictions of this division. 
(c)  Any permit issued for a musical or entertainment festival under the provisions the City Code will be considered a permit for relief from the maximum noise restrictions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 99-15, § 1, 12-29-99)  
Sec. 35-56. - Applicability; enforcement; interference. 
This division shall apply to and be enforced in the City. The City Manager or designee shall be responsible for enforcement of the provisions of this division. It is a violation of this division for any person to resist, obstruct, hinder, or interfere with the City Manager or designee in the enforcement of this division. 
(Ord. No. 99-15, § 1, 12-29-99)  
Sec. 35-59. - Repeat offenses. 
Upon a citation being issued for violation of this division three times for the same offense within a 12-month period, when the noise is created by the same noise emitter, the noise-creating equipment may be confiscated by the court following such third citation until such time as the offender can satisfy the court that he or she is prepared to and, in fact, will operate such equipment within the limits of this division. Further violation may result in permanent confiscation by the court. 
(Ord. No. 99-15, § 1, 12-29-99)  
Sec. 35-60. - Construction activities on Sundays. 
The following specific acts are declared to be unlawful and are prohibited: 
(1)  The sounding of any horn, whistle, or other audible signaling device so as to create a loud and disturbing or disruptive noise, except when sounded as a danger warning. 
(2)  The use or operation of any radio, amplifier, television, musical instrument, phonograph, tape or compact disc player, or other device for the production or reproduction of sound in such a manner as to cause loud and disturbing or disruptive noise. 
(3)  The keeping of any animal which causes a long-continuous loud and disturbing or disruptive noise. 
(4)  Yelling, shouting, whistling, or singing so as to create a loud and disturbing or disruptive noise between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(5)  The use of any motor vehicle without a muffler, the operation of which causes a loud and noise. 
(6)  The use of any blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes loud and noise, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled or such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to prevent loud and noise. 
(7)  The operation between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or 9:00 a.m. on Sundays, of any construction equipment or appliance, the use of which is attended by loud and disturbing or disruptive noise, except in cases of urgent necessity, the restoration of interrupted public utilities, or where a permit or written agreement authorizing such operation has been issued by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2004-26, § 2, 10-19-04) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-26, § 2, adopted October 19, 2004, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion as § 35-60 was at the discretion of the editor.  
DIVISION 3. - WEEDS, HIGH GROWTH, RUBBISH, TRASH, ETC.[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-30, §§ 1—8, adopted November 5, 2002, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion as Div. 3, §§ 35-75—35-82 was at the discretion of the editor.  Subsequently, sections 1 and 3 of Ord. No. 2010-03, adopted March 2, 2010, amended div. 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 3, §§ 35-75—35-82, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2002-30, adopted Nov. 2, 2002. 
 
Sec. 35-75. - Legislative and administrative findings. 
The above recitals (whereas clauses) of Ordinance No. 2010-03 are hereby adopted as the legislative and administrative findings of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 3-2-10)  
Sec. 35-76. - Public nuisances. 
(a)  Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of this section is to prohibit and prevent the following conditions: 
(1)  Accumulation of trash, junk, or debris, living and nonliving plant material, hazard tree(s), and stagnant water. 
(2)  Excessive and untended growth of grass, weeds, brush, branches, and other overgrowth. 
(3)  The existence of all other objectionable, unsightly or unsanitary matter, materials, and conditions on improved property. 
(4)  Property being inhabited by, or providing a habitat for rodents, vermin, reptiles, or other wild animals. 
(5)  Property providing a breeding place for mosquitoes. 
(6)  Property being a place, or being reasonably conducive to serving as a place, for illegal or illicit activity. 
(7)  Property threatening or endangering the public health, safety, or welfare of City residents. 
(8)  Property reasonably believed to cause currently, or potentially to cause in the future, ailments or disease. 
(9)  Property adversely affecting and impairing the economic value or enjoyment of surrounding or nearby property. 
(10)  Failure to replace or repair with similar or improved material in a reasonable period, not to exceed 60 days, broken or missing building components, including, but not limited to, doors, windows, roofing material, siding, and drives/walks outside the right-of-way which detract from the aesthetics of the neighborhood, shopping area, industrial area or other commercial area within the service district. 
(11)  Failure to repair, replace, or remove broken fencing, screening or decorative elements on a developed parcel or lot. 
(b)  Definitions. These words, terms and phrases, when used in this division will mean the following: 
Abandoned property includes, but is not limited to, wrecked or derelict property which has been left behind when it appears that the former owner does not intend to come back, pick it up, or use it. Examples may include, but are not limited to, possessions left in a house, possessions left outside a structure, vehicles, vessels, etc., left behind or beside a road for a period of time not to exceed ten days. 
Abandoned vehicle means, but is not limited to, any wrecked or derelict property which has been left abandoned and unprotected from the elements and shall include, but is not limited to, a vehicle in a state of disuse, neglect, a vehicle without a license plate, a vehicle with a license plate that is not registered to that vehicle, a vehicle that does not have a registration sticker affixed to the license plate, a vehicle that has a registration sticker affixed to the license plate which has expired. Evidence of disuse, neglect or abandonment may include, but is not limited to, factors such as: Refuse or debris collected underneath or the vehicle being used solely for storage purposes; if it is partially dismantled, having no engine, transmission, or other major and visible parts; having major and visible parts which are dismantled; incapable of functioning as a motor vehicle in its present state; having only nominal salvage value; or being in any physical state rendering it inoperable. A vehicle will be considered abandoned or derelict if it is in an evident state of extended disuse or neglect and which has been left abandoned and unprotected from the elements. 
Abate means to repair, replace, remove, destroy or otherwise remedy the condition in question by such means and in such manner and to such an extent as necessary in the interest of the general health, safety and welfare of the community as determined by the City Manager, or his/her designee. 
Actual cost means the actual contract amount plus interest, if any, as invoiced by an independent, private contractor for terminating and abating a violation of this section on a lot, tract, or parcel, plus the cost of serving notice of the remedy, obtaining title information on the property, administrative costs of $150.00, and all other identifiable costs incurred by the City for the abatement of the public nuisance on the lot, tract, or parcel. 
Attractive nuisance means, but is not limited to, leaving a piece of equipment or other condition on property which would be attractive and dangerous to the safety of curious children. This would include, but is not limited to, unguarded swimming pools, open pits, abandoned personal and real property, refrigerators, and buildings which have been boarded up for longer than 60 days. 
City means the incorporated municipality of Palm Coast, with definite boundaries and legal powers as set forth in the State Charter, including any subsequent annexation. 
Compost bin means a container designed for the purpose of allowing nonliving plant or vegetative material to decompose for use as fertilizer. For purposes of this division, any such compost bin shall be constructed of wire, wood lattice or other material which allows air to filter through the structure. A compost bin shall not exceed an area of 16 square feet or a height of three feet. 
Excessive growth of grass, weeds, or brush and other overgrowth means grass or weeds or brush, or bushes, or shrubs, or trees, or vines, or flowering plants and other living plant life that is allowed to grow in a wild and unkempt manner not in keeping with the neighborhood. 
Hazard tree means, but is not limited to, a tree that is dead, diseased, or dying, or has a structural defect that predisposes it to failure and the tree is located near a target, as defined herein. 
Imminent public health threat means the condition of a lot, tract, or parcel of land that, because of the accumulation of trash, junk, or debris, which includes but is not limited to, broken glass, rusted metal, automotive and appliance parts, abandoned vehicles or inoperable vehicles, some of which may contain chemicals, such as Freon, oils, fluids or the like, capable of causing injury or disease to humans or animals or contaminate the environment; or the condition of a lot, tract or parcel that, because of excessive growth of grass, weeds, or brush, hazard tree(s), or stagnant water, can harbor criminal activity, create a habitat for rodents, vermin, reptiles, or other wild animals, become a breeding ground for mosquitoes, or become a place to conduct illegal activity; a place that threatens or endangers the public health, safety or welfare of City residents; a place that is reasonably believed to cause currently, or potentially to cause in the future, ailments or disease. 
Improved lot means, but is not limited to, any lot or parcel of land on which the wild or natural state has been changed or altered, or possessing a valid permit for construction of a dwelling house, commercial or industrial building assigned to it. 
Inoperable vehicle means any wrecked or partially dismantled vehicle that is parked or stored without having all the wheels mounted, or is in a condition of substantial disrepair, or which is parked or stored without having tires inflated, or cannot be operated legally upon the roadways of Florida, or other similar conditions. 
Levy means the imposition of a non-ad valorem assessment against property found to be in violation of this section. 
Non-ad valorem assessment means a special assessment that is not based upon millage and that can become a lien against a homestead as permitted in Section 4, Article X of the Florida Constitution. 
Non-ad valorem assessment roll means the roll prepared by the City and certified to the Flagler County Property Appraiser and Tax Collector, as appropriate under Florida law, for collection. 
Nonliving plant material means nonliving vegetation such as, but not limited to, leaves, grass cuttings, shrubbery cuttings, tree trimmings and other material incidental to attending to the care of lawns, shrubs, vines and trees. 
Nuisance means (i) the excessive growth of grass, weeds, brush, branches, and other overgrowth; (ii) the creation of a habitat for rodents, vermin, reptiles, or other wild animals; or (iii) creating a breeding ground for mosquitoes; (iv) creating a place conducive to illegal activity; (v) maintaining a place that threatens or endangers the public health, safety or welfare of City residents; (vi) develop a place that is reasonably believed to cause currently, or potentially to cause in the future, ailments or disease; or (vii) a condition on the property that adversely affects and impairs the economic value or enjoyment of surrounding or nearby properties; (viii) failure to replace or repair with similar or improved material in a reasonable period, not to exceed 60 days, broken or missing building components, including, but not limited to, doors, windows, roofing material, siding, and drives/walkways outside the right-of-way which detract from the aesthetics of the neighborhood, shopping area, industrial area or other commercial area within the service district; (ix) failure to repair, replace, or remove broken fencing, screening or decorative elements on a developed parcel or lot, is declared to be a nuisance and menace to the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City, including, but not limited to abandoned property, abandoned vehicle(s), inoperable vehicles, or any other attractive nuisance. 
Property means a lot or tract or parcel of land and the adjacent right-of-way portion, whether such lot or tract or parcel is improved or unimproved. 
Stagnant water means, but is not limited to, any swimming pool, pond, cesspool, well, cistern, rain barrel or other receptacle containing water or accumulation of water that is not moving or flowing, may become foul smelling, contain growth of various flora, become coated with scum and in such a condition that mosquitoes may breed therein or may injure health or cause offense to other persons. 
Target is an area where personal injury or property damage could occur if a tree or portions of a tree fails. Target includes, but is not limited to, sidewalks, walkways, roads, vehicles, structures, or a place where people gather (for example, a backyard). 
Trash, junk, or debris means waste materials including, but not limited to, putrescible and nonputrescible waste, combustible and noncombustible waste, and generally all waste materials including, but not limited to, paper, cardboard, tin cans, lumber, concrete rubble, glass, bedding, crockery, household furnishings, household appliances, inoperable vehicle(s), dismantled pieces of motor vehicles or other machinery, abandoned vehicles, tires, rusted metal articles, and abandoned property of any kind. 
Unimproved lot means a lot, tract or parcel that is not made use of; is not legally cleared of trees and brush; in the wild or natural state; and does not have certain basic required services necessary to utilize it for other purposes. These services may include, but are not limited to, electricity, telephone, sewer, street access, or water. 
(c)  Declaration of nuisance. The City of Palm Coast prohibits the existence of any nuisance as defined herein for the following reasons: The property is dangerous, unhygienic, unhealthy, visually unpleasant to the reasonable person of average sensibilities, and a visual nuisance because it depreciates, or potentially can depreciate, the value of neighboring property. 
(d)  Duties and maintenance requirements of property owners and permissible uses. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the owner of property to eliminate on their lot, tract or parcel of land any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence or as provided by the Statutes of the State of Florida or the City code and City ordinances including, but not limited to, excessive growth of grass, weeds, brush, hazard tree(s), and other overgrowth on the property, and that portions of the adjoining public right-of-way between the property and the paved or graded street; conditions which endanger human life or substantially and detrimentally affect the utility, livability, safety or security of occupants, nearby occupants or passers-by; conditions which render air, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the health of human beings; fire hazards; structurally unsound fences or structures; abandoned buildings when they are unsecured or unsecurable and when by reason of abandonment or neglect they contain hazards, or other unsafe conditions; and any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to the health or safety of children or others whether in a building, on the premises of a building or upon an unimproved lot. 
(2)  Maintenance requirements. 
a.  Properties subject to this division shall be kept free of weeds, overgrown brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices, except those required by federal, state, or local law, abandoned personal items included, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed material or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned. 
b.  The property shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior structure. 
c.  Front, side, and rear yard landscaping shall be maintained in accordance with the City's codes. 
d.  Landscape shall include, but not be limited to, grass, groundcovers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential installation. Landscape shall not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt or similar material. 
e.  Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, watering, irrigation, cutting, and mowing of required landscape and removal of all trimmings. 
f.  Pools and spas shall be maintained so the water remains free and clear of pollutants and debris. Pools and spas shall comply with the enclosure requirements of the Property Maintenance Code subsection 15-109(b), as amended from time to time. 
g.  Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly maintain the property may result in a violation of the City Code and issuance of a citation or notice of violation/notice of hearing by a City's Code Enforcement Officer. Pursuant to a finding and determination by the City's Code Enforcement Board/Hearing Officer, the City may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with this section unless the City Manager or his/her designee determines that conditions on a property constitute an imminent public health threat. 
(3)  The following uses are permissible: 
a.  Storage of trash, junk, debris, and living and nonliving plant material in garbage cans that comply with applicable ordinances relating to solid-waste collection. 
b.  The storage of nonliving plant material in compost bins, except that any property may have no more than one compost bin. 
c.  Keeping wood on the property for use as fire or fuel, provided such wood shall be piled, stacked, bundled, or corded and the area surrounding the piles, stack, bundles, or cords shall be free of excessive growth of grass, weeds, brush, branches, and other overgrowth. 
(e)  Imminent public health threat. Whenever the City Manager or his/her designee determines that conditions on a property constitute an imminent public health threat, and the situation calls for abatement sooner than the abatement procedures in this Code permit, the City Manager or his/her designee may order and cause the summary abatement of those conditions without the prior notice or hearing requirements prescribed herein. After-the-fact notice will be provided by the City to the owner no later than ten working days after the abatement. After-the-fact notice shall be sent as set forth in subsection (f) below, and the owner shall have: (i) 30 days from the date the invoice is mailed to reimburse the City; or (ii) 15 days to appeal, as set forth in subsection (g) below, the City's determination that an imminent public health threat existed on the property. If the subject property is secured by locks or otherwise, the City shall have the authority to enter said property for purposes of remedying the condition causing the nuisance or violation, and any additional costs incurred by the City in gaining access to the property including, but not limited to, judicial action, or in re-securing the property after cleaning and clearing, shall be considered expenses of remedying the condition. 
(f)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Violations. Failure or refusal by the owner of the property to comply with the requirements of subsections (d) and/or (e) is a violation of this section. 
(2)  Notice of remedy. Whenever the City Manager, or his/her designee, determines that there is a violation of this section, the City Manager, or his/her designee, shall serve, or cause to be served, a "notice of remedy" on the owner of the property. The "notice of remedy" shall direct the owner to abate the violation within ten calendar days from the date the notice is posted on the property. If the "notice of remedy" pertains to an imminent public health threat which has already been abated by the City, the notice shall direct the owner to pay to the City the cost of such abatement. For abatement of a nuisance caused by an illegally parked inoperable vehicle, see chapter 17. 
(3)  Notice is served. The "notice of remedy" shall be sent by United States Post Office certified mail with a return receipt requested, first class mail, and posted on the property. The physical posting of the "notice of remedy" on the property shall be deemed the date the "notice of remedy" is served. 
(4)  Form of notice. The form of said notice(s) shall substantially follow the format and text as shown in Exhibits A, B, and C, as attached to this division. 
(g)  Appeals. Within 15 days after notice is served, the owner of the property may appeal to the City Clerk that a "notice of remedy" was not warranted for the property or that the property did not pose an imminent public health threat that required immediate abatement. 
(1)  Content of appeal. The owner of the property must appeal the notice of remedy to the Code Enforcement Board/Hearing Officer by written notice to the City Clerk. The written notice must be accompanied by a nonrefundable $25.00 filing fee. The written notice shall be either hand delivered to the City Clerk, or mailed to the City Clerk and postmarked, within the 15-day period. 
Upon timely receipt, the City Clerk will schedule the appeal for a hearing before the Code Enforcement Board/Hearing Officer. At the hearing, the appellant shall be afforded due process and may present such evidence as is probative of the appellant's case. The City Manager or other City staff shall present such evidence as is probative of the alleged violation. 
(2)  Unsuccessful appeal. If the appeal is unsuccessful, the violation must be immediately remedied, if the City has not already corrected the violation. 
(3)  The City's personnel are hereby granted immunity from prosecution or suit for engaging in lawful actions in the implementation of the provisions of this division. 
(h)  Remedy by the City. In the event an appeal is not made within 15 days after notice is posted and mailed and the violation is not remedied, or a timely appeal is made, but is unsuccessful and the violation is not remedied, the City may undertake such action as is necessary or useful to remedy the violation. The costs incurred by the City to remedy the violation, including the actual cost of clean-up, all administrative expenses, and all other identifiable costs incurred by the City, shall be assessed against the property, and the property may also be liened, at the City's option. The City Manager shall certify the expenses incurred by the City in remedying the nuisance condition, all charges necessary to cover the City's administrative expenses, and any administrative penalties as provided in this section. In the event no appeal is filed, or in the event an appeal is unsuccessful, said sum certified to be paid to the City shall become due and payable by the property owner within 30 days of the date of certification. Thereafter, the unpaid amount of the assessment will accrue interest at the rate of 18 percent per annum or at the maximum rate allowed by law, whichever is less. 
(i)  Lien alternative. At the option of the City, a lien may be filed against the property in violation for the amount of the charge described in [subsection] (h). Such lien shall be enforceable in the same manner as a judgment or tax lien in favor of the City of Palm Coast and may be satisfied at any time by payment thereof including, but not limited to, any and all accrued interest. Notice of such lien shall be filed by the City in the Public Records (land records) of Flagler County, Florida. 
(j)  Notice of assessment. Upon completion of the actions undertaken by the City to remedy the violation on the property, the City Manager, or his/her designee, shall notify the owner in writing that a special assessment has been imposed on the property. The notice shall be delivered to the owner in the manner set forth for delivery of the notice of remedy in subsection (f) "Enforcement." The notice of assessment shall set forth the following: 
(1)  A description of the violation, a description of the actions taken by the City to remedy the violation, and the fact that the property has been assessed for the costs incurred by the City to remedy the violation. 
(2)  The aggregate amount of such costs and an itemized list of such costs. 
(3)  The intent of the City to record the assessment as a lien against the property if not paid timely, within the period of 30 days as set forth herein. 
(4)  The intent of the City to place the assessment on the tax roll as a non-ad valorem assessment if not paid by the following December 1. 
(5)  The potential for the property to be subject to the sale of a tax certificate, bearing interest by law at a rate as high as 18 percent per annum, if the non-ad valorem assessment is not paid as part of the tax bill on the property. 
(6)  The potential for the property to be sold and conveyed by tax deed if the tax certificate is not redeemed by payment of the non-ad valorem assessment in full, plus interest, as required by Florida law. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 3-2-10) 
Editor's note— Exhibits A, B, and C, as referenced in subsection (f)(4), are kept on file at the office of the City Clerk.  
Sec. 35-77. - Assessments for public nuisances. 
(a)  Establishment of special assessment district. The City of Palm Coast in its entirety, as its City boundaries exist on the date of enactment of this section and as they may be expanded or contracted from time to time, is hereby declared a special assessment district for the purposes of abating and remedying violations of section 35-76. Individual properties within the City's boundaries, as they may exist from time to time, may be assessed for the costs incurred by the City in abating and remedying violations of section 35-76. 
(b)  Levy of non-ad valorem assessments. There is hereby levied, and the City Council is authorized to levy from time to time, a non-ad valorem assessment against each and every property in the City: (i) on which there occurs or has occurred a violation of section 35-76; and (ii) on which the City undertakes or has undertaken action pursuant to section 35-76 to abate and/or remedy the violation and, thereby, incurs or has incurred costs; and (iii) the property owner of the property fails or refuses, or has failed or refused, for whatever reason, to pay timely the amount owed to the City under section 35-76 for the costs incurred by the City in carrying out such abatement and remedy. 
(c)  Collection of non-ad valorem assessments. The City Council elects to use the uniform method to impose and collect non-ad valorem assessments against properties on which violations of section 35-76 occur or have occurred. The non-ad valorem assessments collected pursuant to this section will be included in the combined notice for ad-valorem taxes and non-ad valorem assessments as provided in F.S. § 197.3635. Non-ad valorem assessments collected pursuant to this section are subject to all collection provisions in F.S. § 197.3632, including provisions relating to discount for early payment, prepayment by installment method, deferred payment, penalty for delinquent payment, and issuance and sale of tax certificates and tax deeds for nonpayment. 
(1)  Agreement to reimburse the Flagler County Property Appraiser and the Flagler County Tax Collector. In order to use the uniform method for the levy, collection, and enforcement of the non-ad valorem assessments, the City is authorized to enter into a written agreement with the Flagler County Property Appraiser and the Flagler County Tax Collector providing for the reimbursement of their costs incurred in the administration and collection of the non-ad valorem assessments levied under this section. 
(2)  Adoption of a resolution. The City will comply with all statutory notice prerequisites set forth in F.S. § 197.3632. The City Council will adopt a resolution at a public hearing prior to January 1, 2011 in accordance with F.S. § 197.3632(3), which resolution shall state the following: 
a.  The City's intent to use the uniform method of collecting non-ad valorem assessments. 
b.  The City's need for the imposition of the non-ad valorem assessments. 
c.  The entire City is declared a special assessment district, with individual properties being subject to the non-ad valorem assessment from time to time if and when violations of section 35-76 occur. 
(3)  Annual non-ad valorem assessment roll. Each year, the City Council will approve a non-ad valorem assessment roll at a public hearing between January 1 and September 15. The non-ad valorem assessment roll will be comprised of properties that have had levied against them non-ad valorem assessments under this section, and such assessments have not otherwise been paid in full prior to approval on the roll. 
a.  The City Manager, or his/her designee, is authorized and directed each year to prepare the notice that must be sent by first class United States mail, as required by F.S. § 197.3632(4)(b). 
b.  The notice to be sent by first class United States mail will be sent to each person owning property that will be on the non-ad valorem assessment roll and will include the following: (i) the purpose of the assessment; (ii) the total amount to be levied against the parcel, which includes the actual cost incurred by the City; (iii) a statement that failure to pay the assessment will cause a tax certificate to be issued against the property, which may result in a loss of title; (iv) a statement that all affected property owners have a right to appear at the hearing and to file written objections with the local governing board within 20 days of the notice; (v) the date, time, and place of the hearing. 
c.  Upon its approval by City Council, the non-ad valorem assessment roll will be certified to the tax collector as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 3-2-10)  
ARTICLE III. - SOLICITATION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 35-101. - Purpose and objectives. 
It is the purpose and intent of this division to protect against the evident dangers of physical injury and traffic disruption that are present when individuals, on behalf of themselves or an organization, stand on or along public streets within the City trying to engage occupants of motor vehicles by soliciting employment, business, and contributions. It is also the intent of this division to promote the free movement and efficiency of vehicle traffic and traffic safety on public streets within the City. Further, this division is intended to preserve public safety, human life and convenience; to secure the comfort, health, welfare and prosperity of all City of Palm Coast inhabitants; to protect City of Palm Coast inhabitants against crime and undue annoyance; and to protect those persons on or otherwise using the streets against abusive behavior by solicitors. 
(Ord. No. 03-16, § 1, 8-19-03; Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 2-3-09)  
Sec. 35-102. - Definitions. 
The following words used in this division shall have the meaning ascribed to them as follows: 
Person means an individual, organization, group, association, partnership, corporation, trust, business entity or any combination of the above. 
Public street means those publicly-owned streets within the City upon which the public has the right to travel by use of a motor vehicle including any medians or shoulders of any publicly-owned streets. 
Solicit or solicitation shall mean the act of approaching, requesting or petitioning a person for purposes of employment, the sale or receipt of goods or services, or for seeking or giving money or other property. 
(Ord. No. 03-16, § 2, 8-19-03; Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 2-3-09)  
Sec. 35-103. - Restrictions/unlawful acts—In general. 
When solicitation is not otherwise prohibited by law, the following general restrictions shall apply to solicitation activities within the city: 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to obstruct any public street, road, highway, lane, alley, sidewalk or driveway in the course of soliciting. 
(2)  It is unlawful for a solicitor to threaten or harass any person in the course of soliciting. 
(3)  It is unlawful for a solicitor to solicit any person at a location that lies within 300 feet of a school bus stop. 
(4)  It is unlawful to engage in soliciting at or within 12 feet of an automated teller machine or any electronic information processing device which accepts or dispenses cash in connection with a credit or deposit account. 
(5)  It is unlawful for any person to engage in soliciting in a manner that impedes pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(6)  It is unlawful for any person to engage in soliciting in a manner that uses mechanical noise or amplifies noise. 
(7)  It is unlawful for a solicitor to provide any service to any person without the person agreeing to such service being provided to the person. 
(Ord. No. 03-16, § 3, 8-19-03; Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 2-3-09)  
Secs. 35-104. - Prohibition upon public streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be upon or go upon any public street for the purpose of seeking or giving employment, business, or contributions of any kind from or to the occupant of any vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 2-3-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-03, § 2, adopted Feb. 3, 2009, amended § 35-104 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 35-104 pertained to licensing requirements, and derived from Ord. No. 03-16, adopted Aug. 19, 2003.  
Secs. 35-105, 35-106. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-03, § 2, adopted Feb. 3, 2009, repealed §§ 35-105 and 35-106 in their entirety. Former §§ 35-105 and 35-106 pertained to action on solicitor's permit applications and appeals/revocations, and derived from Ord. No. 03-16, adopted Aug. 19, 2003.  
Sec. 35-107. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be punished to the maximum extent as provided in state law including, but not limited to, being subject to a code enforcement action under F.S. ch. 162. To the extent that a violation is subject to code enforcement action under F.S. ch. 162, the City Manager, or his designee, shall at his or her discretion designate an alleged violation of this division to be heard by the City's Code Enforcement Board or by the City's Hearing Officer. 
(Ord. No. 03-16, § 7, 8-19-03; Ord. No. 09-03, § 2, 2-3-09)  
DIVISION 2. - PEDDLERS AND HAWKERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Solicitation, § 32-101 et seq. 
 
Sec. 35-162. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings as hereinafter defined when used in this division: 
(a)  Person means a natural person or any firm, corporation, association, club, society or other organization. 
(b)  Solicitor means any person who, not having been invited by the occupant, solicits contributions from the public from door-to-door or place-to-place and any person who solicits the purchase of any type of goods, wares, merchandise or property, of any nature, or services of any nature by going from door-to-door or place-to-place within the City to include, but not be limited to, any person who offers for sale subscriptions to magazines or other materials protected by provisions of the First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States of America. This definition also includes any person or entity who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as part of the scheme to evade the provisions of this article. The term does not include a business conducted at a regular fixed place of business offering to sell goods to be delivered within the City. 
(Ord. No. 03-31, § 2, 11-4-03; Ord. No. 2004-14, § 1, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 35-163. - License required; application; issuance; term. 
(a)  Except as hereinafter provided, all solicitors desiring to sell or offer for sale any goods, wares, merchandise, services or property, door-to-door or place-to-place except to businesses and commercial establishments in the City of Palm Coast shall first obtain a license therefor, to be issued by the City Manager, or designee, and to that end shall make application to such City Manager, or designee, for such license. 
(b)  Upon the recommendation or approval of the Flagler County Sheriff, or designee, in writing, the City Manager, or designee, may issue a license to such person, firm or corporation to act as a solicitor thereby authorizing them to sell or offer for sale any goods, wares, merchandise, services or property within the City for a specified time period not to exceed 12 months from the date of the issuance of such license. Any State licensed real estate broker, real estate salesperson, or other similarly licensed profession shall be presumed to be a person who shall be approved by the Sheriff for licensure without further inquiry. Such licenses may be issued subject to conditions imposed by the City Manager, or designee. 
(c)  An administrative processing fee for a solicitor's license shall be established by resolution of the City Council and said administrative processing fee shall be paid when the application is filed with the City Manager, or designee. 
(Ord. No. 03-31, § 3, 11-4-03; Ord. No. 2004-14, § 2, 7-6-04)  
Sec. 35-164. - Restrictions as to certain activities. 
(a)  No solicitor engaging in vehicular mobile sales selling or distributing any food items or any other items shall park or stop the vehicle for the purpose of making a sale of such items in an area which is closer than 200 feet to a school building between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on days which school is in session, as measured from the closest point of the property upon which the building is located to the location on which the vehicle is parked. 
(b)  Any solicitor engaging in vehicular mobile sales parking in any permissible area within the City must comply with all of the City's traffic regulations including, but not limited to, stopping with the right wheels to the curb, and shall only be allowed to park for that amount of time which it takes to serve a customer. 
(c)  No solicitor engaging in vehicular mobile sales selling or distributing any prepared foodstuffs such as, but not limited to, hot dogs and hamburgers, shall park or stop the vehicle for the purpose of preparing and selling such foodstuffs to a customer in any area other than that area so designated as their authorized sales area under a license issued pursuant to this division. 
(d)  It is unlawful to sell, or offer for sale, goods, wares, or merchandise in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 03-31, § 4, 11-4-03)  
Sec. 35-165. - Transfer of license. 
No license issued under this article shall authorize any person, firm or corporation other than the one named therein to act thereunder. Licenses are not transferable. 
(Ord. No. 03-31, § 5, 11-4-03)  
Sec. 35-166. - Failure to exhibit license and identification. 
It is unlawful for any person licensed under this Ordinance to fail, upon proper demand of any law enforcement officer, to display or exhibit to such officer license and personal identification. 
(Ord. No. 03-31, § 6, 11-4-03)  
Sec. 35-167. - Exemption/claim of exemption. 
(a)  Nothing herein contained shall apply to milkmen, vendors of bona fide newspapers, to bona fide elementary, middle or high school groups engaged in fundraising or to charitable organizations with bona fide physical headquarters located in the City or to any person qualified as a candidate to run for public office or any person campaigning on their behalf. 
(b)  Any person claiming to be legally exempt from the regulations set forth in this division, or from the payment of a permit fee, shall cite to the City Manager the statute or other legal authority under which exemption is claimed and shall present to the City Manager proof of qualification for such exemption. 
(Ord. No. 03-31, § 7, 11-4-03)  
Sec. 35-168. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  In addition to the unlawful acts otherwise enumerated in this division, the acts set forth in this section are unlawful. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any solicitor to ring the bell, or knock on the door, or otherwise attempt to gain admittance of a business or residence for the purpose of peddling or soliciting at any residence, dwelling or apartment at which a sign bearing the words "No Peddler or Solicitors," or words of similar import indicating that such persons are not wanted on said premises, is painted, affixed or otherwise exposed to public view. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any solicitor to fail to disclose to the prospective buyer, upon request, the name of the company, product or organization that he or she represents, and, if requested so to do, to leave the premises immediately. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any solicitor to conduct door-to-door sales, promotions or solicitations at any residence between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. 
(e)  It is unlawful for a solicitor to threaten or harass any person in the course of their solicitation or in any way engage in any conduct which is or would tend to create a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 03-31, § 8, 11-4-03)  
Sec. 35-169. - License suspension. 
(a)  A license may be suspended by the City Manager for a period not to exceed 90 days upon investigation or upon certification by the Flagler County Sheriff, or a City designee, that: 
(1)  A licensee has provided false information on an application; or 
(2)  A licensee has engaged in conduct in violation of this Ordinance or of the criminal laws of the State of Florida or the United States. 
(b)  A licensee shall be given written notice of the cause and terms of the suspension and of the right to have such suspension reversed, modified or affirmed following a hearing to be conducted by the City Council. At the hearing, the licensee shall have the right to hear the evidence relied upon by the City Manager and the right to present evidence and witnesses on [licensees'] behalf. After the hearing, the City Council shall issue a decision in writing. 
(Ord. No. 03-31, § 9, 11-4-03)  
Sec. 35-170. - License revocation. 
(a)  A license may be revoked by the City Council upon request of the City Manager after a hearing at which it is shown that: 
(1)  A licensee has provided false information on an application; or 
(2)  A licensee has violated the terms of a suspension; or 
(3)  A licensee has engaged in conduct in violation of this division or of the criminal laws of the State of Florida or United States. 
(b)  Reasonable written notice of the hearing shall be given to the licensee. The written notice shall be mailed by regular mail to the license holder and shall set forth the alleged violation and also the date, time and place of the hearing before the City Council. At the hearing, the license holder shall have the right to present evidence and witnesses on his behalf. After the hearing, the City Council shall make its decision as to whether to suspend or revoke the license and, after the hearing, shall reduce its decision and the reasons therefor in writing. 
(Ord. No. 03-31, § 10, 11-4-03)  
Sec. 35-171. - Penalties. 
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 plus costs of prosecution or by imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or by both fine and costs and imprisonment in the discretion of the Court. 
(Ord. No. 03-31, § 11, 11-4-03)  
ARTICLE IV. - SEXUAL OFFENSES 
 
Sec. 35-251. - Sexual offenders. 
(a)  Legislative findings and intent. 
(1)  The findings set forth in the recitals (whereas clauses) to this section are hereby adopted as additional legislative findings. 
(2)  The City Council hereby adopts the provisions of F.S. § 775.21(3)(a), which state as follows: 
"Repeat sexual offenders, sexual offenders who use physical violence, and sexual offenders who prey on children are sexual predators who present an extreme threat to the public safety. Sexual offenders are extremely likely to use physical violence and to repeat their offenses, and most sexual offenders commit many offenses, have many more victims than are ever reported, and are prosecuted for only a fraction of their crimes. This makes the cost of sexual offender victimization to society at large, while incalculable, clearly exorbitant." 
(3)  The City Council hereby adopts the provisions of F.S. § 947.1405(7), which provides, in pertinent part, that: 
"It is the finding of the Legislature that the population of offenders released from state prison into the community who meet the conditional release criteria poses the greatest threat to the public safety of the groups of offenders under community supervision. Therefore, the Department of Corrections is to provide intensive supervision by experienced correctional probation officers to conditional release offenders." 
(4)  The City Council hereby finds and determines that repeat sexual offenders, sexual offenders who use physical violence and sexual offenders who prey on children are sexual predators who present an extreme threat to the public safety. Sexual offenders are extremely likely to use physical violence and to repeat their offenses, and most sexual offenders commit many offenses, have many more victims than are ever reported, and are prosecuted for only a fraction of their crimes. This makes the cost of sexual offender victimization to society at large, while incalculable, clearly exorbitant and a drain on the resources of society. 
(5)  It is the intent of this section to serve the City's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety, morals and welfare of the citizens of the City by protecting children at public parks and similar areas where they regularly congregate in concentrated numbers. 
(6)  The City Council hereby finds and determines that the provisions of this article advance a legitimate public purpose and promote and protect the public health, safety, morals and welfare of the public. 
(7)  It is the desire of the City Council that the Flagler County School District carefully adhere to the provisions of 947.1405(7), Florida Statutes, which relates to the requirement that school bus stops be located at least 1,000 feet of the persons who are the subject of this article. 
(b)  Prohibition relating to sexual offenders. It is prohibited and unlawful for any person who has been convicted of a violation of Section 794.011 6 , Section 800.04 7 , Section 827.071 8 , or Section 847.0145, 9 Florida Statutes, regardless of whether adjudication has been withheld, when the victim of the offense for which the conviction resulted was less than 16 years of age at the time the offense was committed, to be present at a City park, community center or location at which a youth recreation programs is being held (when the location is posted for such activities). 
(Ord. No. 05-43, §§ 1, 2, 10-18-05; Ord. No. 05-47, § 1, 12-6-05) 
Note— 6 Sexual battery. 
7  Lewd or lascivious offenses committed upon or in the presence of persons less than 16 years of age. 
8 Sexual performance by a child. 
9 Selling or buying of minors.  
Sec. 35-252. - Definitions. 
The following terms are defined as follows with regard to the application of this article: 
Day care center means any family or child care center facility licensed by the State of Florida pursuant to Chapter 402, Florida Statutes, and includes the parking lot, cartilage, yards, landscaped areas, playgrounds, accessory buildings and other outdoor areas of the facility. 
Church or house of worship means (consistent with the definitions of the Internal Revenue Service) a body of worshipers which has indicia of existence such as the following characteristics (all of which need not be present to result in a determination of existence): 
(1)  A distinct legal existence; 
(2)  A recognized creed and form of worship; 
(3)  A definite and distinct ecclesiastical government; 
(4)  A formal code of doctrine and discipline; 
(5)  A distinct religious history; 
(6)  A membership not associated with any other church or denomination; 
(7)  An organization of ordained ministers; 
(8)  Ordained ministers selected after completing prescribed studies; 
(9)  A body of literature of its own; 
(10)  Established places of worship; 
(11)  Regular congregations; 
(12)  Regular religious services; 
(13)  Sunday schools for religious instruction of the young; or 
(14)  Schools for the preparation of its ministers. 
Park means a public owned or operated area used or available for the public's use as a recreational facility including, by way of example and not limitation, linear parks and trails. 
Permanent residence means a place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of 14 or more consecutive days. 
Playground means an established or dedicated outdoor area for recreation and play including, by way of example and not limitation, soccer fields, baseball diamonds, football fields, tennis courts, swimming pools, basketball courts and locations with outdoor equipment such as, by way of example and not limitation, swing sets, climbing equipment and slides. 
School means any public or private school as defined in Sections 1000.04(1) and 1002.01, Florida Statutes, excluding facilities dedicated exclusively to the education of adults. 
Sexual offender means as defined in Section 944.606(1), Florida Statutes, provided that the victim was less than 16 years of age at the time of the offense. 
Sexual predator means as defined in Section 775.21, Florida Statutes. 
Temporary residence means a place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where the person routinely abides, lodges, or resides for a period of four or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month which is not the person's permanent residence. 
(Ord. No. 05-47, § 2, 12-6-05)  
Sec. 35-253. - Prohibited residences of sexual offenders. 
(a)  It is prohibited and unlawful for any person who has been convicted of a violation of Section 794.011, Section 800.04, Section 827.071, or Section 847.0145, Florida Statutes, (or a sexual offender or sexual predator), regardless of whether adjudication has been withheld, when the victim of the offense for which the conviction resulted was less than 16 years of age at the time the offense was committed, to establish a permanent residence or temporary a residence located within the City when such residence is located within 2,500 feet of any school; day care center; public park; playground; private recreational open spaces, facilities and areas within subdivisions; library or church regardless of whether the school; day care center; public park; playground; private recreational open spaces, facilities and areas within subdivisions; library or church lies within the City Limits of the City of Palm Coast or unincorporated Flagler County. 
(b)  For the purposes of determining the minimum distance separation requirement, distance shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent residence or temporary residence to the nearest outer property line of the school; day care center; public park; playground; private recreational open spaces, facilities and areas within subdivisions; library or church. 
(c)  A person residing within 2,500 feet of any school; day care center; public park; playground; private recreational open spaces, facilities and areas within subdivisions; library or church does not commit a violation of this article, if any of the following apply: 
(1)  The person established the permanent residence or temporary residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to Section 775.21 5 , 943.0435 6 or 944.607 7 , Florida Statutes, prior to the effective date of this article. 
(2)  The person was a minor when he/she committed the offense and was not convicted as an adult. 
(3)  The person is a minor. 
(4)  The school; day care center; public park; playground; private recreational open spaces, facilities and areas within subdivisions; library or church was opened after the person established the permanent residence or temporary residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to Section 775.21, 943.0435 or 944.607, Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 05-47, § 3, 12-6-05) 
Note— 5 The Florida Sexual Predators Act. 
6  Registration of sexual offenders. 
7  Notification of Department of Law Enforcement of information on sexual offenders.  
Sec. 35-254. - Property owners prohibited from renting real property to certain sexual offenders and sexual predators. 
It is prohibited and unlawful to let or rent any place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other conveyance, with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any person prohibited from establishing such permanent residence or temporary residence pursuant to this article if such place, structure, or part thereof, trailer or other conveyance, is located within 2,500 feet of any school; day care center; public park; playground; private recreational open spaces, facilities and areas; library or church regardless of whether the school; day care center; public park; playground; library or church lies within the City Limits of the City of Palm Coast or unincorporated Flagler County. 
(Ord. No. 05-47, § 4, 12-6-05)  
Sec. 35-255. - Application of article/existing contracts. 
The provisions of this article shall not be applied to persons residing at a prohibited location on the effective date of this article such that it is not the intent of this article to impair valid, existing and bona fide contract rights; provided, however, that the provisions of this article shall apply upon termination of any leasehold relationship arising from a landlord tenant relationship or the expiration of a lease. When a person who is the subject of this article changes residences, this article shall fully apply to such persons. 
(Ord. No. 05-47, § 5, 12-6-05)  
Chapter 41 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-05, §§ 1—18, adopted on Feb. 19, 2008, replaced chapter 41 in its entirety. The former chapter 41 pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 15; businesses and business regulations, ch. 16; environment, ch. 24; fire prevention and protection, ch. 25. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 41-1. - Legislative intent and applicability. 
(a)  It is the intent of the City Council of the City of Palm Coast to require all persons, which include but are not limited to, residential, commercial and industrial establishments, within the corporate boundaries of the City to have their solid waste and recyclables collected, transported and disposed of in a proper, sanitary and efficient manner; to make available to all persons a sanitary efficient means of having their solid waste and recyclables collected, transported and disposed of; to eliminate illegal dumping; to provide an effective method of paying the costs for the services rendered; and to promote the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the general public and the City. 
(b)  It is further the intent of the City Council that the collection, transporting and disposal of solid waste and recyclables shall be accomplished only by those persons or entities authorized by the City by means of a franchise agreement and that such disposal shall be accomplished only at City-approved solid waste facilities. 
(c)  In order to protect the quality of air, water, soil and other natural resources of the City, as well as the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens, the City Council declares that certain solid waste and recycling activities and facilities must be regulated. The City Council finds that improper disposal and management of solid waste and recyclables results in or contributes to air and water pollution, land blight and nuisance conditions. It is the intent of the City Council to require that certain solid waste and recycling activities and facilities be managed and regulated to eliminate deleterious effects upon the quality of air, water, soil and human health. It is also the intent of the City Council to encourage recycling and the recovery of resources that have a potential for further use in order to conserve resources and advance the economic use and reuse of materials. The City Council recognizes the controlling provisions of certain Federal and State law relating to solid waste and recyclables. The City Council also recognizes that other Federal, State, regional and local agencies may have adopted rules for the regulation or management of solid waste and recycling. Matters cognizable by other controlling laws and agencies may include, but are not limited to, the generation, flow, transportation, control, collection, storage, removal, abandonment and unauthorized dumping of solid waste, recyclables and litter within the City, and such matters are administered by the applicable governing body or entity. This article regulates solid waste management and recycling activities and facilities within the City. 
(d)  It is not the intent of this article to in any way deviate from the provisions of F.S. § 403.7046, relating to recovered materials. 
(e)  Chapters 62-701 (solid waste management), 62-709 (compost), 62-710 (used oil), 62-711 (waste tires), and 62-712 (biological wastes), Florida Administrative Code, are adopted and incorporated into this article by reference. 
(f)  This article applies to all persons operating or maintaining facilities or conducting activities within the geographic boundaries of the City which recover, dispose, recycle, process, or store solid waste or recyclables. 
(g)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to solid waste or recyclables collection services performed directly by the City or, if a contract or contracts with the City exist(s), as to such services, to the extent that a contract is inconsistent with this article. 
(h)  The City Council may establish, amend the administrative franchise fees contemplative in this article by adoption of resolutions from time-to-time. 
(i)  Nothing contained in this article shall be construed or interpreted to include the City in the definition of "agency" contained in F.S. § 120.52, or to otherwise subject the City to the application of the Florida Administrative Procedures Act, F.S. ch. 120. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 1, 2-19-08)  
Sec. 41-2. - Definitions/authority to promulgate rules. 
(a)  The definitions set forth in any franchise agreement and the definitions of governmental agencies with primary and controlling jurisdiction over solid waste and recyclable matters shall prevail in the event of a conflict with the definitions set forth herein. 
(b)  The definitions set forth in section 1-2 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Palm Coast shall be applicable to the provisions of this article. 
(c)  The definitions set forth in Rule 62-701.200, Florida Administrative Code, apply to the provisions of this article and are attached to this article and are hereby incorporated herein by this reference. 
(d)  Other than as set forth in this section, for the purpose of this article (and the rules that may be adopted administratively implementing this article), the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning and regardless of whether the term is capitalized or not in its use: 
Approved container. A container approved by the City for the temporary reception and storage of refuse pending transportation to a permanent disposal site. 
Bags. Non-dissolvable plastic bags designed to store and enclose garbage or yard waste with sufficient wall strength to maintain physical integrity when lifted by the top. 
Bulk waste. All accumulations of yard waste or junk that requires additional handling, but which does not require more than two persons to lift including, but not limited to, white goods, furniture, television sets, small lawn equipment, grills, bicycles, (excluding motorized vehicles and motors such as, but not limited to, cars, trucks, motorcycles and boat motors) or similar items not having a reasonably useful purpose to the owner or abandoned by the owner whose large size or weight precludes disposal by normal methods. 
Casters. Four wheels attached to the underside of a container so that it may be rolled. 
Collection. The process whereby residential or commercial solid waste, yard waste, bulk waste, construction and demolition debris or recyclables are removed from the location where generated and transported to a City approved, and Florida Department of Environmental Protection permitted, disposal facility or material recovery facility, as appropriate. Collection does not include activities by bona fide charitable organizations which collect printed materials, aluminum cans or similar materials in the course of a bona fide fund raising activity. 
Collector. Any contractor who provides for the collection, transportation, and disposal of commercial solid waste, commercial recyclable materials, and construction and demolition debris. 
Commercial establishment. Any public or private place, building or enterprise devoted in whole or in part to a business enterprise whether nonprofit or profit making in nature except where such place, building and/or enterprise constitutes a single-family residence or multiple dwelling. Multiple dwellings being serviced by commercial containers or which could be serviced in the future shall be considered as "commercial establishments." 
Commercial solid waste. Rubbish and trash, combustibles (such as paper, wood, yard trimmings), noncombustibles (such as metal, glass, stone, dirt, garbage, bulk waste, trash or yard waste) that is not residential solid waste including, but not limited to, the garbage, bulk waste, trash and yard waste generated by or at commercial units including, but not limited to, stores, offices, restaurants, and warehouses, governmental and institutional office buildings, agricultural operations, industrial and manufacturing facilities, hotels, motels, condominiums, apartments and other buildings or parcels of property that have more than four residential units under one roof, and other sites that do not generate residential solid waste. 
Commercial unit. A structure or building unit intended for or capable of being utilized for commercial business use including, but not limited to, stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses, governmental and institutional office buildings, agricultural operations, industrial and manufacturing facilities, hotels, motels, condominiums, apartments, and other buildings and parcels of property that have more than four residential units under one roof, and other sites that do not generate residential solid waste. 
Commercial container. Any front-load container, roll-off, roll-off compactor, rear load container, front load verti-pak compaction container or cart that is designed or intended to be mechanically or manually dumped into a loader-packer type truck. 
Contractor generated waste. Bulk trash, bulk yard and construction demolition debris trash generated by builders, building contractors, privately employed tree trimmers and tree surgeons, landscape services and lawn or yard maintenance services and nurseries. 
Construction and demolition debris collector/hauler. Any contractor who provides for the collection, transportation and disposal of construction and demolition debris. 
Construction demolition debris. Discarded materials generally considered to be not water-soluble and non-hazardous in nature including, but not limited to, steel, glass, wallboard and lumber from the construction or destruction of a structure as part of a construction or demolition project or from the renovation of a structure, and including rocks, soils, tree remains, trees and other vegetative matter that normally result from land clearing or land development operations for a construction project regardless of whether such debris derives from the construction of structures at a site remote from the construction or at the demolition project site. When construction and demolition debris is mixed with any other type of solid waste, the resulting solid waste will be classified as other than construction and demolition debris. The term also includes: 
a.  Clean cardboard, paper, plastic, wood and metal scraps resulting from a construction project, 
b.  Except as provided in F.S. § 403.707(9)(j), unpainted, nontreated wood scraps from facilities manufacturing materials used for construction of structures or their components and unpainted nontreated wood pallets provided the wood scraps and pallets are separated from other solid waste where generated and the generator of such wood scraps of pallets implements reasonable practices of the generating industry to minimize the commingling of wood scraps or pallets with other solid waste, and 
c.  De minimus amounts of other nonhazardous wastes that are generated at construction or destruction projects if such amounts are generated consistent with the best management practices of the solid waste industry. 
Curbside collection point. That area on or adjacent to the driveway within five feet of, and in no case more than ten feet from, the street or roadway and not on the driving surface of the street or roadway or in the drainage gutter or drainage swale or ditch. 
Customer. A person in the corporate limits of the City obtaining residential or commercial collection service from a franchisee. 
Designated disposal facility. The disposal facility(ies) designated by the City for receiving solid waste, recyclables, yard waste, white goods, and bulk waste or construction and demolition debris in accordance with the franchise agreement and in compliance with Chapter 2007-184, Laws of Florida. 
Designated recycling facility. The materials recovery facility(ies) designated by the City for recovery of recyclables. 
Disposal charges. The prevailing rates charged for disposal or processing of items at designated facilities. 
Dry run. The franchisee's making a trip to a customer's site to pull a roll-off container or commercial front load dumpster, but not pulling it due to it being blocked, overloaded or other reasons beyond the franchisee's control and not the franchisee's fault. 
Exempt waste. Bio-hazardous or bio-medical waste, household, commercial or industrial hazardous waste, sludge, automobile parts, boats, boat parts, boat trailers, internal combustion engines, lead-acid batteries, used oil and tires, those wastes under the control of the Nuclear Regulatory Council and those other materials whose size, weight, or both are in excess of that allowed for bulk waste as defined herein. 
Extra pickup. Emptying a customer's container on more than its normal sequencing occurring when a customer's solid waste or recyclables generation requirements exceed scheduled service. 
Franchise agreement. The contractual agreement between the City and a franchisee containing, but not limited to, the following terms and conditions: a description of the service area; name of the person to perform commercial and residential collection, transport and disposal services in the service area; the term of the contract; the consideration to be paid for such contract, the method of payment, the services to be furnished, performance bond and the conditions thereof, insurance provisions, responsibilities and obligations of the parties thereto performance under which is subject to such rules and regulations promulgated by the City governing performance as are deemed necessary to implement the provisions of this article. 
Franchise fee. The amount of money which the franchisee shall be obligated to pay to the City for the contract rights as defined in this article and the franchise agreement. The franchise fee shall not be separately listed on any invoices. 
Franchisee. A person or entity awarded a franchise for solid waste or recyclables collection services by the City to perform the work or services, or to furnish materials or equipment by performing collection, transport and disposal services under the provisions of a franchise agreement and this article. The contractor who is engaged with the City to perform residential solid waste and recyclables services is a franchisee consistent with the terms and conditions of this article. 
Front load or rear load container. A large metal or plastic box for commercial solid waste or recyclables, usually of the two cubic yard to eight cubic yard size, which is lifted by mechanical means which containers will normally have plastic lids. 
Furniture. All accumulations of sofas, chairs, tables, mattresses, small televisions, DVD players and other similar domestic and commercial small appliances. 
Garbage. All putrescible waste which generally includes, but is not limited to, kitchen and table food waste, animal, vegetative food or any organic waste that is attendant with or results from the storage, preparation, cooking or handling of food materials. 
Garbage can. Any commonly available light gauge steel, plastic or galvanized receptacle of a non-absorbent material, closed at one end and open at the other, and without any jagged or sharp edges, furnished with a tightly fitted top or lid and handle(s) and has a capacity not to exceed 40 gallons. 
Garbage cart. Any commonly available light gauge steel, plastic or galvanized receptacle of a non-absorbent material, closed at one end and open at the other, and without any jagged or sharp edges, furnished with a tightly fitted top or lid and handle(s) and wheels, and has a capacity of at least 32 gallons, but not to exceed 96 gallons. 
Gross revenue. All revenues derived directly or indirectly by a franchisee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parents, and any person in which a franchisee has a financial interest, exclusive of all taxes, from or in connection with the operation of a solid waste collection service under a franchise agreement awarded by the City with no deductions whatsoever. 
Hazardous waste. Waste with properties that make it dangerous or potentially harmful to human health or the environment. Hazardous waste can be liquids, solids, contained gases, or sludges also can be by products of manufacturing processes or simply discarded commercial products such as cleaning fluids or pesticides. Hazardous waste exhibits one or more characteristics of ignitability, reactivity or toxicity which make it dangerous. Such products as paint products, pool chemicals, household cleaners (which are not properly managed) have the potential of contaminating the ground water. These materials must be deposited at a designated site which accepts hazardous waste. 
Industrial waste collection container. A metal or plastic commercial container designed for mechanical pick-up by front or rear loading compaction trucks or roll off open top containers or roll off compactors. Industrial waste container shall be the same types that are used as multifamily and commercial collection containers. 
Junk. All tangible items such as furniture, white goods, bicycles, or smaller property not having a reasonable useful purpose to the owner or abandoned by the owner whose large size or weight precludes disposal by normal methods. 
Lock. A master key type padlock furnished by the franchisee that is used in conjunction with a steel bar, chains, etc. to secure a container or its contents. 
Multifamily and commercial solid waste, rubbish and refuse collection container. Any portable nonabsorbent, enclosed container with a close-fitting cover, or doors, approved by the Flagler County Health Department and the City, which is used to store large volumes of refuse. These include dumpsters, compactors, and permanent-use open-top roll-offs. Other type collection containers may qualify as this type container, from time-to-time by the City based upon a review of sound and generally accepted solid waste management and collection processes and procedures. Such a collection container must be capable of being serviced by mechanical equipment. 
Multiple-family residence. A structure or building unit intended for or capable of being utilized for multiple-family residential living as defined in the Land Development Code. 
Multiple-family unit. A structure or building unit intended for or capable of being utilized for multiple-family residential living as defined in the Land Development Code. 
Non-collection notice. A form or tag used by the franchisee to notify customers of the reason(s) for non-collection of materials set out for collection by the customer for collection by the franchisee pursuant to the franchise agreement. 
Noncombustible refuse. Metals, mineral matter, large quantities of glass or crockery, metal furniture, auto bodies and parts, washing machines, refrigerators and other similar materials usual to housekeeping or to the operation of stores and offices. 
Non-exclusive franchisee. A person or entity holding a nonexclusive franchise to collect, transport and process solid waste or recyclables. 
Owner. The person designated on the real property tax roll maintained by the Flagler County Property Appraiser for each parcel of improved real property. 
Pathological waste. Tissues, organs, animal bodies, body excretions, used bandages, medicines, drugs, hypodermic syringes or solid organic wastes from hospitals, laboratories, clinics, physicians' and dentists' offices, animal hospitals or similar sources. 
Pathological waste container. A disposable, waterproof container or bag, securely closed, not torn or ruptured. Such disposable container or bag shall be placed within an approved container. 
Recyclable collector. Any contractor who provides for the collection, transportation and disposal of recyclables. 
Recyclables. Recyclable materials. 
Recycling bin. A rigid receptacle made of plastic or other suitable substance of no less than 14 gallons capacity. 
Recycling containers. The receptacles purchased, leased and distributed or placed by or on behalf of the City to City residents and commercial locations for the intended use as receptacles of recyclables. 
Refuse. Any combination of solid waste and rubbish. 
Resident. A resident of a residential dwelling or unit designated by the City to receive residential solid waste or recyclables services. 
Residential and small commercial solid waste, rubbish or refuse receptacle. A container of not more than 40 or less than three-gallons capacity and with weight not to exceed 50 pounds which shall be watertight and provided with a tight-fitting lid and which shall be free of jagged or sharp edges, shall not have any inside structures such as inside bands or reinforcing angles or anything within that shall prevent the free discharge of the contents and shall be of impervious material or a waterproof bag of not more than 40 or less than three-gallons capacity and of not less than one mill in thickness, securely closed, not torn or ruptured, and which is of a type approved by the City. 
Residential solid waste. Solid waste originating from residential property occupied by four or fewer residential units less than one roof per parcel of land. 
Residential unit. A structure or building unit intended for or capable of being utilized as a dwelling for residential living including, but not limited to, a home, duplex, apartment, condominium or mobile home. 
Roll-off container. A large metal or plastic box normally used for construction and demolition debris or other large amounts of solid waste and yard trash, usually of the ten, 20, 30, or 40 cubic-yard size, which are lifted by mechanical means which roll-offs may be either open top or enclosed compaction type. 
Rubbish. Every accumulation of paper, excelsior, rags, wooden and paper boxes or containers, sweepings and all other accumulation of materials other than solid waste which are usual to housekeeping and to the operation of stores, offices and other business places, including bottles, cans and containers. 
Service area. The city limits of the City. 
Single-family residence. A single structure or building or mobile home intended for or capable of being utilized as a dwelling for single-family residential living as defined in the Land Development Code. 
Small commercial garbage. Garbage deriving from a commercial establishment not serviced by a multifamily or commercial container of two cubic yards or more. 
Solid waste collector. Any contractor who provides for the collection, transportation and disposal of commercial solid waste. 
Source separated. Recovered materials, which are separated from solid waste where the recovered materials and solid waste are generated. The separation of various types of recovered materials from each other is not required and de minimus solid waste, in accordance with industry standards and practices, may be included in the recovered materials. Materials are conclusively deemed to not be source separated when such materials contain more than ten percent solid waste by volume or weight. 
Surety. A party, approved by the City, who is bound with and for the franchisee to ensure the payment of all lawful debts pertaining to and for the acceptable performance of the franchise agreement. Surety bonds shall be issued by a financial institution and in a form and amount satisfactory to the City after review by the City Manager and City Attorney. 
Trash. Accumulations of refuse, paper, paper boxes and containers, rags, sweepings, all other accumulations of a similar nature including, but not limited to broken toys, tools, equipment, and utensils. 
Uncontrollable forces. Any event, which results in the prevention or delay of performance by a party of its obligation under a franchise agreement which performance is beyond the reasonable control and is not due to the fault, acts or omissions of the non-performing party and includes, but is not limited to, fire, flood, hurricanes, earthquakes, storms, tornadoes, lightning, epidemic, terrorism, war, riot, civil disturbance and sabotage and other types of force majeure. 
Yard waste receptacle. Every receptacle equivalent to those specified in this article for residential and commercial solid waste, rubbish or refuse can container or plastic bags having a capacity not in excess of 40 gallons and of sufficient physical strength to hold and contain their contents while being lifted and handled during collection. 
(e)  The City Manager shall have the power and authority to promulgate administrative rules and formulate incipient City policy in order to implement the provisions of this article. Said rules may include the imposition of administrative fees for appeals and similar actions not prescribed herein or by resolution adopted by the City Council. The City Manager shall promulgate procedural rules providing for appeals of City staff decisions to the City Manager and for appeal of City Manager decisions to the City Council. As part of the rules, the definitions set forth or adopted in this article shall apply; provided, however, that the City Manager may issue determinations further clarifying the definitions or in order to implement the provisions of this article to which definitions apply. All rules and determinations by the City Manager shall be filed with the City Clerk and posted and published on the City's Web page by the City. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 2-19-08; Ord. No. 08-27, § 2, 12-2-08)  
Sec. 41-3. - City awarded franchises for mandatory solid waste and recyclable services. 
(a)  Solid waste and recyclables produced in the City shall be collected, transported and disposed of exclusively under the direction of the City pursuant to the terms and provisions of this article and such rules as the City shall prescribe for the removal, transportation and disposal of such solid waste and recyclables. The residential rates currently in effect, by residential contract (franchise agreement), in the City shall continue to be charged. The City's scope of authority relating to recovered materials is as set forth in F.S. § 403.7046, and other controlling law except as set forth in an exclusive franchise agreement procured through the City's procurement process. Rates for commercial solid waste and commercial recycling shall be negotiated by franchisee and customer. 
(b)  Solid waste and recyclables collection service is mandatory as to all properties located within the City. The franchisee shall bill all commercial properties for which solid waste and commercial recyclables services are provided within the City at the rates negotiated between the franchisee and the customer. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 2-19-08)  
Sec. 41-4. - Franchises. 
(a)  All solid waste generated and accumulated within the city limits of the City, by both residential and commercial properties, shall be collected and removed by a City franchisee except as otherwise specifically provided in this article. 
(b)  All residential recyclables generated and accumulated within the corporate boundaries of the City shall be collected and removed by a City franchisee as otherwise provided in this article. The City's scope of authority relating to recovered materials is as set forth in F.S. § 403.7046, and other controlling law. 
(c)  No owner, occupant or other person having control of a property shall collect or remove, or cause to be removed any solid waste or recyclables generated on such property except by utilizing a City franchisee or as otherwise provided in this article. 
(d)  No person may collect or transport solid waste or recyclables except as provided in this article. 
(e)  This section applies to all persons except those utilizing their personal passenger cars, station wagons or pick-up trucks of one ton or less capacity to transport items from a residence owned by the person to a solid waste or recycling facility. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 2, 2-19-08)  
Sec. 41-5. - Franchise agreements. 
(a)  The City may enter into an exclusive or non-exclusive franchise agreement or agreements with any person to provide for residential or commercial solid waste and recyclables collection services within the City except as may be prescribed by State law. Each franchise agreement shall contain such terms and conditions as prescribed and set forth in the procurement documents of the City and shall be awarded in accordance with the procedures of the City Council as may exist from time-to-time. 
(b)  This article sets forth the conditions for the grant of exclusive or non-exclusive right, privilege and franchise to provide solid waste and recyclables collection services within the City. 
(c)  Any franchise granted under the provisions of this article shall include the right to operate collection vehicles on the public streets of the City and to conduct a solid waste and recyclables collection business within the City. 
(d)  This article grants no independent authority to operate a solid waste or recyclables collection services business to any person. Such a grant may only occur by the award of a City solid waste or recyclables franchise agreement to a specific franchisee consistent with the provisions of this article. 
(e)  If a franchisee has entered an exclusive franchise agreement with the City to perform the services set forth herein, no other solid waste or recyclable collector shall be permitted by the City to provide solid waste or recyclables collection services within the City, except for services not covered under the franchise agreement; provided, however that franchise agreements may either be exclusive or non-exclusive based upon the nature of the procurement activity initiated by the City. 
(f)  Each franchisee shall maintain an insurance policy in place issued by a Florida licensed insurance company for public liability and property damage in the amounts as specified in the franchise agreement and in accordance with section 41-15. The City shall be named as an additional insured and the policy shall provide that the City shall be provided at least 30 days' written notice prior to cancellation or modification. Throughout the duration of the franchise agreement, the franchisee shall supply the City with a renewal or replacement certificate of insurance not less than 30 days before expiration or replacement of the insurance for which a previous certificate has been provided. Failure to maintain insurance shall be a per se breach of the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 5, 2-19-08)  
Sec. 41-6. - Franchise fee and related financial matters. 
(a)  Each franchisee shall pay to the City a uniformly established franchise fee. The amount of the franchise fee, the terms and conditions of payment of the franchise fee and the minimum guaranteed franchise fee shall be established at the time of the award of a franchise agreement. The franchise fee shall not be listed as a separate item on invoices. The books and records of the franchisee shall be subject to audit by the City upon not less than five days demand by the City at all reasonable times within the City for the purpose of determining the amount of franchise fees due to the City. Said books shall not generally be audited more than two times per year or at a greater frequency except to the extent that said audits are deemed necessary by the City for the purpose of validating franchise fees due to the City or to ensure compliance with law. 
(b)  Franchise fees may be adopted by City resolution and may be charged in accordance with the resolution or the provisions of a franchise agreement procured in accordance with procurement policies. Franchise fees may be a percentage of the gross revenue for one or more types of solid waste or recyclables collection whether or not service is provided under the franchise agreement. Franchise fees may also be established in the course of procurement activities of the City. 
(c)  For any services required to be performed under a residential franchise agreement, the charges by the City to the recipients of the solid waste or recyclables collection services shall be as set forth by City resolution or in a franchise agreement resulting from the City's procurement activities. Commercial franchise service charges will be negotiated between each franchisee and its customers. 
(d)  The City shall have the right to conduct a financial audit performed by a certified public accountant in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, whenever determined necessary by the City relative to the provisions of a franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 6, 2-19-08)  
Sec. 41-7. - Duties of franchisees. 
(a)  A franchise shall perform, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  a.  Collect, transport and dispose of all solid waste and recyclables generated by customers within the City requiring such services, in accordance with a franchise agreement and this article. 
b.  In order to provide residential and/or commercial solid waste services within the City, any and all solid waste or recyclable collection franchisees shall provided full recycling services, including but not limited to, glass, plastic, aluminum, cardboard, etc. to their residential and/or commercial customers. 
(2)  Carry out and perform all provisions of the franchise agreement. 
(3)  Provide access to the City, upon reasonable notice, full access to all records with respect to the franchise agreement. 
(4)  Provide access to the City with regard to its equipment and vehicles for the purpose of inspections. 
(b)  The City may enforce the terms of franchise agreements either through code enforcement activities, contractual enforcement, or some other remedies as may be available under the law. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 7, 2-19-08; Ord. No. 08-27, § 4, 12-2-08)  
Sec. 41-8. - Transferability. 
No franchise agreement shall be transferred or assigned to another person without first obtaining the written and formal approval of the City Council after payment of a transfer fee established by resolution or franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 8, 2-19-08)  
Sec. 41-9. - Vehicles. 
(a)  All solid waste and recyclables collection vehicles operating in the City shall be clearly marked with the name of the franchisee and the franchisee's telephone number. 
(b)  All trucks, trailers, and other vehicles used to collect, transport and dispose of solid waste or recyclables in the City or to transport solid waste or recyclables over any public roadways in the City shall: 
(1)  Be constructed as watertight to prevent the escape of water or other fluids from the vehicle. 
(2)  Be fully enclosed or covered so as to prevent the escape of any solid waste or recyclables. 
(3)  Comply with all local, regional, State and Federal roadway weight limits. 
(4)  Comply with all local, regional, State and Federal laws, rules and regulations applicable to such vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 9, 2-19-08)  
Sec. 41-10. - Solid waste storage facilities and enclosures—Non single-family. 
(a)  All solid waste and recyclables storage facilities in all zoning districts, shall be consistent with all land development regulations relating to the property on which located and shall be screened by the owner so as to completely conceal such facilities from the view of the general public and shall not be located on public right-of-way. Screening shall be six feet in height measured from the top of the pad or paved surface, and shall conform to the aesthetics (including color) and architectural characteristics of the adjoining structure or structures. 
(b)  The screened enclosure, when located in the front yard or side yard on a corner lot and when detached from the principal structure, shall also be landscaped to create a visual barrier on three sides. The landscaping shall have a height of four feet. Low-maintenance, long-life vegetative and structural materials shall be used. All applicable fire, life safety and building codes shall be met. In addition, all dumpsters shall be disinfected in accordance with industry standards at least one time each week by the franchisee. 
(c)  The doors and openings of each storage facility shall be closed except during loading and unloading. It is prohibited and unlawful to fail to keep storage facility doors and openings closed. Each storage facility shall have paved access 12 feet in width. The storage facility and enclosure, as a combined unit, shall be placed directly adjacent to a paved access to be used by the collection vehicle. For dumpster collection, the angle of the facility with the land shall allow for a straight-line maneuvering distance of 55 feet from the front of the screening. It is prohibited and unlawful to access the storage facility over a yard area without a paved access. 
(d)  Each enclosure shall contain gates, except as otherwise authorized, of a like or compatible material but shall not be constructed of wood. The gates for dumpster collection enclosures shall have a minimum width of the dumpster plus four feet and 90 degrees of swing with a gate-stop mechanism on each gate. The gates shall be closed except during the loading and unloading of the storage facilities. Failure to keep the gates closed as prescribed shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(e)  It shall be the equal responsibility of the property owner and any business operator using the property to maintain the facilities in good order and in accordance with this article at all times. 
(f)  It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to ensure at all times that no waste is placed on the ground in or around any collection container and that all waste is contained within a collection container at all times. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 10, 2-19-08)  
Sec. 41-11. - Facilities at single-family properties. 
(a)  The location of garbage and trash facilities and containers located at residential properties, when not set out for the day of pickup, shall be shielded or sheltered by opaque objects or structures in such a manner that they are substantially screened from public view; examples of "shielding" or "shelter" include, but are not limited to, bushes, fences, walls, trees, buildings, and enclosures. 
(b)  All residential solid waste and recyclables placed for collection shall be containerized so as to maintain sanitary conditions and facilitate handling. All garbage and trash cans or containers placed for collection shall be placed at the edge of the curb or right-of-way in areas most accessible and practicable to aid the garbage collection forces to expedite the loading and removal of the garbage or trash, and all containers shall be the type that may be easily handled by the collection employees. 
(c)  With regard to vegetative debris and yard waste, items such as tree limbs, tree trunks, and palm fronds shall not be in lengths greater than five feet nor shall any such item exceed six inches in diameter with no individual item exceeding a weight of 60 pounds. Special pick-ups may be required and a service charge may be levied for such services. 
(d)  Solid waste and recyclables shall be containerized so as to maintain sanitary conditions and facilitate handling. 
(e)  Customers shall separate yard waste from household garbage or other solid waste. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 11, 2-19-08)  
Sec. 41-12. - Fee imposed for single-family and commercial collection service. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed on all residential properties within the City a solid waste and recyclables collection franchise fee at the rate established in accordance with this article. 
(b)  There is hereby imposed on all commercial franchisees doing business within the City a solid waste and recyclables collection franchise fee at the rate established in accordance with this article. 
(c)  Gated residential communities and multi-family and mobile home complexes which have contracted for yard waste services or which are billed monthly garbage rates based on a single-family schedule for each unit within the complex shall be eligible to apply to the City for an exemption. The City may grant an exemption from the yard waste service collection and billing upon receipt and approval of the following: 
(1)  An application in a form provided by the City Manager, or designee, renewable annually. 
(2)  Administrative fees as established by resolution of the City Council which shall be collected for each exemption applied for on an annual basis. 
(3)  An affidavit of the applicant certifying that the applicant contracts for a common lawn maintenance with other adjoining properties within the same complex, the common lawn maintenance service disposes of all yard waste generated at the property of the applicant and that the yard waste is not commingled with household garbage and trash. 
(4)  A copy of the common lawn maintenance service contract or other evidence satisfactory to the City establishing the common yard and lawn maintenance system and the terms for removal of all yard waste and proper disposal. 
(5)  Such other documents as may be required in the discretion of the City Manager, or designee, necessary to establish compliance with the criteria for exemption. 
(d)  Once granted, an exemption shall be valid for the property identified for a period of one year. 
(e)  In the event the applicant is found to have violated the requirements for qualifying for an exemption as established through a Code Enforcement Board action, or has otherwise failed to maintain such qualifications, the City may revoke the exemption of the property owner upon notice to the property owner and a hearing thereon. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 12, 2-19-08)  
Sec. 41-13. - Billing for fee collection. 
(a)  All residential customers shall be billed for solid waste and recyclable services in accordance with rules adopted by the City Manager and the rates established in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  In addition to and not in lieu of any other remedies, any unpaid charges for residential solid waste or recyclable collection services may be deducted from any water/utility deposit from the occupant of the premises located on the property for which the unpaid solid waste or recyclable collection charges have accrued at such time as any refund of said deposit is requested or when the unpaid solid waste or recyclables collection services charges have accrued at such time as the accrued charges are equal to or exceed the amount of deposit. 
(c)  The amount of solid waste and recyclables franchise fees imposed by this article are hereby declared to be a service secured by a property owner or occupant from the City through the franchise agreement and a service which inures to the benefit of the property owned or served and the provision of said service is, therefore, declared to be a debt due to the City. Any person required under the terms of this article to have accumulations of solid waste or recyclables collected, transported and disposed of or processed by the City shall be liable to the City for the amount of applicable collection fees therefore and such fees shall be recoverable by any legal means such as the filing of an action in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 13, 2-19-08)  
Sec. 41-14. - Delinquency; liens. 
(a)  The City's codes and ordinances relating to the collection of fees and charges and the assessment of liens for non-payment shall be applicable with regard to fees and charges relating to solid waste and recyclable services. 
(b)  If the City is the entity responsible for collection, in addition to any other remedies afforded by law or set forth herein the City may record a lien against each unit of residential or commercial property for unpaid solid waste, yard waste and recyclables collection fees or terminate water/sewer service in a like manner as it would in the event fees for that service remain unpaid. If such fees are not paid by the due date of the date of billing, the City may assess the amount of such fees as a lien against the benefited property of the same extent and character as a lien granted to the City by law for special assessments for the cost of a local improvement. 
(c)  If the City is not the entity responsible for collection, all responsibility for such activities shall be borne by the franchisee. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 14, 2-19-08)  
Sec. 41-15. - Insurance requirements. 
(a)  Franchisees are authorized under this section to aid the City in fulfilling its responsibility for providing an adequate, safe and sanitary system of collecting, transporting and disposing of refuse from buildings and establishments which are not covered by the City franchisees' solid waste and recyclables collection services franchise agreements. 
(b)  All solid waste or recyclable collectors, excluding construction and demolition collectors/haulers, who are issued a franchise shall secure and maintain a public liability insurance policy in the amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 for one person injured, and $2,000,000.00 for more than one person injured, and property damage liability insurance of not less than $1,000,000.00 as well as an overall umbrella policy with a minimum of $5,000,000.00. Construction and demolition collectors/haulers that are issued a franchise shall secure and maintain a public liability insurance policy in the amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 for one person injured, and $2,000,000.00 for more than one person injured, and property damage liability insurance of not less than $1,000,000.00. All solid waste or recyclable collectors who are issued a franchise shall secure and maintain an automobile policy in the amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 and a worker's compensation policy of not less than $500,000.00. Evidence of such insurance shall be deposited with the City Manager, or designee, prior to issuance of the franchise. The franchisee shall maintain an insurance policy in place issued by a licensed insurance company permitted to do business in the State of Florida for a public liability and property damage in the amounts specified. The City shall be named as an additional insured, and the policy shall provide that the City shall be provided at least 30 days' written notice prior to cancellation or modification. Throughout the duration of the franchise, the franchisee shall supply the City with a renewal or replacement certificate of insurance not less than 30 days before expiration or replacement of the insurance for which a previous certificate has been provided. Failure to maintain insurance shall be a per se breach of the franchise. 
(c)  All solid waste or recyclable collection franchisees, excluding Construction and Demolition franchisees, who are issued a franchise, shall be required to secure a performance bond in the amount of $1,000,000.00 in favor of the City. All Construction and Demolition franchisees, who are issued a franchise, shall be required to secure a performance bond in the amount $25,000.00 in favor of the City. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 15, 2-19-08; Ord. No. 08-27, § 3, 12-2-08; Ord. No. 09-14, § 2, 6-2-09)  
Sec. 41-16. - Ownership/collection of recyclables. 
(a)  All recyclables, once placed at a collection location or in a recycling container at a collection location, become the exclusive property of the City and/or its collection franchisee as established in a franchise agreement; provided, however that this provision does not apply to commercial enterprises which store materials on the business location and have an ongoing program of reusing materials or marketing such materials to purchasers of the materials. 
(b)  Recovery of recyclables from any solid waste generated or brought within the City must occur prior to the placing in a recyclable container at a collection location and such recovery shall be subject to State and local public health and safety laws. 
(c)  It is the franchisee's duty and responsibility to ensure that all items collected as recyclable material are, in fact, recyclable, or contain only de minimus non-recyclable material. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 16, 2-19-08)  
Sec. 41-17. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It is prohibited and unlawful for any person to do any of the following: 
(1)  To place, or cause to be placed any solid waste or recyclables in or upon the property of another or in a dumpster or container of another. 
(2)  To convey or cause to be conveyed over and upon any of the streets and alleys of the City any solid waste or recyclables without being awarded a franchise agreement by the City as may be required by this article and the laws, rules or regulations affecting the collection and disposal of solid wastes or recyclables. 
(3)  To deposit or dispose of any solid waste or recyclables in or upon any public streets, sidewalk, rights-of-way or alleyway or any stream, ditch, river, pond, creek, park or public place in the City. 
(4)  To burn any solid waste or recyclables generated or brought within the City, except for trees and brush as may be permitted to be burned where applicable permits have been obtained from the City and other appropriate entities in accordance with Federal, State and local laws, rules and regulations. 
(5)  To place solid waste or recyclables out for collection earlier than 6:00 p.m. on the day before a scheduled collection day or leave containers adjacent to the street any later than 6:00 a.m. on the day after the containers are emptied; provided, however, that the City Manager, or designee, may grant exemptions from this requirement to address the requirements of the Americans With Disabilities Act. 
(6)  To place solid waste or recyclables out for collection at any location not serviced by the franchisee. 
(7)  To remove solid waste or recyclables from any container, garbage can or recycling bin at a collection location or from curbside unless authorized to do so. 
(8)  To accumulate or cause to be accumulated any yard waste, industrial waste, junk, rubbish or other solid waste in or upon any premises or lot owned by a person or in a persons control such as to cause a nuisance. 
(9)  To deposit flammable liquids, hazardous wastes or explosives in any container or garbage can. 
(10)  To open, remove, untie or to interfere with the orderly and legitimate collection of solid waste or recyclables or a recycling container, or to disturb or scatter solid waste or recyclables stored in containers placed for collection at a curbside, drop-off or collection location. 
(11)  To transport over any public road any solid waste or recyclables which is subject to leakage or spillage or unless the solid waste is securely tied or covered and encapsulated so as to prevent spillage and leakage. 
(12)  To allow solid waste or recyclables to spill, blow or drop from any vehicle on any road, street or private or public property. 
(13)  To allow the water saturating or covering solid waste to leak from any vehicle on any road, street or private or public property. 
(14)  To collect or transport solid waste or recyclables for hire or for remuneration or other consideration in any form without first being awarded a franchise agreement and receiving any all permits required by the City or any other agency of government or to fail to pay the City's local business tax. 
(15)  To dispose of solid waste at any site, public or private, which is unapproved by the City or to process recyclables at any site, public or private, which is unapproved by the City. 
(16)  For reasons of general health, safety and welfare including, but not limited to sanitation and community appearance, to accumulate any solid waste for a period in excess of seven days upon public or private property. Creation or maintenance of a backyard compost pile consistent with sound and sanitary gardening practices shall be considered recycling, not disposal, unless the site results in the creation of a nuisance. 
(17)  To fail to use a front load container for solid waste disposal when directed to do so by the City based upon the City's evaluation of the solid waste requirements of the commercial site. 
(18)  To permit any garbage or other refuse of any kind that is unsafe or unsanitary, offensive to public health, or that is a menace to the welfare of the City, either by reason of danger by fire or otherwise, to remain upon the premises of such person or upon the public rights-of-way adjoining such premises. 
(19)  To place, deposit or dump or dispose of any solid waste, garbage, trash or other refuse in any place within the City except in approved containers. 
(20)  For any nonresident of the City, or for any business or commercial establishment, whether located within or without the boundaries of the City, to deposit any refuse or trash of any kind in any residential containers authorized in this article except for de minimus uses by guests or visitors of the owner of a premises who specifically authorizes such nominal activity. 
(21)  To collect or remove either recycling containers or recyclables placed in or near the recycling containers, designated collection locations or commercial dumpster locations unless previously authorized by the City or to vandalize containers or recyclables. 
(22)  For any person, after notice from the City, to employ or continue to employ any company to transport solid waste or recyclables which company has not entered a franchise agreement entered with the City in accordance with this article. 
(23)  For any person to collect, transport or process recyclables without first securing a franchise agreement with the City. 
(24)  To engage in solid waste, garbage and/or trash collection or recyclables collection services on Sunday unless specifically authorized by the City. 
(25)  To refuse City access to the equipment and vehicles of the franchisee for the purposes of inspections. 
(26)  To overload a collection container. 
(27)  To do any act prohibited or to fail to do any act required by this article or the laws, rules or regulations affecting solid waste and recyclables within the City. 
(b)  If an owner has not removed nonconforming solid wastes or other industrial waste, hazardous wastes or noncombustible refuse or any other material of a similar type or nature within 24 hours after notification from the City, the City may order such removal and all costs incurred shall be charged against the owner or shall otherwise be due and payable and collected in accordance with controlling law. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 18, 2-19-08)  
Sec. 41-18. - Penalties/violations/interpretation of ordinance/reconciliation with franchise agreement/charges. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished to the maximum extent as provided in State law as set forth in F.S. § 162.22, and other controlling legal authority. 
(b)  All persons participating in, or contributing to, a violation of this article shall be in violation. 
(c)  The City may engage in any other code enforcement activities and processes, as it deems appropriate under the circumstances, and may seek judicial and administrative remedies as deemed appropriate by the City. 
(d)  Should any franchisee be found by the City Manager, after notice and an opportunity to be heard, to be in violation of the terms and conditions of this article then the City Manager may suspend or revoke the franchise, exercise any contractual rights of the City, and take appropriate actions to protect the public health safety and welfare. 
(e)  Each act of violation of this article shall constitute a separate violation. 
(f)  This article shall be interpreted in conjunction with any franchise agreements entered and permits issued by the City. 
(g)  The City Council may deviate from the provisions of this article in entering a franchise agreement as to technical solid waste and recyclables collection matters relating to franchisees operating within the City. 
(h)  In the event that this article and a franchise agreement conflict, the provisions of the franchise agreement shall prevail. In the event that the provisions of this article and the franchise agreement have equivalent effect, those provisions may be enforced by the City either as a matter of contract or as a matter of code enforcement regulatory authority. In the event that a provision of this article is applicable and no similar provision is set forth in the franchise agreement, the provisions of this article shall be applicable. 
(Ord. No. 08-05, § 18, 2-19-08)  
Chapter 41.5 - SPECIAL DISTRICTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-06, adopted on March 3, 2008 did not specifically amend the Code; hence, at the discretion of the editor these provisions have been included as a new chapter 41.5, pertaining to special districts. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
 
ARTICLE I. - AUTHORITY, DEFINITIONS, AND FINDINGS 
 
Sec. 41.5-1. - Authority. 
This article is enacted pursuant to the authority of the Florida Constitution, F.S. Chapter 166, the City of Palm Coast Charter, and other applicable provisions of law. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 1.01, 3-3-08)  
Sec. 41.5-2. - Definitions. 
When used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Administrative costs means costs and expenses, budgeted, incurred or contracted for in providing ongoing administration and maintenance of the assessment program developed and implemented hereunder. 
Annual assessment resolution means the resolution described in section 41.5-32 hereof, approving the assessment roll for a specific fiscal year. 
Assessment means a special assessment, sometimes called a non-ad valorem assessment, imposed by the City pursuant to the article to fund all or part of the project cost of Old Kings Road improvements. Assessments shall include collection costs and administrative costs. 
Assessment coordinator means the city administrator or such person's designee. 
Assessment district means the Old Kings Road Special Assessment District created by the article. 
Assessment roll means the assessment roll relating to Old Kings Road improvements, approved by a Final Assessment Resolution pursuant to section 41.5-31 hereof or an Annual Assessment Resolution pursuant to section 41.5-32 hereof. 
Assessment unit means the apportionment unit or criteria utilized to determine the assessment for each parcel of property, as set forth in the Initial Assessment Resolution. 
Capital cost means all or any portion of the expenses that are properly attributable to the acquisition, design, construction, installation, reconstruction, renewal or replacement (including demolition, environmental mitigation and relocation) of Improvements and imposition of any related Assessments, under generally accepted accounting principles; and including reimbursement to the City for any funds advanced for any costs incurred in connection with any of the foregoing and interest on any Obligations, interfund or intrafund loan for such purposes. By way of example and not limitation, the term shall include: (A) the cost of physical construction, reconstruction or completion; (B) the cost of acquisition and installation; (C) the cost of all labor, materials, machinery and equipment, including costs associated with the acquisition thereof; (D) the cost of land or interest therein, property rights, easements and franchises of any nature whatsoever including costs associated with the acquisition thereof; (E) the cost of any indemnity or surety bonds and premiums for insurance during construction; (F) the cost of construction plans and specifications, surveys and estimates of costs; (G) the cost of engineering, legal and other consultant services or contractual services associated with the acquisition, development, and completion of construction of improvements, including the fees and expenses of counsel or consultants retained, contracted for or paid by the City in connection with the preparation of assessments, and development and completion of improvements; (H) reasonable contingencies; and (I) all other costs and expenses, including start-up expenses, that are properly attributable to such acquisition or construction under generally accepted accounting principles applicable to improvements. Additional items of cost may be provided pursuant to the financing documents. 
City means the City of Palm Coast, Florida, or, as the context requires, it's city council. 
City council means the city council of Palm Coast, Florida. 
Collection costs means the costs and expenses budgeted, incurred or contracted for by the City during any fiscal year in connection with the collection of assessments. 
District means town center at Palm Coast Community Development District and its successors and assigns. 
Final assessment resolution means the resolution described in section 41.5-31 hereof, which shall confirm, modify or repeal the Initial Assessment Resolution and which shall be the final proceeding for the imposition of an assessment. 
Financing documents means the resolution or resolutions duly adopted by the City authorizing the issuance of obligations, as well as any indenture of trust, trust agreement, interlocal agreement, or other instrument relating to the adoption, execution, issuance or security of any obligations. 
Fiscal year means the period commencing on October 1 of each year and continuing through the next succeeding September 30, or such other period as may be prescribed by law as the fiscal year for the City. 
Government means the United States of America, the State of Florida, a city, a special district, a municipal corporation, or any of their respective agencies or political subdivisions. 
Initial assessment resolution means the resolution described in section 41.5-27 hereof, which shall be the initial proceeding for the imposition of an assessment. 
Obligations means any form or series of bonds, or other evidence of indebtedness, including, but not limited to, certificates, warrants, notes, commercial paper, capital leases or any other obligations of any nature issued pursuant to financing documents and secured, in whole or in part, by assessments. 
Old Kings Road improvements or improvements means the capital improvements acquired, constructed or installed by the City or the district relative to the widening and improving of Old Kings Road to an urban section road from Highway 100 to Palm Coast Parkway, which are determined to benefit lands located within the assessment district, including but not limited to design, permitting, construction, clearing, fill, hardscaping, landscaping, irrigation, roadway lighting, roadway drainage (both within rights-of-way and separate therefrom), subgrade, curbs, sidewalks, gutters, medians, undergrounding of utilities, signals, signage, striping, lane expansion, ingress, egress, turn-lane and intersection improvements and all related improvements of every nature. Where the context requires, the term may also include land, improvements to land, structures, fixtures and tangible personal property of every kind and description and the acquisition of any estate or interest in any of the foregoing (both within rights-of-way and separate therefrom) which are necessary to accomplish the contemplated improvements. 
Ordinance means City Ordinance No. 2005-10, including this amendment thereto where the context requires. 
Pledged revenue means, as to any obligations: 
(a)  The proceeds of such obligations, including investment earnings; 
(b)  Proceeds of assessments imposed by the City hereunder pledged to secure the payment of such obligations; 
(c)  Revenues to be derived from any improvements pledged to secure the payment of such obligations; 
(d)  Rates, fees or other charges of the City to be collected from the benefited landowners within the assessment district pledged to secure the payment of such obligations; 
(e)  The City contribution and/or; 
(f)  Any other legally available source of security which may be pledged, at the city council's sole option, to secure the payment of such obligations, as specified by the financing documents authorizing such obligations. 
Project cost means: 
(a)  The capital cost of any improvements; 
(b)  The transaction cost associated with the obligations which finance improvements; 
(c)  Interest accruing on such obligations for such period of time as the City deems appropriate; 
(d)  The debt service reserve fund or account, if any, established for the obligations which finance the improvements; 
(e)  Any other costs or expenses related thereto. 
Property appraiser means the Flagler County Property Appraiser. 
Resolution of intent means the resolution expressing the city council's intent to collect assessments pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. 
Tax collector means the Flagler County Tax Collector. 
Tax roll means the real property ad valorem tax assessment roll maintained by the property appraiser for the purpose of the levy and collection of ad valorem taxes. 
Transaction cost means the costs, fees and expenses incurred in connection with the adoption, issuance or sale of any obligation or series of obligations, including but not limited to: 
(a)  Rating agency and other financing fees; 
(b)  The fees and disbursements of bond counsel, special counsel and issuer's counsel; 
(c)  The underwriters' discount; 
(d)  The fees and disbursements of the City's financial advisor; 
(e)  The costs of preparing or printing the obligations, any preliminary official statement, final official statement, or other documentation supporting the adoption or issuance of the obligations; 
(f)  The fees payable in respect of any municipal bond insurance policy; 
(g)  Administrative, development, credit review, and all other fees associated with any pooled commercial paper or similar interim financing program; and 
(h)  Any other costs of a similar nature incurred in connection with the adoption or issuance of such Obligations. 
Uniform Assessment Collection Act means F.S. §§ 197.3631, 197.3632 and 197.3635, or any successor statutes authorizing the levy, imposition, collection and enforcement of non-ad valorem assessments on the same bill as ad valorem taxes, and any applicable regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 1.02, 3-3-08)  
Sec. 41.5-3. - Findings. 
It is hereby ascertained, determined, and declared that the foregoing recitals are true, correct and incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 1.03, 3-3-08)  
Sec. 41.5-4. - Interpretation. 
Unless the context indicates otherwise, words importing the singular number include the plural number and vice versa; the terms "hereof," "hereby," "herein," "hereto," "hereunder" and similar terms refer to this article; and the term "hereafter" means after, and the term "heretofore" means before, the effective date of this article. Words of any gender include the correlative words of the other gender, unless the sense indicates otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 1.04, 3-3-08)  
ARTICLE II. - ASSESSMENTS 
 
Sec. 41.5-25. - Assessments ratified and confirmed. 
The purpose of this article is to supplement Ordinance No. 2005-10. The imposition of assessments provided for in the article is hereby ratified and confirmed. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 2.01, 3-3-08)  
Sec. 41.5-26. - Old Kings Road special assessment district. 
Ownership of the various properties comprising the assessment district has changed since enactment of Ordinance No. 2005-10. A list of the properties and current owners thereof is attached hereto as appendix A and incorporated herein. The assessment district shall initially only encompass parcels which the owners thereof have consented to inclusion within the assessment district, committed to cooperate in the extraordinary advancement of the improvements and whom have determined on behalf of themselves and their successors that the improvements specially benefit their lands and that the method employed to share that portion of the project cost anticipated to be funded by assessments is fair and reasonable. 
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the schedule of developable acreage within the assessment district, including the total amount of developable acreage within the assessment district and the amount attributable to each tax parcel, may be refined by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 2.01, 3-3-08; Ord. No. 2013-06, § 1, 8-6-13)  
Sec. 41.5-27. - Initial assessment resolution. 
The imposition of the assessments shall be implemented by the city council's adoption of an Initial Assessment Resolution. The Initial Assessment Resolution shall: 
(a)  Describe the assessment district; 
(b)  Describe the improvements proposed to be funded, in whole or in part, from proceeds of the assessments; 
(c)  Respectively estimate the capital cost, the project cost, the administrative costs and the collection costs; 
(d)  Describe with particularity the proposed method of apportioning that portion of the project cost to be recovered through the assessments among the parcels of benefited property located within the assessment district, such that the owner of any parcel of benefited property can objectively determine the number of assessment units and the amount of the assessment; 
(e)  Describe the provisions, if any, for acceleration and prepayment of the assessment; 
(f)  Describe the provisions, if any, for reallocating the assessment upon future subdivisions; 
(g)  Include any additional specific legislative findings that recognize the special benefit to be conveyed by the improvements and the fair and reasonable nature of the apportionment methodology; and 
(h)  Describe how the assessment is to be levied, collected and/or amortized over a number of years. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 2.03, 3-3-08)  
Sec. 41.5-28. - Assessment roll. 
(a)  The assessment coordinator shall prepare a preliminary assessment roll that contains the following information: 
(1)  A summary description of each parcel of property (conforming to the description contained on the tax roll) subject to the assessments; 
(2)  The name of the owner of record of each parcel, as shown on the tax roll; 
(3)  The number of assessment units attributable to each parcel; 
(4)  The maximum annual assessment to become due in any fiscal year for each assessment unit; and 
(5)  The maximum annual assessment to become due in any fiscal year for each parcel. 
(b)  Copies of the Initial Assessment Resolution and the preliminary assessment roll shall be on file in the offices of the assessment coordinator and open to public inspection. The foregoing shall not be construed to require that the assessment roll be in printed form if the amount of the assessments for each parcel of property can be determined by use of a computer terminal or internet access available to the public. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 2.04, 3-3-08)  
Sec. 41.5-29. - Notice by publication. 
After filing the assessment roll in the offices of the assessment coordinator, as required by section 41.5-28(b) hereof, the assessment coordinator shall cause to be published once in a newspaper of general circulation within the City a notice stating that a public hearing of the city council will be held on a certain day and hour, not earlier than 20 calendar days from such publication, at which hearing the city council will receive written comments and hear testimony from all interested persons regarding proposed assessments and adoption of the Final Assessment Resolution. The published notice shall conform to the requirements of the Uniform Assessment Act and contain at least the following information: 
(a)  A geographic depiction of the assessment district; 
(b)  The proposed schedule of the assessments; and 
(c)  A statement that all affected property owners have the right to file written objections within 20 days of the publication of the notice. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 2.05, 3-3-08)  
Sec. 41.5-30. - Notice by mail. 
In addition to the published notice required by section 41.5-29, the assessment coordinator shall cause to be provided notice of the proposed assessment by first class mail to the owner of each parcel of property subject to the assessment. Such notice shall conform to the requirements of the Uniform Assessment Act and include 
(a)  The purpose of the assessment; 
(b)  The maximum annual assessment per assessment unit to be levied against each parcel of property; 
(c)  The assessment unit to be applied to determine the assessment; 
(d)  The number of such assessment units contained in each parcel; 
(e)  The total revenue anticipated to be collected by the assessment; 
(f)  A statement that all affected property owners have a right to appear at the hearing and to file written objections with the city council within 20 days of the notice; and 
(g)  The date, time and place of the hearing. Notice shall be mailed at least 20 calendar days prior to the hearing to each property owner at such address as is shown on the tax roll readily available on the twentieth calendar day prior to the date of mailing. Notice shall be deemed mailed upon delivery thereof to the possession of the U.S. Postal Service. The assessment coordinator may provide proof of such notice by affidavit. Failure of the owner to receive such notice due to mistake or inadvertence shall not affect the validity of the assessment roll or release or discharge any obligation for the payment of any assessments imposed by the city council pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 2.05, 3-3-08)  
Sec. 41.5-31. - Adoption of final assessment resolution. 
At the time named in such notice, or such time to which an adjournment or continuance may be taken, the city council shall receive written objections and hear testimony of interested persons and may then, or at any subsequent meeting of the city council, adopt the Final Assessment Resolution which shall: 
(a)  Confirm, modify or repeal the Initial Assessment Resolution with such amendments, if any, as may be deemed appropriate by the city council; 
(b)  Create the assessment district; 
(c)  Establish the maximum amount of the assessments for each assessment unit; 
(d)  Approve the assessment roll, with such amendments as it deems just and right; and 
(e)  Determine the method of collection. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 2.05, 3-3-08)  
Sec. 41.5-32. - Annual Assessment Resolution. 
During its budget adoption process, the city council shall adopt an Annual Assessment Resolution for each fiscal year in which assessments will be imposed to approve the assessment roll for such fiscal year. The Final Assessment Resolution shall constitute the Annual Assessment Resolution for the initial fiscal year. The assessment roll shall be prepared in accordance with the Initial Assessment Resolution, as confirmed or amended by the Final Assessment Resolution. Unless consented to by written consent from the owner, the proposed assessment for any parcel of property shall not exceed the maximum amount established in the notice provided pursuant to section 41.5-30 hereof. After the initial imposition of assessments, if an assessment is imposed against property not previously subject thereto, the city council shall provide notice to the owner of such property in accordance with sections 41.5-29 and 41.5-30 hereof and conduct a public hearing prior to adoption of the Annual Assessment Resolution. Failure to adopt an Annual Assessment Resolution during the budget adoption process for a fiscal year may be cured at any time. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 2.08, 3-3-08)  
Sec. 41.5-33. - Effect of assessment resolutions. 
The adoption of the Final Assessment Resolution shall be the final determination by the City of the issues presented (including, but not limited to, the apportionment methodology, the rate of assessment, the adoption of the assessment roll, the maximum period or number of years over which annual assessment are to be imposed, the methods and procedures for collection and the levy and lien of the assessments), unless proper steps are initiated in a court of competent jurisdiction to secure relief within 20 days from the date of the city council's adoption of the Final Assessment Resolution. The initial imposition of assessments shall result from the consensual participation of the owners of parcels within the assessment district and such consent shall be documented in a manner that touches, concerns and runs with such lands and is binding upon each successive owner thereof. Based upon the Initial Assessment Resolution, as confirmed or amended by the Final Assessment Resolution, the amount of the assessments for each subsequent fiscal year shall be established upon adoption of the Annual Assessment Resolution. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 2.09, 3-3-08)  
Sec. 41.5-34. - Lien of assessments. 
Upon adoption of the Final Assessment Resolution, Assessments shall constitute a lien against assessed property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, City, district or municipal taxes and other non-ad valorem assessments. Except as otherwise provided by law, such lien shall be superior in dignity to all other liens, titles and claims, until paid. The lien shall be deemed perfected on the date notice thereof is recorded in the Official Records of Flagler City, Florida. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 2.10, 3-3-08)  
Sec. 41.5-35. - Revisions to assessments. 
If any assessment made under the provisions of this article is either in whole or in part annulled, vacated or set aside by the judgment of any court, or if the city council is satisfied that any such assessment is so irregular or defective that the same cannot be enforced or collected, or if the city council has omitted the inclusion of any property on the assessment roll which property should have been so included, the city council may take all necessary steps to impose a new assessment against any property benefited by the improvements, following as nearly as may be practicable the provisions of this article, and in case such second assessment is annulled, the city council may levy and impose other assessments until a valid assessment is imposed. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 2.11, 3-3-08)  
Sec. 41.5-36. - Procedural irregularities. 
Any informality or irregularity in the proceedings in connection with the levy of any assessment under the provisions of this article shall not affect the validity of the same after the approval thereof, and any assessment as finally approved shall be competent and sufficient evidence that such assessment was duly levied, that the assessment was duly made and adopted, and that all proceedings related to such assessment were duly had, taken and performed as required by this article; and no variance from the directions hereunder shall be held material unless it be clearly shown that the party objecting was materially injured thereby. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section 4.5-36, any party objecting to an assessment imposed pursuant to this article must file an objection with a court of competent jurisdiction within the time periods prescribed herein. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 2.12, 3-3-08)  
Sec. 41.5-37. - Correction of errors and omissions. 
(a)  No act of error or omission on the part of the city council, assessment coordinator, property appraiser, tax collector, or their deputies or employees, shall operate to release or discharge any obligation for payment of any assessment imposed by the city council under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The number of assessment units attributed to a parcel of property may be corrected at any time by the assessment coordinator. Any such correction which reduces an assessment shall be considered valid from the date on which the assessment was imposed and shall in no way affect the enforcement of the assessment imposed under the provisions of this article. Any such correction which increases an assessment or imposes an assessment on omitted property shall first require notice to the affected owner at the address shown on the tax roll notifying the owner of the date, time and place that the city council will consider confirming the correction and offering the owner an opportunity to be heard. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 2.13, 3-3-08)  
Sec. 41.5-38. - Interlocal agreement. 
The city council shall have the power and is hereby authorized, to the maximum extent permitted by law, to enter into one or more interlocal agreements with the district for the purpose of providing or delivering the improvements contemplated herein or any activity reasonably associated therewith. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 2.14, 3-3-08)  
Sec. 41.5-39. - Consent to special assessments; government property. 
(a)  The imposition of assessments against property within the assessment district is conditioned upon the written consent of the owner of such property; provided, however, that once such consent is given, it shall be binding upon all those who take title by, through or under the owner. The written consent shall be in substantially the form attached hereto as appendix B. 
(b)  The written consent of any owner agreeing to include a parcel within an assessment district must provide that any assessment imposed hereunder shall become due and payable in full, for that part of any parcel subject to an assessment, prior to conveyance or transfer thereof to any government. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 2.15, 3-3-08)  
Sec. 41.5-40. - Pledge of assessments. 
The pledge of assessments imposed hereunder to the repayment of obligations is hereby authorized. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 2.16, 3-3-08)  
Sec. 41.5-41. - Validation. 
Any obligations undertaken to carry out the intent and purpose hereof, and all matters reasonably associated therewith, shall be validated pursuant to F.S. Chapter 75. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 2.17, 3-3-08)  
ARTICLE III. - COLLECTION OF ASSESSMENTS 
 
Sec. 41.5-61. - Method of collection. 
Unless directed otherwise by the city council, assessments shall be collected pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, and the City shall comply with all applicable provisions thereof, including but not limited to (1) entering into a written agreement with the property appraiser and the tax collector for reimbursement of necessary expenses, (2) certifying the assessment roll to the tax collector, and (3) adopting a Resolution of Intent after publishing weekly notice of such intent for four consecutive weeks preceding the hearing. The Resolution of Intent may be adopted either prior to or following the Initial Assessment Resolution; provided however, that the Resolution of Intent must be adopted prior to January 1 (March 1 with consent of the property appraiser and tax collector) of the year in which the assessments are first collected on the ad valorem tax bill. Any hearing or notice required by this article may be combined with any other hearing or notice required by the Uniform Assessment Collection Act. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 3.01, 3-3-08)  
Sec. 41.5-62. - Alternative method of collection. 
In lieu of using the Uniform Assessment Collection Act, the City may elect to collect the assessment by any other method which is authorized by law or provided by this section 41.5-62 as follows: 
(a)  The City shall provide assessment bills by first class mail to the owner of each affected parcel of property. The bill or accompanying explanatory material shall include: 
(1)  A brief explanation of the assessment; 
(2)  A description of the assessment units used to determine the amount of the assessment; 
(3)  The number of assessment units attributable to the parcel; 
(4)  The total amount of the parcel's assessment for the appropriate period; 
(5)  The location at which payment will be accepted; 
(6)  The date on which the assessment is due; 
(7)  A statement that the assessment constitutes a lien against assessed property equal in rank and dignity with the liens of all state, county, district or municipal taxes and other non-ad valorem assessments. 
(b)  A general notice of the lien resulting from imposition of the assessments shall be recorded in the Official Records of Flagler County, Florida. Nothing herein shall be construed to require that individual liens or releases be filed in the official records. 
(c)  The City shall have the right to appoint or retain an agent to foreclose and collect all delinquent assessments in the manner provided by law. An assessment shall become delinquent if it is not paid within 30 days from the due date. The City or its agent shall notify any property owner who is delinquent in payment of an assessment within 60 days from the date such assessment was due. Such notice shall state in effect that the City or its agent will initiate a foreclosure action and cause the foreclosure of such property subject to a delinquent assessment in a method now or hereafter provided by law for foreclosure of mortgages on real estate, or otherwise as provided by law. 
(d)  All costs, fees and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and title search expenses, related to any foreclosure action as described herein shall be included in any judgment or decree rendered therein. At the sale pursuant to decree in any such action, the City may be the purchaser to the same extent as an individual person or corporation. The City may join in one foreclosure action the collection of assessments against any or all property assessed in accordance with the provisions hereof. All delinquent property owners whose property is foreclosed shall be liable for an apportioned amount of reasonable costs and expenses incurred by the City and its agents, including reasonable attorney fees, in collection of such delinquent assessments and any other costs incurred by the City as a result of such delinquent assessments including, but not limited to, costs paid for draws on a credit facility and the same shall be collectible as a part of or in addition to, the costs of the action. 
(e)  In lieu of foreclosure, any delinquent assessment and the costs, fees and expenses attributable thereto, may be collected pursuant to the Uniform Assessment Collection Act; provided however, that (1) notice is provided to the owner in the manner required by law and this article, and (2) any existing lien of record on the affected parcel for the delinquent assessment is supplanted by the lien resulting from certification of the assessment roll or to the Tax Collector. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 3.02, 3-3-08)  
Sec. 41.5-63. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
The City and its agents, if any, shall maintain the duty to enforce the prompt collection of assessments by the means provided herein. The duties related to collection of assessments may be enforced at the suit of any holder of obligations in a court of competent jurisdiction by mandamus or other appropriate proceedings or actions. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 3.03, 3-3-08)  
ARTICLE IV. - ISSUANCE OF OBLIGATIONS 
 
Sec. 41.5-83. - General authority. 
(a)  The City Council shall have the power and is hereby authorized to provide by ordinance or resolution, at one time or from time to time in series, for the issuance of obligations to fund improvements and any amounts to be paid or accrued in connection with issuance of such obligations including but not limited to capitalized interest, transaction costs and reserve account deposits. 
(b)  The principal of and interest on each series of obligations shall be payable from pledged revenue. At the option of the city council, the City may agree, by ordinance or resolution, to budget and appropriate funds to make up any deficiency in the reserve account established for the obligations or in the payment of the obligations, from other non-ad valorem revenue sources. The city council may also provide, by ordinance or resolution, for a pledge of or lien upon proceeds of such non-ad valorem revenue sources for the benefit of the holders of the obligations. Any such ordinance or resolution shall determine the nature and extent of any pledge of or lien upon proceeds of such non-ad valorem revenue sources. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 4.01, 3-3-08)  
Sec. 41.5-84. - Terms of the obligations. 
The obligations shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates, shall mature at such times as may be determined by ordinance or resolution of the city council, and may be made redeemable before maturity, at the option of the City, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions, all as may be fixed by the city council. Said obligations shall mature not later than 40 years after their issuance. The city council shall determine by ordinance or resolution the form of the obligations, the manner of executing such obligations, and shall fix the denominations of such obligations, the place or places of payment of the principal and interest, which may be at any bank or trust company within or outside of the State of Florida, and such other terms and provisions of the obligations as it deems appropriate. The obligations may be sold at public or private sale for such price or prices as the City council shall determine by ordinance or resolution. The obligations may be delivered to any contractor to pay for the provision of improvements or may be sold in such manner and for such price as the city council may determine by ordinance or resolution to be for the best interests of the City. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 4.02, 3-3-08)  
Sec. 41.5-85. - Variable rate obligations. 
At the option of the city council, obligations may bear interest at a variable rate. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 4.03, 3-3-08)  
Sec. 41.5-86. - Temporary obligations. 
Prior to the preparation of definitive obligations of any series, the city council may, under like restrictions, issue interim receipts, interim certificates, or temporary obligations, exchangeable for definitive obligations when such obligations have been executed and are available for delivery. The city council may also provide for the replacement of any obligations which shall become mutilated, destroyed or lost. Obligations may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things other than those proceedings, conditions or things which are specifically required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 4.04, 3-3-08)  
Sec. 41.5-87. - Anticipation notes. 
In anticipation of the sale of obligations, the city council may, by ordinance or resolution, issue notes and may renew the same from time to time. Such notes may be paid from the proceeds of the obligations, the proceeds of the assessments, the proceeds of the notes and such other legally available moneys as the city council deems appropriate by ordinance or resolution. Said notes shall mature within five years of their issuance and shall bear interest at a rate not exceeding the maximum rate provided by law. The city council may issue obligations or renewal notes to repay the notes. The notes shall be issued in the same manner as the obligations. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 4.05, 3-3-08)  
Sec. 41.5-88. - Taxing power not pledged. 
Obligations issued under the provisions of this article shall not be deemed to constitute a general obligation or pledge of the full faith and credit of the City within the meaning of the Constitution of the State of Florida, but such obligations shall be payable only from pledged revenue and, if applicable, proceeds of the assessments, in the manner provided herein and by the article or resolution authorizing the obligations. The issuance of obligations under the provisions of this article shall not directly or indirectly obligate the City to levy or to pledge any form of ad valorem taxation whatsoever. No holder of any such obligations shall ever have the right to compel any exercise of the ad valorem taxing power on the part of the City to pay any such obligations or the interest thereon or to enforce payment of such obligations or the interest thereon against any property of the City, nor shall such Obligations constitute a charge, lien or encumbrance, legal or equitable, upon any property of the City, except the pledged revenue. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 4.06, 3-3-08)  
Sec. 41.5-89. - Trust funds. 
The pledged revenue received pursuant to the authority of this article shall be deemed to be trust funds, to be held and applied solely as provided in this article and in the article or resolution authorizing issuance of the obligations. Such pledged revenue may be invested by the City, or its designee, in the manner provided by the article or resolution authorizing issuance of the obligations. The pledged revenue upon receipt thereof by the City shall be subject to the lien and pledge of the holders of any obligations or any entity other than the City providing credit enhancement on the obligations. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 4.07, 3-3-08)  
Sec. 41.5-90. - Remedies of holders. 
Any holder of obligations, except to the extent the rights herein given may be restricted by the article or resolution authorizing issuance of the obligations, may, whether at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the state or granted hereunder or under such ordinance or resolution, and may enforce and compel the performance of all duties required by this part, or by such ordinance or resolution, to be performed by the City. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 4.08, 3-3-08)  
Sec. 41.5-91. - Refunding obligations. 
The City may, by ordinance or resolution of the city council, issue obligations to refund any obligations issued pursuant to this article, or any other obligations of the City issued to finance capital improvements, and provide for the rights of the holders hereof. Such refunding obligations may be issued in an amount sufficient to provide for the payment of the principal of, redemption premium, if any, and interest on the outstanding obligations to be refunded. If the issuance of such refunding obligations results in an annual assessment that exceeds the estimated maximum annual assessments set forth in the notice provided pursuant to section 41.5-30 hereof, the city council shall provide notice to the affected property owners in accordance with sections 41.5-29 and 41.5-30 hereof and conduct a public hearing prior to adoption of the annual assessment resolution. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 4.09, 3-3-08)  
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 41.5-110. - Alternative method. 
This article shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for purposes, provisions, and authorizations addressed herein and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to the article and powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing or which may hereafter come into existence. The article, as amended herein, being necessary for the welfare of the inhabitants of the City, including but not limited to the owners and users of property located within the assessment district, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 5.01, 3-3-08)  
Sec. 41.5-111. - Construction of ordinance. 
The provisions of this article shall be liberally construed to affect its purposes and shall be deemed cumulative, supplemental, and alternative authority for the exercise of the powers provided herein. The exercise of the powers provided in this article shall not be subject to the limitations or provisions of any other law or laws, except to the extent expressly provided herein. In the event of any conflict between any provision of this article and any applicable law or laws providing cumulative, supplemental, and/or alternative authority to counties for the exercise of the powers provided herein, the least restrictive in favor of the City's powers shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 05-10, §§ 1—9, 3-1-05; Ord. No. 08-06, § 5.02, 3-3-08)  
Chapter 42 - STREETS, ROADS, BRIDGES AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; animals, ch. 8; buildings and building regulations, ch. 15; businesses and business regulations, ch. 16; emergency services, ch. 23; environement, ch. 24; floods, ch. 26; franchise regulations, ch. 27; health and sanitation, ch. 28; impact fees, ch. 29; solid waste, ch. 41; traffic and vehicles, ch. 44; utilities, ch. 49; waterways, ch. 50; land development code, app. A. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 42-2. - Repair of roads, swales, etc., affected by construction or development. 
The following provisions apply to public roads, swales, shoulders, medians and drainage systems that are affected by construction or development: 
(1)  Preinspection. Preinspection of the subject area by the City Manager or designee will be made. At the request of the owner or contractor, the inspection will be made in the presence of the owner or builder. 
(2)  Final inspection. Final (passing) inspection of the structure(s) under construction in the vicinity of any such damage will be withheld by the City, until repairs satisfactory to the City to the shoulders, swales, medians, and drainage system or other appurtenances are effected by the property owner or contractor or other parties causing the damage. Every effort shall be made to prevent or minimize swale damage during construction and to correct damage at the time it occurs. 
(3)  Definition. "Vicinity" is defined as the building lot, the lot on each side, and the lot across the street from the building lot in platted subdivisions. In nonplatted areas, "vicinity" is the building tract, 100 feet on each side of the tract and frontage equal to the building tract frontage across the road from the building tract. If the construction site has been accessed from a side or rear road, the same conditions shall apply. 
(4)  Damage by construction. In the event of damage to a public right-of-way, the area of the damage will be designated, photographed and marked by the City. In the case of building construction, the holder of the building permit will be required to pay the City the sum of a dollar amount per square foot of damage marked. This dollar amount per square foot will be established by a separate resolution by the City Council. Final (passing) inspection of the permitted work under construction will be granted upon the payment by certified check, cashier's check, business check, cash or money order, for repairs, to be held by the City for repair of damage. 
(5)  Damage by others. In the case of damage by others, repairs will be made within 30 days of notice by the City. Failure to make payment will be cause for seeking payment through the court of jurisdiction in the City. The owner and contractor, however, shall be jointly responsible for damages to the public right-of-way caused by construction activities except damage that is clearly caused by an identified utility company. 
(6)  Deposit accounts, bonds. Licensed contractors and utility companies may make application to establish an annual deposit account of $500.00 or a bond assuring payment, which will be retained by the City, then released when all debts are cleared by the depositor. This deposit is to be used in lieu of withholding the final inspection or the release of a certificate of occupancy. The City will keep the interest on these accounts as an administrative fee. In all cases, the contractor may be allowed to make his/her own repairs under the supervision of the City Manager or designee within 30 days of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, providing said contractor has a deposit account or bond on file. 
(7)  Designated inspector. All inspections shall be made by the City Manager or designee. 
(8)  Deposit of estimated costs. In the event that there is disagreement between the party causing the damage who does not have a deposit account and the City as to the extent and/or responsibility for damage, and to avoid delay, the City will estimate the cost of uncompleted or unsatisfactory repair of the public road, shoulders, swales, medians or drainage systems or other appurtenances, and the party causing the damage will provide a cashier's check, certified check, business check, cash or money order to be held by the City. Funds collected for such damage will be used solely for the repair of the determined damaged area. Repairs shall be completed within 90 days. 
Repairs may be performed either by contractors retained by the City or by City departments. In the event the City departments perform the repairs, the costs of labor, equipment use, equipment replacement, and material from stock or otherwise shall be charged to the budget account for road damage repair moneys. The City Manager or designee shall cause budgets, budget amendments, and budget transfers to be made from the road damage repair account to the appropriate departmental budget, as applicable. 
This amendment may be applied for repairs or other costs associated with road repairs that have occurred this fiscal year, commencing October 1, 1996, that have been performed by the City's departments. 
(9)  Any disputes concerning the repairs required under this section will be resolved by a road damage board consisting of the City Manager or designee, and the president of the Flagler/Palm Coast Home Builders Association or their designees. The decision of this board may be appealed to the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 00-50, § 1, 9-19-00)  
Sec. 42-3. - Installation of utility facilities. 
The State Department of Transportation Utility Accommodation Guide, July 1979 edition, a copy of which is attached to this article and which is adopted as part of this section by reference, shall regulate the location, manner of installation and adjustment of utility facilities in the road rights-of-way in the City. All requirements of this guide will apply except as waived by the City Manager or designee. 
(Ord. No. 00-50, § 1, 9-19-00)  
Sec. 42-4. - Encroachment in right-of-way. 
(a)  Title. This section shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Palm Coast Encroachment Ordinance". 
(b)  Intent. The intent of this section is to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of citizens of the City by providing for the control of items within the right-of-way that may be deemed a safety hazard or encroachment throughout the unincorporated areas of the City. 
(c)  Scope. This section shall be used to enforce and control items within the right-of-way that may be deemed a safety hazard throughout the City. 
(d)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Encroachment means the placement within the right-of-way of any nonfrangible item that can be deemed a safety hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(2)  Hazard means a source of danger. 
(e)  Safety hazards prohibited. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to cause, create, permit, allow or contribute to allowing the continuation or placement of items deemed to be safety hazards within the public right-of-way. 
(f)  Exception. During construction on private property where building permits have been issued, or during installation or repair of utilities, contractors may park equipment or materials essential to the construction or repair operation temporarily in the swale area a minimum of two feet off the paved right-of-way immediately adjacent to the permitted property. Such equipment or materials, when temporarily placed in swales or on shoulders, shall not restrict proper drainage of runoff water and shall be marked clearly with reflective warning signs in accordance with State Department of Transportation standards and visible for a distance of 100 feet. 
(Ord. No. 00-50, § 1, 9-19-00)  
Sec. 42-5. - Operation of spotlights and similar devices from vehicle on right-of-way. 
It is unlawful to shine or operate spotlights, handheld lights, flashlights or similar devices from an automobile or vehicle operated or located on a road right-of-way owned or maintained by the state, the United States or the City. 
(Ord. No. 00-50, § 1, 9-19-00)  
ARTICLE II. - RIGHT-OF-WAY UTILIZATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-50, §§ 1—26, adopted Sept. 19, 2000, included herein as §§ 42-31—42-56, superseded the provisions of Ord. No. 00-15, § 1, adopted March 7, 2000 in their entirety. Formerly said superseded sections pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 42-31. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Right-of-Way Utilization Ordinance". 
(Ord. No. 00-50, § 1, 9-19-00)  
Sec. 42-33. - Intent. 
To promote, protect and improve the safety, health and welfare of the citizens of Palm Coast. This article is for the purpose of providing necessary regulations for use of any City right-of-way within the City and shall apply to all private contractors, private citizens, utility companies and any person or persons proposing to install, construct, maintain or repair any facility or structure within existing or planned rights-of-way, traveled ways or easements, dedicated, or planned to be dedicated, to the public for use within the City whether or not maintained by the City. 
(Ord. No. 00-50, § 3, 9-19-00)  
Sec. 42-34. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means the contractor, company person or persons responsible for the construction, installation, maintenance or repair of the facility or structure being applied for. 
County means the Flagler County Board of County Commissioners or its designee. 
Drainage easement means land in which the public or the City has an easement devoted to, planned, proposed or required for use as drainage system. 
Driveway ingress/egress across public right-of-way to private property. 
Emergency repair means work necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare that would present an immediate threat to any of these if left not repaired. 
Permit means the completed application when approved and signed by the City Engineer or such other officer as may be designated by the City Council. 
Permittee means the contractor, company, person or persons named in the permit. The entity responsible to the City for performing the work as specified by the permit. 
Right-of-way means land in which the state, the department, a county, or municipality owns the fee or has an easement devoted to or required for use as a transportation facility. 
Road means an open way to travel by the public including, but not limited to a street, highway or alley. The term includes associated sidewalks, the road bed, the right-of-way and all culverts, drains, sluices, ditches, water storage areas, waterways, embankments, slopes, retaining walls, bridges, tunnels, and viaducts necessary for the maintenance of travel and all ferries used in connection therewith. 
Swale means a manmade conveyance facility which: 
(1)  Contains contiguous areas of flowing water following a rainfall event, and 
(2)  Is planted with or has stabilized vegetation suitable for soil stabilization, stormwater treatment and nutrient uptake, and 
(3)  Is designed to take into account the soil erodibility, soil percolation, slope, slope length, and drainage area so as to prevent erosion and reduce pollutant concentration of any discharge. 
Traveled way means that portion of the road surface between both edges of the pavement including, but not limited to, turn lanes, tapers, parking lanes, deceleration and accelerations lanes or 12 feet each side of the centerline of the right-of-way of unpaved roads. 
(Ord. No. 00-50, § 4, 9-19-00)  
Sec. 42-35. - Stipulations. 
(a)  The permit provided herein is a license for a permissive use only and the placing of facilities upon/within public property pursuant to the permit shall not operate to create or to vest any property right in the holder thereof. The issuance of a right-of-way utilization permit does not relieve the permit holder of the need for obtaining any other permits that may be required by any other appropriate authorities. A permit may be revoked if the City finds that the work performed thereunder is or will be detrimental to the public interest, such as creating a health or safety hazard or an increase in maintenance requirements. 
(b)  The rights and privileges herein set out are granted only to the extent of the City's right, title and interest in the land to be entered upon and used by the applicant. The applicant will be required at all times to assume all risks of, and defend the City from and against, any and all loss, damage, cost or expense arising in any manner on account of the exercise or attempted exercise by the applicant of the aforesaid rights and privileges. 
(c)  Interference or encroachment. The construction and/or maintenance of a utility or any other facility shall not interfere or encroach upon the property and rights of a prior occupant. 
(d)  In the event of future widening, repair, reconstruction or improvement upon the right-of-way the permittee shall, upon notice by the City, relocate or protect the permitted facilities to clear such construction in a manner acceptable to the City and at no cost to the City. 
(Ord. No. 00-50, § 5, 9-19-00)  
Sec. 42-36. - Supporting regulations. 
(a)  When applicable, the provisions of the latest editions of the following references shall apply: 
(1)  Development and subdivision regulations, as adopted and/or modified by the City. 
(2)  F.S. § 337.401 (and its successors) entitled "Use of Right-of-Way For Utilities Subject To Regulation". 
(3)  F.S. ch. 556, entitled "Underground Facility Damage Prevention and Safety Act". 
(4)  Florida Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction. (F.D.O.T. Specs) 
(5)  Manual on Traffic Controls and Safe Practices for Street and Highway Construction, Maintenance and Utility Operations, Florida Department of Transportation. 
(6)  State of Florida Department of Transportation Utility Accommodation Guide. 
(7)  Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways (MUTCD). 
(8)  Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways (Green Book), as published by the Florida Department of Transportation. 
(b)  In the event of conflict between the provisions of the regulations and specifications referred to in (a) above, and these right-of-way utilization permit regulations, whichever regulation is more restrictive shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 00-50, § 6, 9-19-00)  
Sec. 42-37. - Qualifications of permittee. 
(a)  Subject to the satisfaction of and compliance with requirements contained herein, permits may be issued to the following: 
(1)  Utility corporations or companies that will be servicing the installed facility. 
(2)  Contractors responsible for the installation, maintenance or repair of any facility or structure subject to these regulations. 
(3)  Private citizens, corporations or organizations with a reasonable and legitimate purpose in using the right-of-way, which purpose poses no threat or danger to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 00-50, § 7, 9-19-00)  
Sec. 42-38. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Scheduled short side service connections with no pavement or sidewalk cut, or road or sidewalk crossings, and all scheduled maintenance repair (i.e., pole replacement or placement in existing pole lines) with no change in location or alignment, splice pits or line repair not involving subterranean crossing or removal of roads, sidewalks, etc. in the right-of-way, where limits of excavation are not in or within six feet of the edge of the traveled way will not require an individual permit. The requirements governing construction, clean-up and restoration contained herein will, however, apply to such activities as if set forth in detail. 
(b)  On approved City reconstruction projects, within the construction limits, permit applications need not be submitted for approval provided the proposed relocation and/or construction has been approved and coordinated with the City Engineer. Timely coordination in relocation of utilities and other obstructions, between the City Engineer and the contractor for a construction or reconstruction project is required to be observed. Construction work outside of the proposed construction limits, determined not to be an integral part of the highway construction project or scheduled after completion of the project, will require permitting in the normal manner. 
(c)  Utility companies may apply for a general permit to cover residential unit connections where the work involved requires disturbance to the right-of-way. The general permit shall describe, in general terms, the routine services to be provided, the general location of transmission and distribution lines with respect to the roadway pavement, the methods to be used in providing the services and the methods proposed for repairing any damage to the City roads or rights-of-way, as well as statements as to the repair of any damaged private or public property. A statement listing the units supplied with service connections the previous month shall be sent to the City Engineer on the first work day of each month, together with the appropriate fee for those units. Failure to properly report the activities involved or to pay the fees required shall result in revocation of the general permit. 
(d)  Emergency repair. Emergency repair as defined in section 42-34(f) above, may be performed without obtaining a permit prior to such repair. Emergency repair work shall be completed in accordance with applicable directives from the City or other authority as expeditiously as possible. The City shall be notified on all emergency repair work by 10:00 a.m., the workday following beginning of such repair work and the proper applications made at that time. 
(e)  Wireless Communication Facilities . Wireless communication facilities permitted in accordance with section 42-108 do not require a permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-50, § 8, 9-19-00; Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 2, 2-6-18)  
Sec. 42-39. - Responsibility for compliance—All applicants. 
(a)  The applicant assumes full and total responsibility for compliance with these regulations, supporting regulations, additional requirements of the permit, with City, state or federal laws, ordinances or codes. 
(b)  The applicant shall agree to indemnify and hold harmless the City from any costs that occur as a result of the issuance of the permit and the work performed thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 00-50, § 10, 9-19-00)  
Sec. 42-40. - Notification to other agencies; utility installations. 
(a)  The applicant for utility installation shall notify all other right-of-way users in the immediate vicinity of the proposed construction/installation locations, either through stating the work proposed by the applicant and enclosing a plan of the proposed construction/installation or by notifying Sunshine State One-Call of Florida (SSOCOF) in accordance with F.S. § 556.102(7). Any location conflicts or objections to the applicant's proposed construction/installation by affected right-of-way users must be forwarded in writing to the applicant and the City Engineer within seven days of the proposed work. The City will hold a permit application for a period of seven days to allow time for the receipt of objections to the proposed use of the right-of-way. For the purpose of expediting the handling of a permit application, the seven-day period may be shortened by including with the permit application a separate statement or letter from the other right-of-way users stating that said users have no objections to the immediate issuance of the right-of-way utilization permit for the proposed construction. 
(b)  The applicant shall verify the notification to other users by completing the section provided in the application for such verification. It is the full and complete responsibility of the applicant to determine that all other users are notified of the proposed work. Any work performed without such notification, shall be at the sole risk of the applicant and may be stopped by the City if deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 00-50, § 10, 9-19-00)  
Sec. 42-41. - Location standards—Utility installations. 
(a)  The primary concern in the design and location of utility installations is protection of the right-of-way and the safety of the highway user. In all cases, full consideration shall be given to sound Engineering principles. 
(b)  Where possible, all longitudinal underground utility facilities should be placed in an area within seven feet inside the outer edge of the right-of-way line except where potable water and sanitary sewers lie along the same side of the road, requiring a separation of ten feet between those utility lines. These, and other similar situations will be considered on a case by case basis. Above ground facilities should be placed at or close as practical to the right-of-way line. Under no condition shall a utility installation interfere with the roadway storm drain system. 
(c)  Proposed location of poles, fire hydrants, water meters, telephone and cable boxes, etc., should take into consideration future road widening, sidewalk, storm drainage or other construction. Minimum guidelines for roadside recovery area are shown in the State of Florida Department of Transportation Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways. Any deviation from those requirements require prior approval by the City. 
(d)  Water meter boxes and telephone boxes shall be installed flush with or below the ground. If installation must protrude to the extent such boxes may be a hindrance to drainage maintenance or mowing, they must be located within two feet of the right-of-way line whether their parallel line runs along the right-of-way line or not: Water meter boxes, telephone boxes or television cable boxes shall not be placed within the limits of a proposed or existing sidewalk, curb, gutter or bike path. 
(e)  No person shall place or maintain upon any City roadway any sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. 
(Ord. No. 00-50, § 11, 9-19-00)  
Sec. 42-42. - Driveways. 
(a)  Residential driveways. Driveways entering upon a paved City street shall be constructed of portland cement concrete, or of such other rigid paving material as the City Engineer may approve, shall be a minimum of ten-feet wide at the right-of-way line and 16 feet wide at the roadway edge. That widening may be provided by a taper. Driveway shoulder within the road right-of-way shall be a be a minimum of two feet in width and shall be stabilized and sodded. Driveway thickness on the right-of-way shall be either six inches on firmly compacted subgrade of clean granular material or five inches on three inches of limerock or shell base. These concrete thickness may be reduced by one inch by the addition of six inches × six inches re-mesh or fiber mesh concrete reinforcing wire. Culvert pipe shall be of the size and set in the location (horizontal and vertical) established by the City and required by the permit. Mitered or tapered end sections are required on driveway pipes, except where otherwise approved by the City Engineer. Culvert pipes with less than 12 inches of cover below the bottom of driveway pavement to the top of pipe shall either be constructed of reinforced concrete or encased in concrete from the middle of the pipe to the bottom of the concrete driveway. For driveways entering upon a cul-de-sac and for driveways entering a flag lot the minimum width at the roadway edge and the placement of the culvert pipe will be modified to best suit the actual conditions at the site. Existing residential driveways, cut or destroyed by utility installation may be re-constructed to the same section as that original driveway with prior approval from the City. All residential driveways are required to be permitted, in accordance with the above criteria. 
(b)  Commercial driveways. Requirements for commercial driveway shall be dependent on the nature of the business being served by the driveway. As a minimum, however, commercial driveways shall be constructed of portland cement concrete six-inches thick on six-inch thick compacted limerock or shell base or eight-inches thick on four inches of limerock or shell base. Commercial driveway width depends on the type traffic scheduled to utilize the driveway. As a minimum, the width at the right-of-way line for a one-way driveway shall be 14 feet and for a two-way driveway shall be 24 feet. Minimum width at the roadway pavement edge shall be not less than 48 feet for one-way commercial driveways and not less than 64 feet for a two-way commercial driveway. 
The widening shall be provided by a taper not less than 20 feet long as measured along the centerline of the driveway. Shoulders for commercial driveways shall be six feet in width, stabilized and sodded. In addition, turn lanes or acceleration and deceleration lanes may be required, dependent on the road involved and the traffic on that road. 
Culvert pipes for commercial driveways shall be reinforced concrete pipe culverts, with mitered end sections. Culverts shall be sized and located, horizontally and vertically, as specified by the City and shown on the permit. Commercial driveway damaged by utility installations shall be re-constructed to the section described herein. 
(c)  Portland cement concrete material. 
(1)  Residential drives shall be constructed using material with a minimum 28 day compressive strength of 3,000 pounds per square inch. 
(2)  Commercial drives shall be constructed using Florida Department of Transportation Class 1 material with a minimum 28 day compressive strength of 3,000 pounds per square inch placed with a maximum slump of five inches. 
(d)  Temporary driveways. Temporary access for residential or commercial units from City roads will be permitted under the following conditions: 
(1)  Responsible party submits application for a permit. 
(2)  City representatives will visit the site and determine the size, type and length of culvert pipe needed to provide proper drainage (if any). 
(3)  Permit will state size, type, length and elevations for culvert installation, as well as width of access point at the roadway and at the right-of-way line, and any other conditions. 
(4)  For entrances, with sufficient cover over the culvert to protect the drainage structure, where heavy equipment is expected to use the entrance on an intermittent basis, no surface material will normally be required. For entrances expected to carry a high concentration of heavy vehicles, the surface shall be stabilized with limerock or shell. 
(5)  For driveways, installed to provide temporary access prior to constructing on the property, the surface shall be stabilized sufficiently to permit passage of vehicular traffic without rutting. 
(6)  All culvert pipes shall be back-filled with select granular material, compacted to a tight homogeneous mass. The permittee shall be responsible for maintaining the access in a passable condition. The City will not regrade or surface a temporary entrances. 
(7)  Permits for temporary driveways are valid for one year from date of issue and a permanent access permit must be obtained prior to that time. Such permits may be extended for another one year period, provided the permittee demonstrates an acceptable reason for the delay in obtaining a permanent permit. A right-of-way utilization permit for a permanent access shall be required for any access from a City street to residential or commercial building. 
(8)  The fee for temporary driveways shall be the same as for a permanent driveway; however no additional fee will be charged to replace a temporary driveway with a permanent access to the same parcel or tract of land, provided the permitted temporary driveway is removed, or becomes the permanent access. Permanent driveways shall meet the requirements listed hereinafter. The City will not participate in the installation of any access from/to City road(s) for any type access. 
(Ord. No. 00-50, § 12, 9-19-00)  
Sec. 42-44. - Permit application. 
(a)  A single application form furnished by the permitting office shall be used when applying for a right-of-way utilization permit. Applications forms may be obtained at the City's Development Services Department or at such other location as is determined by the City. Completed applications shall be submitted to that office. 
(b)  Information provided by the applicant in completing the application form shall be typewritten or printed in ink. The application must be legible and all requested information must be provided. Instructions for completing the application are printed on the backside of the application. Incomplete applications will not be accepted. 
(c)  Upon approval of the application and payment of the fee, one copy of the approved application (permit) with attachments will be returned to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 00-50, § 14, 9-19-00)  
Sec. 42-45. - Permits. 
(a)  All work performed on City rights-of-way must be in accordance with the terms and requirements of the permit. Additional work or revisions, not authorized by the original terms of the permit, will require a new permit or modification of the existing permit. 
(b)  The permit must be available at all times at the work site while work is being performed. Any work in progress on, or use of, the right-of-way without a valid permit available at the site, shall be suspended until such time as a valid permit is produced on the site. 
(c)  The City shall have the right to inspect and approve materials affecting the right-of-way during all phases of the work. Final inspection and acceptance of work by the City must be obtained to document the completion of the work. Work will be considered incomplete until that portion of the permit indicating final inspection and approval has been signed and dated by the City. 
(d)  Permits shall become null and void if the work authorized is not commenced within 90 days of the scheduled start date, or the permit approval date, or is not completed within one year from the date of issuance of the permit. That 90-day requirement may be extended for a singular period of 90 days upon written application for such an extension by the permittee, listing those reasons for the delay, which must be those beyond the permittee's control. If work has already commenced, within the 90-day period, and the one year expiration date arrives, the permit may be extended for a singular period of not more than six months upon written request by the applicant. The permit shall also become null and void if the work authorized by such permits is suspended or abandoned for a period of 90 days at any time after the work is commenced, except for delays caused by acts of God, or such causes beyond the permittee's control, provided however that the permittee notifies the City Engineer of such causes as soon there after as possible. Except for delays beyond the permittee's control, before such work can again be commenced or completed, a new permit must first be applied for and obtained as for an original permit. Permit fees for the work to be done will be assessed as for an original permit. 
(e)  Letter requests for modification of permits will be processed in accordance with the provisions of section 42-44 hereof. The letter requesting modification must verify that the other right-of-way users have no objection to the requested modification. 
(Ord. No. 00-50, § 15, 9-19-00)  
Sec. 42-46. - Utility or stormwater crossings. 
(a)  General considerations. The normal crossing under paved surfaces will be made without cutting the pavement. Pavement cuts will be considered only under unusual conditions and permission must be requested in writing. 
Casings will be required for crossing of underground utilities under existing pavement, where the carrier conduit is of insufficient strength due to composition or depth of cover. No jetting (air, water, etc.) is authorized within any rights-of-way in the City. 
(1)  All subterranean crossings of a traveled way, 30 feet or more in width, shall require a track type bore and jack, with encased auger. Crossings of traveled ways less than 30 feet wide may be made by boring, jacking, pushing, pulling, driving or some combination of these, having a positive horizontal and vertical control. Pits required for these crossings must be constructed no closer than six feet from the edge of the traveled way. 
(2)  Closed end jacking may be permitted for pipes with a maximum outside diameter of three inches. The pipe shall extend a minimum of six feet beyond the edge of the pavement, except where connections to another utility, closer than the specified six feet, is necessary. 
(3)  All other pipe must be jacked with the end open or bore and jacked and extend a minimum of six feet beyond the edge of pavement or as otherwise approved by the City. 
(4)  If mechanical boring is used, the tip of the drill head shall not precede the end of the jacked pipe by more than two inches. 
(5)  All such crossing shall be continuous operation and shall be completed and the pits backfilled and properly compacted and the site cleaned up and sodded prior to ceasing the operation. 
(6)  Directional boring, or methods other than those described above may be permitted, provided the applicant can demonstrate expertise in the proposed method to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. 
(7)  Open street cuts. 
a.  Traffic through the construction area shall be maintained in accordance with the requirements shown on the permit. 
b.  Restoration of the right-of-way will be in accordance with the permit requirements. 
(b)  Canals, ditches and swales. 
(1)  The minimum depth of cover for crossings under facilities identified as part of the City's primary drainage system, and City's secondary drainage facilities, which are of comparable size to the primary facilities, shall be 18 inches from the top of the utility installation to the design or existing (whichever is the lowest elevation) canal or ditch bottom. The minimum depth of cover for crossings under all other canals and ditches shall be 24 inches from the top of the utility installation to the design, or existing, ditch bottom whichever is lowest. 
(2)  The minimum vertical distance for crossings over any waterway shall be 24 inches from the bottom of the utility to the 100-year flood elevation, except those ditches or waterways where small boat traffic can be expected, where the minimum clear vertical clearance shall be 48 inches. No overhead crossings of navigatible canals will be permitted. The minimum vertical clearance shall be implemented for the full length of the crossing from the top-of-bank to top-of-bank. The crossing shall not increase to the existing 100-year flood elevation. A childproof barrier shall be required for crossings over waterways. The crossing shall not impede maintenance equipment or maintenance operations of the waterway. 
(3)  Drainage swales shall be restored to a design grade and any damage to swale area shall be fully repaired, including sodding, to conform to such condition as the swale existed prior to construction or to such other shape and grade as may be approved by the City Engineer. Any telephone, cable and fiber lines, which include, but are not limited to, RJ 11, copper, wire, fiber, aluminum coaxial, DSL, and T1 lines, placed in drainage swales located within City rights-of-way must be buried and maintained at a minimum of 24 inches below the bottom of the design grade of the drainage swale. For purposes of this subsection, "design grade" is the required grade as shown in the City of Palm Coast Technical Manual, Engineering Design Standards, Typical Residential Swale Profile, as may be amended, or as shown in the originally approved construction drawings for the property. Utility lines that are not maintained at the required depth and are damaged shall be repaired by the utility provider at the provider's cost and shall be re-installed and maintained at the required minimum depth. 
(c)  Faulty workmanship or materials. Faulty workmanship shall be repaired within 30 days of notification from the City to like or better condition than existing prior to construction unless a longer period is approved by the City Engineer. 
Any repairs or replacement not completed within the 30 day time limit may result in refusal to issue further right-of-way permits to the applicant concerned. The City reserves the right to repair such damages, after the 30 day time limit, with its own forces and charge the contractor and/or owner for 150 percent of the cost of such repairs. 
(Ord. No. 00-50, § 16, 9-19-00; Ord. No. 2018-17 , § 2, 8-21-18, effective 11-20-18)  
Sec. 42-47. - Construction standards. 
(a)  All construction shall be in accordance with current City road construction specifications and standards, the subdivision regulations, utility standards and this article. 
(b)  Buried utility lines . Minimum vertical clearance for direct buried cable, conduit casings, utility lines, and duct systems shall be per location criteria for utilities in the State of Florida Department of Transportation Utility Accommodation Manual or in accordance with the requirements of the City's cable TV regulatory ordinance [article IV of this chapter] where that ordinance applies. Coaxial and glass fiber cables, including but not limited to, RJ 11, copper, wire, fiber, aluminum coaxial, DSL, and T1 lines shall be buried a minimum of 24 inches below the design grade, and shall be maintained at the installation depth (a minimum of 24 inches below design grade). For purposes of this subsection, "design grade" is the required grade as shown in the originally approved construction drawings for the property. Buried utility lines that are not maintained at the required depth and are damaged shall be repaired by the utility provider at the provider's cost and shall be re-installed and maintained at the required minimum depth. 
(c)  Storm drainage structures. Installation shall be in accordance with the City subdivision regulations, the public works manual. 
(d)  Backfill and compaction. Backfill with clean granule material and testing requirements shall be in accordance with City requirements and this article. Backfill shall be in accordance with the State of Florida Department of Transportation Utility Accommodation Manual unless otherwise stated in permit requirements. If requested by the applicant, special back filling materials and/or methods will be considered. 
(e)  Traffic signals. Flagler County is responsible for all traffic signals located on county Roads within Palm Coast. 
Utilities or contractors working at intersections where traffic signals are located must contact the County's Engineer for location of underground signal wiring, both within the roadway and the right-of-way. Damages incurred to signal wiring will be the responsibility of the permittee. Repairs may be made by contract personnel, but must be made with the concurrence and under the requirements as set forth by the City Engineer. In some instances, repairs may be made by Flagler County, with total costs billed to the permittee. Permittee shall be fully responsible for damage or loss of any traffic sign or control device caused by any commission or omission, neglect, or misconduct in the performance of the work by and/or for the permittee. 
(f)  Traffic signs. When traffic signs are located within the area of approved installation or construction, the permittee is required to notify the City's Department of Public Works to arrange for removal and/or relocation. Costs incurred by the City for the removal and resetting, or relocations of signs will be billed to the permittee. Permittee shall be fully responsible for the replacement or cost of any traffic sign or device removed or damaged due to its operation, relocation/re-setting shall comply with MUTCD. 
(g)  Pavement markings. 
(1)  Utility companies or contractors having permitted installation or construction within paved sections of roadway that disturb or destroy current pavement markings shall be required to replace said pavement markings with approved thermoplastic marking material and to restore such markings to their original condition. 
(2)  When new turn, bypass, deceleration and/or acceleration lanes are constructed in accordance with approved plans, a striping plan shall be submitted for the approval of the City Engineer. Striping shall be accomplished by the permittee in accordance with the approved plans. 
(h)  Tunneling or jetting within public rights-of-way is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 00-50, § 17, 9-19-00; Ord. No. 2018-17 , § 2, 8-21-18, effective 11-20-18)  
Sec. 42-48. - Testing. 
(a)  Density tests conducted in accordance with applicable F.D.O.T. specifications for determination of the specified backfill, base, and other compaction shall be made be an independent testing laboratory, licensed in the State of Florida and approved by the City, or by a certified technician utilizing a method approved by the City Engineer at the expense of the permittee and copies of all reports from those technicians or testing laboratory shall be submitted to the City Engineer. 
(b)  If any test results are unsatisfactory, the permittee shall re-excavate and recompact the backfill at its expense until the desired compaction is obtained. Additional compaction tests shall be made to each side of an unsatisfactory test, as directed by the City, to determine the extent of re-excavation and recompaction necessary. 
(c)  Concrete compressive strength tests are required and copies of the results of such tests shall be submitted to the City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 00-50, § 18, 9-19-00)  
Sec. 42-49. - Inspection. 
(a)  The permittee shall notify the City Engineer at least 24 hours prior to beginning work. The date, time and location regarding the work must be given at the time of this notification. The City Engineer shall be immediately notified of any revisions to the schedule. 
(b)  Underground facilities (buried cable, water lines, drainage structures, etc.) will not be covered until inspected and approved by the City Engineer or designee except in instances where the permittee has sufficient density tests to confirm proper compaction has been obtained and leaving the facility uncovered would create an unsafe or unsound condition. Cable facilities need not be left exposed when buried by the direct burial process provided the contractor has demonstrated his competence in such construction. The City reserves the right to require exposure of all or portions of the installation to verify correct depth of cover. 
(c)  Failure of the permittee to obtain the appropriate inspections prior to proceeding with work shall not relieve the permittee from re-excavation or other measures necessary for the inspection of the work and cost of such re-excavation shall be the permittee's sole expense. 
(d)  Any items not in compliance with these requirements will be immediately corrected by the permittee. 
(e)  The inspector's signature on the completion line on the permit terminates that permit and no further work may be done under that permit except such repairs or area clean up as are directed by the City Engineer. 
(f)  Reinspections. Permittee shall be charged an additional fee for each reinspection required should permittee call for an inspection and not be prepared or have said work ready for requested inspection. Reinspection fees shall be established by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 00-50, § 19, 9-19-00)  
Sec. 42-50. - Working hours. 
(a)  Operations permitted by this regulation which require inspection by City forces shall normally be conducted from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, excluding holidays. Any deviation from those hours requires prior approval from the City, and any overtime payments for inspection will be billed at current manpower expense rates. Those charges will be paid by the permittee, in accordance with current City billing requirements. A minimum of two working days notice, in writing, requesting deviation from normal working hours, must be provided. Such written notice is not required if the work times have been included as a part of the permit. Emergency repairs are excluded from this time restriction. 
(Ord. No. 00-50, § 20, 9-19-00)  
Sec. 42-51. - Maintenance of traffic. 
(a)  Except for residential driveways and emergency repairs, if the work involves construction on or near a traveled way, the permittee shall provide the City Engineer with its proposed maintenance of traffic plan at least five working days prior to commencement of any work on the project and shall not commence work until the plan has been approved by the City Engineer. Notification to affected emergency agencies (fire, rescue, police, etc.) shall be the responsibility of the City Engineer; however the permittee may be required to notify the news media in some instances, including the possibility of paid advertisements, and to bear the costs of such notifications. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided, all roads within the limits of the permit shall be kept open to traffic. When approved by the City, traffic may be by-passed over an approved detour route. The permittee shall keep the portion of the project being used by the public, whether it be through or local traffic, in such condition that traffic will be adequately accommodated. He shall furnish, erect and maintain barricades, warning signs, delineators, flagmen or pilot cars in accordance with the Manual on Traffic Controls and Safe Practices for Street Operations published by the Florida Department of Transportation. He shall also provide and maintain temporary approaches or crossings, and intersections with trails, roads, streets, businesses, parking lots, residences, garages and farms in a safe condition. The permittee shall bear all expense of maintaining the traffic over the section of road undergoing construction and of maintaining such approaches, crossings, intersections and detours and other features as may be necessary. Materials stored at the site of the work shall be so placed as to cause no obstruction to vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Any equipment or materials stored within the right-of-way shall be properly barricaded. No roadway shall be closed or re-opened except by express permission of the City Engineer. 
(c)  When an open cut of a road has been authorized, and a detour/diversion traffic route has not been requested or approved by the City, no lane closure will be authorized prior to 8:00 a.m. or later than 3:00 p.m. without specific and individual approval. In the case of a two-way/two-lane road one lane traffic may be authorized during this period. In the case of a two-way/four-lane road, two-way/two-lane traffic will normally be required. 
(Ord. No. 00-50, § 21, 9-19-00)  
Sec. 42-52. - Restoration and clean up. 
(a)  The permittee shall ensure that all monuments, section corners and property markers shall be protected, or replaced, at his expense. 
(b)  The permittee shall be liable for all damage, injury or loss to persons or property of any character arising from or resulting from any act of commission, omission, neglect or misconduct in the performance of work by the permittee, his employees or agents. The permittee shall be further liable for damage, injury or loss to persons or property arising from or as a result of defective work or materials. 
(c)  Where any work disturbs the area outside the roadway, the permittee shall insure that the area is completely restored to a like or better condition than that which existed prior to construction or, in a manner acceptable to the City. Sod that is removed shall be replaced with sod of the same type. Unsodded areas shall be graded and then seeded and mulched or sodded if required by the City Engineer. The permittee is responsible for establishing a dense stand of permanent-type grass within a reasonable time. Shrubbery that is removed or destroyed shall be replaced with plants of equal types and sizes. Sodding and grassing and mulching operations are to begin immediately after construction/installation has been completed. All landscape items damaged or disturbed during construction shall be replaced by the permittee at its expense, as directed by the City. Any plantings on private property damaged or disturbed by the permittee shall be replaced to the satisfaction of the City and property owner unless otherwise directed by the City Engineer. All debris shall be removed by the permittee at its expense. 
(d)  Existing utilities that are damaged, destroyed or temporarily removed by the permittee shall be replaced or repaired by the permittee at the direction of the owner, with no expense to the City or of the existing utility. 
(e)  The permittee shall ensure that work site cleanup and property restoration follows construction/installation operations without delay. In order to maintain an acceptable site, debris and waste material shall be removed from the site daily and swale trenching shall be coordinated to minimize overnight swale drainage blockage. Site maintenance, along with ongoing cleanup and final property restoration shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 00-50, § 22, 9-19-00)  
Sec. 42-53. - Safety and convenience. 
(a)  The safety provisions of applicable laws, ordinances, building codes and construction codes shall be observed. 
The permittee shall take all reasonable precautions for initiating, maintaining and supervising all programs relating to the safety of all persons and property affected by or involved in the performance of its work under a right-of-way permit. The permittee will take all reasonable precautions to prevent damage, injury or loss to: 
(1)  All persons who may be affected by the performance of its work, including employees; 
(2)  All materials and equipment at the work site location; and 
(3)  All property, public or private, at or surrounding the work site. 
In any emergency affecting the safety of persons or property, the permittee will act with reasonable care and discretion to prevent any damage, injury or loss. 
(Ord. No. 00-50, § 23, 9-19-00)  
Sec. 42-54. - Warranty. 
(a)  Permits shall be issued with the understanding that the permittee shall unconditionally guarantee all work performed under the terms of the permit for a period of one year from the date of completion as certified on the permit by the City unless otherwise required. 
If inadequate design, settlement, or faulty construction of a deceleration/acceleration lane, authorized by a permit issued by the City, results in an inverted crown or ponding affect at the juncture of said lane and the traveled way of the main road within the one-year period or within any warranty period required by county regulations: 
(1)  A complete overlay of the deceleration/acceleration or the right-of-way lane and the traveled way of the main road, and other auxiliary lanes within the right-of-way, will be required in accordance with the City requirements. 
(2)  Any failure shall be repaired by the permittee, at the direction of the City, within 30 working days, unless the urgency of the problem requires a quicker reaction time. 
(3)  For work exceeding a construction cost of $2,500.00 the permittee will be required to post surety guaranteeing the work for a period of one year after acceptance by the City. The surety may be in the form of a cashier's check, money order, or letter of credit, or cash and shall be in the amount of ten percent of the cost of the construction in the right-of-way. For projects where construction in the right-of-way costs exceed $10,000.00 the guarantee may be in the form of a surety bond, or any of the forms listed above. Utility installations may be guaranteed by posting a bond, suitable in size to cover its average day-to-day operations for a 90-day period and in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney. 
(Ord. No. 00-50, § 24, 9-19-00)  
Sec. 42-55. - Landscaping and irrigation systems. 
(a)  General requirements. 
(1)  Installation of any landscaping and irrigation systems, and/or related materials within dedicated or planned public rights-of-way is prohibited without the express approval of the City. This approval shall be based on issuance of a right-of-way utilization permit authorizing such installation or construction. Maintenance of any of the aforementioned project will be the responsibility of the signatories. 
(2)  Persons and equipment maintaining any authorized landscaping or irrigation systems, must perform such maintenance work in a manner so as not to create safety hazards or obstruct vision or normal traffic flow. Spray patterns shall not cross pedestrian walk ways nor shall any irrigation water be allowed to fall on a travelway, except as hereinafter provided. 
(3)  If, in the opinion of the City, damages in or adjacent to the right-of-way are deemed to have been caused by construction, then maintenance or restoration of a landscaping or irrigation system will be the responsibility of the right-of-way utilization permittee. 
(b)  Landscaping. 
(1)  No landscaping, or improvement to existing landscaping shall be planted or constructed within the right-of-way unless such landscape construction plans have been approved by the City Engineer and a valid right-of-way utilization permit has been authorized and issued by the City. 
(2)  Landscaping in a median island and within 100 feet of a median nose shall be installed and maintained at a maximum height of 24 inches above road grade at the center line of travelway. Normally trees will not be allowed to be installed in medians, unless clear zone and clear sight distance zone requirements will allow installation without violation of those clear zone requirements. 
(3)  A four foot minimum mowing strip shall be maintained between plantings and the curb or pavement edge. 
(4)  No rocks, boulders, railroad cross ties, heavy timbers or other obstructions, shall be used within the right-of-way without special and specific written permission. 
(5)  On divided or undivided highways or roads, trees will not be allowed to be planted or to remain in the clear recovery zone. The required minimum width of the clear recovery zone adjacent to the traveled way is shown in the Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways (Green Book) as published by the Florida Department of Transportation. Trees and other plants on private property shall not be allowed to overhang the right-of-way to the extent they screen traffic sight distances at intersections. 
(6)  Poisonous or exotic pest plant species shall not be planted in any planned or dedicated public rights-of-way. 
(7)  Landscaping planned for either a parkway or median strip will not be authorized if, in the opinion of the City, such installation would possibly create a safety hazard or sight obstruction. Safety of the public will be a predominant factor in all decisions. The applicant shall demonstrate at the time of the permitting that the sight distance will not be impaired to the motoring public in any direction by landscaping and plantings now or in the future. The Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and the Florida Manual on Uniform Minimum Standards for Design, Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways shall be used as a reference. 
(c)  Irrigation systems. 
(1)  No irrigation systems, or appurtenances thereto, shall be placed within the right-of-way, unless irrigation construction plans have been approved by the City and a valid right-of-way utilization permit, applied for by a county or state licensed contractor, has been authorized by the City. 
(2)  Sprinkler heads within the safe recovery area must be of the pop-up type (no stand-ups authorized). Feeder hoses with drip lines may be used. The sprinkler system must be installed in such a manner so that it will not create a traffic or safety hazard. 
(3)  Underground systems and crossings will be made in accordance with the utility requirements of this regulation, and any deviation from that regulation will result in issuance of a violation notice and revocation of the permit. 
(4)  Minimum cover, other than beneath the traveled way or within six feet of the traveled way, for irrigations systems shall be 12 inches, if piping is used, and six inches, if a feeder hose with drip line is used. 
(5)  No jetting (air, water etc.) is authorized within any public rights-of-way. 
(6)  Pumps, wells, electrical control devices, and other associated items, relating to irrigation systems, unless specifically approved by the City, will not be permitted in the public rights-of-way. 
(7)  Irrigation systems shall not be allowed to be constructed, either in the public right-of-way, or on private property, that are designed or constructed in such a manner that water flows from sprinkler heads over roads, sidewalks and/or bike paths that have been constructed for and used by the public, unless the permit allows, and the permittee specifically agrees, that the irrigation system will not be operated during the hours that pedestrians and cyclists are apt to be passing. Unauthorized irrigation systems such as herein described will be subject to legal action and penalty as prescribed by law and/or revocation of the "Right-of-way Utilization Permit". 
(Ord. No. 00-50, § 25, 9-19-00)  
Sec. 42-56. - Other obstructions. 
Placement or allowance of encroachments within the public right-of-way that are deemed to be a safety or traffic hazard, shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 00-50, § 26, 9-19-00)  
ARTICLE III. - ROAD MSBU ORDINANCE 
 
Sec. 42-76. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Road MSBU Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 1, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 42-77. - Authority for article. 
This article is enacted pursuant to Article VIII, Section 1, Florida Constitution of 1968, as amended, and other applicable provisions of law. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 1, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 42-78. - Findings. 
It is hereby found, determined and declared by the City Council (the "Council") of Palm Coast, Florida (the "City"), as follows: 
(1)  Pursuant to Article VIII, Section 1, Florida Constitution of 1968, as amended, the City has such powers of self-government as is provided by general or special law, and may enact City ordinances not inconsistent with general or special law. F.S. § 125.01, authorizes the City Council to provide for roads and related facilities and to establish municipal service benefit units within which may be provided such services, from funds derived from special assessments. 
(2)  It is necessary for the public health, safety and general welfare of the City and its citizens that provision be made: 
a.  For the acquisition, construction, and improvement from time to time of roads and related drainage improvements in various areas of the City, which serve a public purpose (the "projects"); 
b.  For the maintenance from time to time of such projects or other roads and related drainage improvements in the City (the "services"); and 
c.  For the funding of such projects and services through the levy and collection of special assessments in addition to or in lieu of other sources available to the City. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 1, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 42-79. - Projects; services. 
The City is hereby authorized to establish by resolution one or more municipal service benefit units ("MSBU") within which shall be provided the projects and the services, as the same may be determined by the City Council from time to time in accordance with applicable law. The City may pay out of its general fund or out of any special fund that may be provided for that purpose, such portion of the cost of any project or services as it may deem proper. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 1, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 42-80. - Special assessments. 
The City may finance the costs of the projects and/or the services to be provided in an MSBU by levying and collecting special assessments on the specially benefited property within the MSBU, as provided below. Special assessments shall be levied only on benefited real property at a rate of assessment based on the special benefit accruing to such property from such projects and/or services, as applicable, when the projects and/or the services funded by the special assessments provide a benefit which is different in type or degree from benefits provided to the community as a whole; and the amount of the special assessment for each parcel of land is not in excess of the proportional benefits as compared to other special assessments on other parcels of real property in the MSBU. 
(1)  Procedure for levy of special assessments. 
a.  Method of proration. Special assessments against property deemed to be benefited by the projects and/or the services shall be assessed upon the property specially benefited by the improvement or program in proportion to the benefits to be derived therefrom, such special benefits to be determined and prorated according to the method of apportionment based upon one or more of the following methods or any combination thereof: 
1.  The foot frontage of the respective properties specially benefited by the project; 
2.  The square footage of the respective properties specially benefited by the project; 
3.  The assessed value of the respective properties specially benefited by the project; or 
4.  Such other method as shall apportion the assessments equitably among the specially benefited property. 
b.  Resolution declaring projects, services and assessments. When the City may determine to construct any project, or provide any services, and defray the whole or any part of the cost thereof by special assessments, the City Council shall so declare by resolution stating the nature of the proposed project and, if applicable, the services, designating, if applicable, the streets to be so improved, and the location of the project or services, the portion of the cost thereof to be paid by special assessments, the manner in which the assessments shall be made, when the assessments are to be paid, and what part, if any, shall be paid from the general fund or other funds of the City. Such resolution shall also designate the lands to be included in the MSBU and upon which the special assessments shall be levied, and in describing the lands it shall be sufficient to describe them as "all lots and lands adjoining and contiguous or bounding and abutting upon such improvements, or specially benefitted thereby, and further designated by the assessment plat described below." The resolution shall also state the total estimated cost of the project and, if applicable, the assessed cost of the services and the assessment rate for such services. Such estimated cost may include the cost of construction or reconstruction; the cost of all labor and materials; the cost of all lands, property rights, easements and franchises acquired; the cost of plans and specifications, surveys and estimates of costs and of revenues; the cost of Engineering and legal services; all other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of such construction or reconstruction and, if applicable, the provision of the services; administrative expenses; and such other costs as may be necessary or incident to the projects and/or services, including reimbursement to the City of money advanced for such costs. 
c.  Assessment plat. At the time of the adoption of the resolution specified in subsection (a)(2) above, there shall be on file with the City Manager or designee, an assessment plat showing the area to be assessed, with a description of the projects and, if applicable, the services, which description may include preliminary or final plans or drawings, and an estimate of cost of the proposed projects and, if applicable, the services, which assessment plat, description and estimate shall be open to inspection of the public. 
d.  Publication of resolution. Upon the adoption of the resolution specified in 26-75(a)(2) above, the City Manager or designee shall cause notice of adoption of such resolution to be published one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. 
e.  Preliminary assessment roll. Upon the adoption of the resolution described in 26-75(a)(2) above, the City Council shall cause to be made a preliminary assessment roll in accordance with the method of assessment specified in such resolution, which assessment roll shall be completed in a timely fashion to permit hearings and consideration by the City Council in accordance with F.S. § 197.3632(4). The assessment roll shall show the lots and lands assessed and the amount of the benefit to and the assessment against each lot or parcel of land, and, if the assessment is to be paid in installments, the number of annual installments of the assessment. 
f.  Publication of preliminary assessment roll. Upon completion of the preliminary assessment roll, the City Council shall by resolution fix a time and place at which the owners of the property to be assessed, or any other persons interested therein, may appear and be heard as to the propriety and advisability of constructing such project and, if applicable, providing such services, as to the cost thereof, as to the manner of payment therefor, and as to the amount thereof to be assessed against each property so improved. At least 20 days' prior notice in writing of such time and place shall be given to such property owners in the manner provided in F.S. § 197.3632(4)(b). The notice shall include the information required by F.S. § 197.3632(4), and the amount of the assessment and shall be served by mailing a copy to each of such property owners at his last known address. The names and addresses of such property owners shall be obtained from the records of the property appraiser or from such other sources as the City Manager or designee deems reliable, proof of such mailing to be made by affidavit of the City Manager or designee, such proof to be filed with the City Manager or designee; provided, that failure to mail such notice or notices shall not invalidate any of the proceedings hereunder. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall also be given by two publications a week apart in a newspaper of general circulation in the City; provided, that the last publication shall be at least one week prior to the date of the hearing. Such notice shall describe the streets or other areas to be improved, shall advise all persons interested that the description of each property to be assessed and the amount to be assessed to each piece or parcel of property may be ascertained at the City Manager or designee, and shall set forth the time and place at which the City Council shall meet as an assessment equalization board. Such service by publication shall be verified by the affidavit of the publisher filed with the City Manager or designee. 
Such hearing shall be held before the City Council. 
g.  Equalizing board to hear complaints and adjust assessments; adjustment of difference in cost and assessment. At the time and place named in the notice specified in subsection (a)(6) above, the City Council shall meet as an equalizing board to hear and consider any and all complaints as to the special assessments and shall adjust and equalize the assessments on a basis of justice and right. When so equalized and approved by resolution of the City Council, a final assessment roll shall be filed with the City Manager or designee, and such assessments shall stand confirmed and remain legal, valid, and binding first liens upon the property against which such assessments are made until paid; however, upon completion of a project, the City shall add or credit to each of the assessments, the difference in the assessment as originally made, approved and confirmed and the proportionate part of the actual cost to be paid by special assessments as finally determined upon the completion of the project, but in no event shall the final assessments exceed the amount of benefits originally assessed. The adoption of such resolution by the City Council shall constitute a legislative determination that all property assessed derives a special benefit from the projects and/or services to be constructed and/or provided, and that the assessments are fairly and reasonably apportioned among the properties that receive the special benefit. Promptly after such confirmation, the assessments shall be recorded by the City Manager or designee in the official records of the City, and such record of the liens shall constitute prima facie evidence of their validity. The City Manager or designee shall certify the assessment roll to the tax collector of the county as required by the uniform method referred to in subsection (c), below. 
(2)  Priority of lien; interest; and method of payment. The special assessments shall be payable at the time and in the manner stipulated in the resolution providing for the project or, if applicable, the services; shall remain liens, coequal with the lien of all state, county, district and municipal taxes, but superior in dignity to all other liens, titles, and claims, until paid; shall bear interest, if not paid when due, at a rate of interest to be specified in the resolutions levying the special assessments, and may, by such resolution and only for projects, be made payable in equal installments over a period not to exceed ten years. 
(3)  Uniform method of levy, collection and enforcement. The City shall use the uniform method for the levy, collection and enforcement of the special assessments, as specified by F.S. § 197.3632, or any successor provisions of law (collectively, the "uniform method"). The levy, collection and enforcement provisions of the uniform method shall control and be used to the extent they are inconsistent with the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Council sitting as the Board required to make new assessments until valid assessment is made if special assessment is omitted or held invalid. If any special assessment made under the provisions of this article shall be either in whole or in part annulled, vacated or set aside by the judgment of any court, or if the City Council shall be satisfied that any such assessment is so irregular or defective that the same cannot be enforced or collected, or if the City Council shall have omitted to make such assessment when it might have done so, the City Council shall take all necessary steps to cause a new assessment to be made for the whole or any part of any project or, if applicable, any services, or against any property benefited by any project, or, if applicable, any services, following as nearly as may be the provisions of this article, and in case such second assessment shall be annulled, the City Council may obtain and make other assessments until a valid assessment shall be made. 
(5)  Assessment roll sufficient evidence of assessment and other proceedings of this article; variance not material unless party objecting materially injured thereby. Any informality or irregularity in the proceedings in connection with the levy of any special assessment under the provisions of this article shall not affect the validity of the special assessment where the assessment roll has been confirmed by the City Council. The assessment roll as finally approved and confirmed shall be competent and sufficient evidence that the assessment was duly levied, that the assessment was duly made and adopted, and that all other proceedings adequate to the adoption of the assessment roll were duly had, taken and performed as required by this article, and no variance from the directions hereunder shall be held material unless it be clearly shown that the party objecting was materially injured thereby. However, nothing in this section shall relieve the City Council or the City Manager or designee from notifying the affected property owners of the special assessments as required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 1, 3-7-00)  
Sec. 42-81. - Powers vested in the City Council; exercise; referendum. 
All power and authority granted to the City by the provisions of this article shall be exercised by the City Council or its successors as the governing body of the City. The powers granted hereunder may be exercised by resolution duly adopted by the City Council, except as otherwise provided herein. No referendum in the City shall be required for the exercise of any of the powers granted by this article, unless such referendum is required by the Constitution of Florida or by general or special law. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, § 1, 3-7-00)  
ARTICLE IV. - COMMUNICATIONS RIGHTS-OF-WAY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 3(Attch. A), adopted Feb. 2, 2018, amended art. IV, §§ 42-101—42-118, in its entirety in effect repealing and reenacting said article as set out herein. Former art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 01-13, §§ 1—18, adopted Sept. 19, 2001. 
 
Sec. 42-101. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Palm Coast Communications Rights-of-Way Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 3(Attch. A), 2-6-18)  
Sec. 42-102. - Intent and purpose. 
It is the intent of the City to promote the public health, safety and general welfare by: Providing for the placement or maintenance of communications facilities in the public rights-of-way within the City; adopting and administering reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with state and federal law, including F.S. § 337.401, as it may be amended, the City's home rule authority, and in accordance with the provisions of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 and other federal and state law; establishing reasonable rules and regulations necessary to manage the placement or maintenance of communications facilities in the public rights-of-way by all communications services providers; and minimizing disruption to the public rights-of-way. In regulating its public rights-of-way, the City shall be governed by and shall comply with all applicable federal and state laws. These regulations are specifically subject to state and federal law limitations. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 3(Attch. A), 2-6-18)  
Sec. 42-103. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given. Where not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not otherwise defined shall be construed to mean the common and ordinary meaning. 
Abandonment shall mean the permanent cessation of all uses of a communications facility for a period of 180 or more consecutive days; provided that this term shall not include cessation of all use of a facility within a physical structure where the physical structure continues to be used for some purpose or use accessory to the communications facility. By way of example and not limitation, cessation of all use of a cable within a conduit, where the conduit continues to be used, shall not be "abandonment" of a facility in public rights-of-way. A wireless infrastructure provider's failure to have a wireless service provider provide service through a small wireless facility collocated on a utility pole within nine months after the application is approved in accordance with section 42-108 shall constitute abandonment. 
Antenna shall mean communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in providing wireless services. 
Applicable codes shall mean a uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to those codes enacted solely to address threats of destruction of property or injury to persons, or local codes or ordinances adopted to implement this subsection. The term includes objective design standards adopted by ordinance which may require that a new utility pole replacing an existing utility pole be of substantially similar design, material, and color, or that ground-mounted equipment meet reasonable spacing requirements. The term includes objective design standards adopted by ordinance which may require a small wireless facility to meet reasonable location context, color, stealth, and concealment requirements. 
As-built plans shall mean final and complete drawings in a format as specified by the Planning Manager or designee submitted upon completion of a project, signed and sealed by a professional surveyor or mapper as defined in F.S. § 472.005, that reflect all changes made during the construction process, and show the exact dimensions, geometry and location of all elements of the work completed under the permit. 
Base station shall mean a structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term does not encompass a tower as defined in section 4.20, Land Development Code, or any equipment associated with a tower. "Base station" includes, without limitation: 
(1)  Equipment associated with wireless communications services such as private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul. 
(2)  Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including distributed antenna systems ("DAS") and small-cell networks). 
(3)  Any structure other than a tower that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the City under this subsection, supports or houses equipment described in subsections (1) and (2) of this definition that has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another state or local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing that support. 
The term does not include any structure that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the City under this subsection, does not support or house equipment described in subsections (1) and (2) of this definition. 
City shall mean City of Palm Coast, Florida. 
City utility pole shall mean a utility pole owned by the City in the public rights-of-way. The term does not include a utility pole owned by a municipal electric utility, a utility pole used to support municipally owned or operated electric distribution facilities, or a utility pole located in the public rights-of-way within a retirement community that: (a) is deed restricted as housing for older persons as defined in F.S, § 760.29(4)(b),; (b) has more than 5,000 residents; and (c) has underground facilities for electric transmission or distribution. 
Collocate or collocation shall mean to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace one or more wireless communication facilities on, under, within, or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole. The term does not include the installation of a new utility pole or wireless support structure in the public rights-of-way. 
Communications facility or facility or system shall mean any permanent or temporary plant, equipment and property, including but not limited to cables, wires, conduits, ducts, fiber optics, poles, antennae, converters, splice boxes, cabinets, hand holes, manholes, vaults, drains, surface location markers, appurtenances, and other equipment or pathway placed or maintained or to be placed or maintained in the public rights-of-way of the City and used or capable of being used to transmit, convey, route, receive, distribute, provide or offer communications services. 
Communications services shall mean the definition in F.S. § 202.11(1), as may be amended, and also includes, but is not limited to wireless services, as defined herein. 
Communications services provider shall mean any person including a municipality or county providing communications services through the placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way. "Communications services provider" shall also include any person including a municipality or county that places or maintains a communications facility in public rights-of-way but does not provide communications services. The term includes pass-through providers and wireless infrastructure providers. 
Dealer shall mean any person, municipality or county providing communications services to an end user in the City through the use and operation of communications facilities installed, placed and maintained in the public rights-of-way, whether owner or leased, and who has registered with the Florida Department of Revenue as a provider of communications services pursuant to F.S. ch. 202. This term is intended to include any "Reseller." 
Eligible facilities request shall mean any request for modification of an existing tower or base station that, in accordance with the definitions contained in FCC regulations codified at 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001, does not substantially change the physical dimensions of the existing structure and is requesting: 
(1)  Collocation of new transmission equipment; 
(2)  Removal of existing transmission equipment; or 
(3)  Replacement of existing transmission equipment. 
FCC shall mean the Federal Communications Commission. 
In public rights-of-way or in the public rights-of-way shall mean in, on, over, under or across the public rights-of-way. 
Ordinance shall mean this article. 
Micro wireless facility shall mean a small wireless facility having dimensions no larger than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height, and an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches. 
Pass-through facilities shall mean the facilities for a communications system that merely pass through the City from one point to another point and from which no revenues are directly attributable to subscribers or other carriers within the City. 
Pass-through provider shall mean any person who places or maintains a communications facility in the public rights-of-way and who does not remit taxes imposed by the City pursuant to F.S. ch. 202. A pass-through provider can also be a wireless infrastructure provider as defined in F.S. § 337.401, as amended, or a communications facility provider pursuant to this section. 
Permit shall mean a communications rights-of-way permit required pursuant to section 42-108 prior to commencement of any placement or maintenance of facilities within the public rights-of-way. 
Person shall include any individual, children, firm, association, joint venture, partnership, estate, trust, business trust, syndicate, fiduciary, corporation, organization or legal entity of any kind, successor, assignee, transferee, personal representative, and all other groups or combinations, and shall include the City only to the extent the City acts as a communications services provider. 
Place or maintain or placement or maintenance or placing or maintaining shall mean to erect, construct, install, maintain, place, repair, extend, expand, remove, occupy, locate or relocate. A communications services provider that owns or exercises physical control over communications facilities in public rights-of-way, such as the physical control to maintain and repair, is "placing or maintaining" the facilities. A person providing service only through resale or only through use of a third party's unbundled network elements is not "placing or maintaining" the communications facilities through which such service is provided. The transmission and receipt of radio frequency signals through the airspace of the public rights-of-way does not constitute "placing or maintaining" facilities in the public rights-of-way. 
Public rights-of-way shall mean a public right-of-way, public utility easement, highway, street, bridge, tunnel or alley for which the City is the authority that has jurisdiction and control and may lawfully grant access to pursuant to applicable law, and includes the surface, the air space over the surface and the area below the surface. "Public rights-of-way" shall not include private property. "Public rights-of-way" shall not include any real or personal City property except as described above and shall not include City buildings, fixtures, poles, conduits, facilities or other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the public rights-of-way. 
Registrant shall mean a communications services provider that has registered with the City in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
Registration or register shall mean the process described in this article whereby a communications services provider provides certain information to the City. 
Repurposed structure shall mean an existing structure that has been renovated, reconfigured, or replaced with a similar structure so as to continue serving its primary existing purpose while also supporting the attachment of communications facilities, through stealth design or otherwise, that is approximately in the same location as the existing structure and in such a manner that does not result in a net increase in the number of structures located within the public rights-of-way and does not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular access, and is compliant with applicable codes. To "repurpose an existing structure" shall mean the act of renovating, reconfiguring or replacing an existing structure as described above. 
Reseller shall mean any person providing communications services within the City over a communications system, or portion thereof, for which a separate charge is made, where that person does not place or maintain, nor own or control, any of the underlying facilities in the public rights-of-way by either interconnecting with the facilities of a communications services provider utilizing the public rights-of-way or by leasing excess capacity from a facility-based communications services provider. 
Stealth design shall mean a method of camouflaging any tower, antenna or other communications facility, including, but not limited to, supporting electrical or mechanical equipment, which is designed to enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses and be as visually unobtrusive as possible. Stealth design may include a repurposed structure or a wrap. 
Small wireless facility shall mean a wireless communication facility that meets the following qualifications: 
(1)  Each antenna associated with the facility is located inside an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of antennas that have exposed elements, each antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of no more than six cubic feet in volume; and 
(2)  All other wireless equipment associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than 28 cubic feet in volume. The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation boxes, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switches, cutoff switches, vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services, and utility poles or other support structures. 
Surrounding neighborhood shall mean the area within a 500 foot radius of a communications facility site or proposed communications facility site. 
Utility pole shall mean a pole or other similar structure that is used in whole or part to provide communication services or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, signage, or a similar function. The term includes the vertical support structure for traffic lights but does not include a horizontal structure to which signal lights or other traffic control devices are attached and does not include a pole or similar structure 15 feet in height or less unless the City grants a waiver for the pole. The term does not include a City utility pole, nor does it include any other utility pole exempt from such term pursuant to F.S. § 337.401. 
Wireless communication facility or wireless communication facilities shall mean any equipment at a fixed location which enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network, including radio transceivers, antennas, wires, coaxial, or fiber-optic cable or other cables, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration, and equipment associated with wireless communications. The term includes small wireless facilities. The term does not include: (a) the structure or improvements on, under, within, or adjacent to the structure on which the equipment is collocated; (b) wireline backhaul facilities; or (c) coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is between wireless structures or utility poles or that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with a particular antenna. 
Wireless infrastructure provider shall mean a person who has been certificated to provide telecommunications service in the state and who builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless communication facilities, or wireless support structures but is not a wireless services provider. 
Wireless provider shall mean a wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider. 
Wireless services shall mean any services provided using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, using wireless communication facilities. 
Wireless services provider shall mean a person who provides wireless services. 
Wireless support structure shall mean a freestanding structure, such as a monopole, a guyed or self-supporting tower, or another existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless communication facilities. The term does not include a utility pole. 
Wrap shall mean an aesthetic covering depicting scenic imagery, such as vegetation, which blends with the surrounding area. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 3(Attch. A), 2-6-18)  
Sec. 42-104. - General prohibitions. 
(a)  Wireless communication facilities, other than small wireless facilities and micro wireless facilities, are prohibited within the public rights-of-way. 
(b)  Wireless communication facilities are prohibited within the public rights-of-way of roadways and railways under the jurisdiction and control of the Florida Department of Transportation unless approved in writing by the Florida Department of Transportation and, pursuant to any permit delegation agreement, the City. 
(c)  Wireless communication facilities are prohibited on arms used to support or mount traffic control signals and warning signals, and on arms attached to utility poles. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 3(Attch. A), 2-6-18)  
Sec. 42-105. - Registration for placing or maintaining communications facilities in public rights-of-way. 
(a)  Applicability . All persons, including, but not limited to, a communications services provider, pass-through provider, or wireless infrastructure provider, seeking to place or maintain a communications facility in public rights-of-way in the City shall first register with the City in accordance with this article before being eligible to receive a permit. Subject to the terms and conditions prescribed in this article and issuance of a permit, a registrant may place or maintain a such facilities in public rights-of-way. 
(b)  Limits of registration . An effective registration shall not convey any title, equitable or legal, to the registrant in the public rights-of-way. Registration under this article governs only the placement or maintenance of communications facilities in public rights-of-way. Other ordinances, codes or regulations may apply to the placement or maintenance in the public rights-of-way of facilities that are not communications facilities. Registration does not excuse a communications services provider from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before locating its facilities on the City or another person's facilities. Registration does not excuse a communications services provider from complying with all applicable City ordinances, codes or regulations, including this article. 
(c)  Application requirements . Each communications services provider that desires to place or maintain a small wireless facility, micro wireless facility, or utility pole for collocation of a small wireless facility in public rights-of-way in the City shall file a single registration with the City which shall, at minimum, include the following information: 
(1)  Name of the applicant under which it will transact business in the City and, if different, in the state of Florida; 
(2)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant's primary contact person in connection with the registration, and the person to contact in case of an emergency; 
(3)  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant's principal place of business in the state of Florida, and any branch office located in the City, or, if none, the name, address, and telephone number of the applicant's national headquarters and its registered agent in Florida; and 
(4)  Evidence of the insurance coverage required under this article and acknowledgment that registrant has received and reviewed a copy of this article, which acknowledgment shall not be deemed an agreement; 
(5)  A copy of the applicant's certificate of authorization, public convenience and necessity, or other similar certification or licenses to provide communications services issued by the Florida Public Service Commission, the FCC, or other federal or state authority, if any; 
(6)  If the applicant is a corporation, proof of authority to do business in the state of Florida, including the number of the corporate certification; 
(7)  A copy of both the applicant's resale certificate and certificate of registration issued by the Florida Department of Revenue to engage in the business of providing communications services in the state of Florida, if any; 
(8)  The type of communications services that the applicant intends to provide within the corporate limits of the City (if more than one, state all that apply), or, if none, state that the applicant is a pass-through provider or is intending only to place and maintain pass-through facilities, as the case may be, and whether the applicant currently remits or intends to remit Communications Services Tax, as authorized in F.S. ch. 202; and 
(d)  Application fees . No registration application fees shall be imposed for registration under this article. 
(e)  Review of registration . The City shall review the information submitted by the applicant. Such review shall be by the designated City Manager or designee. If the applicant submits information in accordance with subsection (c) above, the registration shall be effective and the City shall notify the applicant of the effectiveness of registration in writing. If the City determines that the information has not been submitted in accordance with subsection (c) above, the City shall notify the applicant of the non-effectiveness of registration, and reasons for the non-effectiveness, in writing. The City shall so reply to an applicant within 30 days after receipt of registration information from the applicant. Non-effectiveness of registration shall not preclude an applicant from filing subsequent applications for registration under the provisions of this section. An applicant has 30 days after receipt of a notice of non-effectiveness of registration to appeal the decision as provided in section 42-114. 
(f)  Cancellation of registration . A registrant may cancel a registration upon written notice to the City stating that it will no longer place or maintain any communications facilities in public rights-of-way within the City and will no longer need to obtain permits to perform work in public rights-of-way. A registrant cannot cancel a registration if the registrant continues to place or maintain any communications facilities in public rights-of-way. 
(g)  Non-exclusivity . Registration does not, in and of itself, establish a right to place or maintain or priority for the placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way within the City but shall establish for the registrant a right to apply for a permit, if permitting is required by the City. Registrations are expressly subject to any future amendment to or replacement of this article and further subject to any additional City ordinances, as well as any state or federal laws that may be enacted. Registration does not excuse or exempt a communications services provider from having to obtain a local business tax receipt, if required, from the City in accordance with the City Code. 
(h)  Registration renewal . A registrant shall renew its registration with the City by April 1 of even-numbered years in accordance with the registration requirements in this article, except that a registrant that initially registers during the even-numbered year when renewal would be due or the odd-numbered year immediately preceding such even-numbered year shall not be required to renew until the next even-numbered year. Within 30 days of any change in the information required to be submitted pursuant to subsection (c), a registrant shall provide updated information to the City. If no information in the then-existing registration has changed, the renewal may state that no information has changed. Failure to renew a registration may result in the City restricting the issuance of additional permits until the communications services provider has complied with the registration requirements of this article. 
(i)  Applicability to resellers . A reseller, which by definition does not place or maintain communications facilities in the public rights-of-way, is not required to register with the City. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 3(Attch. A), 2-6-18)  
Sec. 42-106. - Notice of transfer, sale or assignment of assets in public rights-of-way. 
If a registrant transfers, sells or assigns its assets located in public rights-of-way incident to a transfer, sale or assignment of the registrant's assets, the transferee, buyer or assignee shall be obligated to comply with the terms of this article. Written notice of any such transfer, sale or assignment shall be provided by such registrant to the City within 20 days after the effective date of the transfer, sale or assignment. If the transferee, buyer or assignee is a current registrant, then the transferee, buyer or assignee is not required to re-register. If the transferee, buyer or assignee is not a current registrant, then the transferee, buyer or assignee shall register as provided in section 42-105 within 60 days of the transfer, sale or assignment. If any applications for a permit are pending under the communications services provider's name as of the date the City receives written notice of the transfer, sale, or assignment, then the City shall consider the transferee, buyer or assignee as the new applicant unless otherwise notified by the communications services provider. If any permit applications are pending under the registrant's name as of the date the City receives written notice of the transfer, sale, or assignment, then the City shall consider the transferee, buyer or assignee as the new applicant unless otherwise notified by the registrant. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 3(Attch. A), 2-6-18)  
Sec. 42-107. - Involuntary termination of registration. 
(a)  The City may terminate a registration if: 
(1)  A federal or Florida authority suspends, denies, or revokes a registrant's certification or license to provide communications services; 
(2)  The registrant's placement or maintenance of a communications facility in the public rights-of-way presents an extraordinary danger to the general public or other users of the public rights-of-way and the registrant fails to remedy the danger promptly after receipt of written notice; or 
(3)  The registrant ceases to use all of its communications facilities in public rights-of-way and has not complied with section 42-123 of this article. 
(4)  The registrant fails to comply with any of the rules, regulations, or general conditions set forth herein. 
(b)  Notice of intent to terminate . Prior to termination, the City Manager or designee, shall notify the registrant with a written notice setting forth all matters pertinent to the proposed termination action, including which of (1) through (4) above is applicable as the reason therefore, and describing the proposed action of the City. The registrant shall have 30 days after receipt of such notice within which to address or eliminate the reason or within which to present a plan, satisfactory to the City Manager or designee, to accomplish the same. If not eliminated, or if the plan is rejected, the City Manager or designee shall provide written notice of such rejection within 15 days of receipt of the plan to the registrant. A registrant shall be notified by written notice of any decision by the City Manager or designee to terminate its registration. Such written notice shall be sent within seven days after the decision. Should registrant wish to appeal the City Manager or designee's decision, the appeal to City Council shall be subject to the appeal process as provided in section 42-114. 
(c)  In the event of termination, the former registrant shall: 
(1)  Notify the City of the assumption or anticipated assumption by another registrant of ownership of the registrant's communications facilities in public rights-of-way; or 
(2)  Provide the City with an acceptable plan for disposition of its communications facilities in public rights-of-way. If a registrant fails to comply with this subsection (c), which determination of noncompliance is subject to appeal as provided in section 42-114, the City may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including but not limited to taking possession of the facilities where another person has not assumed the ownership or physical control of the facilities; or requiring the registrant within 90 days of the termination, or such longer period as may be agreed to by the City, to remove some or all of the facilities from the public rights-of-way and restore the public rights-of-way to its original condition before the removal. 
(d)  In any event, a terminated registrant shall take such steps as are necessary to render safe every portion of the communications facilities remaining in the public rights-of-way of the City. 
(e)  In the event of termination of a registration, this section does not authorize the City to cause the removal of communications facilities used to provide another service for which the registrant or another person who owns or exercises physical control over the facilities holds a valid certification or license with the governing federal or state agency, if required for provision of such service, and who is registered with the City, if required. 
(f)  The City's right to terminate a registration shall be in addition to all other rights of the City, whether reserved in this article, or authorized by other law. No action, proceeding or exercise of the right to terminate registration will affect or preclude any other right the City may have. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 3(Attch. A), 2-6-18)  
Sec. 42-108. - Communications rights-of-way permit required. 
(a)  Communications rights-of-way permit required. Except as provided herein, a registrant shall not commence to place, maintain, or modify a communications facility in public rights-of-way, without a communications rights-of-way permit issued by the City Manager or designee in accordance with this section, unless otherwise exempt as provided herein. An effective registration shall be a condition of obtaining a permit. A permit may be obtained by or on behalf of a registrant having an effective registration if all permitting requirements are met. A registrant shall not commence to place or maintain a communications facility in the public rights-of-way until all applicable permits if any, have been issued by the City or other appropriate authority. Registrant acknowledges that as a condition of granting such permits, the City may impose reasonable rules or regulations governing the placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way. Permits shall apply only to the areas of public rights-of-way specifically identified in the permit. 
(b)  Permit not required. 
(1)  A registrant shall be allowed to perform emergency maintenance within the public rights-of-way without first obtaining a permit. The term "emergency" shall mean a condition that affects the public's health, safety or welfare, which includes an unplanned out-of-service condition of a pre-existing service. Registrant shall provide prompt notice to the City of the placement or maintenance of a communications facility in public rights-of-way in the event of an emergency, and may be required to obtain an after-the-fact permit within 15 days of completing the emergency work, if a permit would have originally been required to perform the work undertaken in public rights-of-way in connection with the emergency. 
(2)  A registrant shall be allowed to perform routine maintenance within the public rights-of-way if such proposed routine maintenance does not involve excavation, construction, or disruption to transportation in the public rights-of-way. If routine maintenance requires the closure of the public rights-of-way, a permit shall be required. 
(3)  A permit shall not be required for replacement of an existing small wireless facility with a small wireless facility that is substantially similar or of the same or smaller size. 
(4)  A permit shall not be required for the installation, placement, maintenance, or replacement of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cables strung between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable codes by or for a communications services provider authorized to occupy the public rights of-way and who is remitting taxes under F.S. ch. 202. At least 30 days prior to placing a micro wireless facility in the public rights-of-way pursuant to this subsection, the registrant shall submit a certification of the micro wireless facility's dimensions to the City for review. If the micro wireless facility's dimensions exceed the dimensions to constitute a micro wireless facility, the registrant shall not be authorized to place such facility in the public rights-of-way. 
(5)  Prior to performing any work authorized herein without a permit, a registrant shall provide reasonable advance written notice to the City identifying the areas where such work will occur, scope of work, and dates(s) and duration of work to be performed. 
(c)  Pre-application conference. To minimize issues related to permit application, prior to submitting materials for a permit application, a registrant must request a pre-submittal meeting with the Planning Manager or designee to discuss the registrant's plans and network goals for placing and maintaining wireless communications facilities in the public rights-of-way. The City shall undertake efforts to accommodate a registrant's request within ten business days of a request. 
(d)  Application requirements. To ensure compliance with federal and state law, applicants shall request and schedule an application submittal appointment with the Planning Manager or designee or designee. Permit application submittal appointments shall be scheduled by the City, at the City's sole discretion, upon no less than five days advanced written notice by the applicant. No permit application shall be deemed accepted by the City unless received at a scheduled permit application submittal appointment. No more than one consolidated collocation permit application, for a maximum of 30 small wireless facilities, or five individual permit applications shall be received at a permit application submittal appointment. The application shall be in a form approved by the Planning Manager or designee, and shall include such information as the City finds reasonably necessary to demonstrate applicant's compliance with applicable codes for the placement of small wireless facilities in the locations identified in the application. 
(e)  Affidavits. 
(1)  An application for a permit to install new utility pole(s) or new wireless support structures (as opposed to collocations, applications to use an existing structure, or wireline pole attachment installations made in the communication space of utility poles) shall include an affidavit from a Florida licensed professional engineer with a statement that it is not feasible to locate applicant's proposed facilities on existing poles along the proposed route, and all the facts relied upon in the applicant's attempt to both collocate or attach the proposed new communications facilities on existing structures within the public rights-of-way, as well as on property outside the public rights-of-way, within a 500 foot radius of the proposed new communications facility. 
(2)  An application for collocation shall include an affidavit from the owner of the facility or existing structure being collocated upon that the applicant has been granted permission to attach to the facility or existing structure being collocated upon or attached to. 
(3)  An application from a wireless infrastructure provider to place a new utility pole in the public rights-of-way to support the collocation of small wireless facilities shall include an attestation that small wireless facilities will be collocated on the utility pole or structure and will be used by a wireless services provider to provide service within nine months after the date the application is approved. The wireless infrastructure provider shall use its best efforts to individually notify all adjacent property owners affected by the proposed construction prior to the commencement of that work. Such notification shall not be required for emergencies requiring immediate repairs. 
(4)  The applicant shall certify that any and all of its abandoned facilities within the public rights-of-way have been removed, indicating the prior location of such abandoned facilities. 
(f)  Permit applicant not registrant. If the applicant for the permit is not the registrant, the application must include a statement of authority by the registrant for the applicant to act on behalf of the registrant. In addition, if the applicant is a contractor, the application must include the contractor's license or registration confirming the contractor's authority to perform construction in the City and statements as to whether the contractor has any open permits with the City, and if so, the permit identification number or information. 
(g)  Information regarding height limitations. For applications for installation of a utility pole to support the collocation of a small wireless facility, the applicant shall provide information regarding the heights of other utility poles located in the public rights-of-way within 500 feet of the proposed location of the utility pole. If there is no utility pole within 500 feet of the proposed utility pole, the applicant shall so certify. 
(h)  Revised plans. If the plans or drawings submitted showing the proposed location for installation of the facility in the public rights-of-way require revision for any reason prior to commencing construction, the communications services provider shall promptly submit revised plans and drawings to the Planning Manager or designee. 
(i)  Consolidated collocation application. An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities within the City's boundaries may, at the applicant's discretion, file a consolidated application with the City and receive a single permit for the collocation of up to 30 small wireless facilities. If the application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the City may separately address small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete information has been received or which are denied. 
(j)  Stop work order. The City Manager or designee may issue an immediate stop work order where any permitted or unpermitted construction or other work in the public rights-of-way poses a serious threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public until such serious threat has been abated. Failure to comply with such order may subject a registrant, and its agents, employees, and contractors as applicable, to appropriate enforcement remedies as set forth herein. 
(k)  Communications services tax in lieu of permit fee. A registrant that places or maintains a communications facility in the public rights-of-way and that pays communications services taxes shall not be required to pay a permit fee since the City has elected to collect the communications services tax pursuant to F.S. ch. 202. as same may be amended from time to time. Pass-through providers shall pay a fee pursuant to F.S. § 337.401(5), as amended from time to time, and City Code section 42-124. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 3(Attch. A), 2-6-18)  
Sec. 42-109. - Permit review. 
(a)  Review process. The City shall process and issue permits for the placement, maintenance, or modification of communication facilities in the public rights-of-way subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Within 14 days after the date of receiving the application, the City shall determine and notify the applicant by electronic mail to the email address provided in the application as to whether the application is complete. If an application is deemed incomplete, the City shall specifically identify the missing information. An application is deemed complete if the City does not provide notification to the applicant within 14 days. 
(2)  If an applicant seeks to place or collocate a small wireless facility in the public rights-of-way, the City may, within 14 days after the date of filing the application, request that the proposed location of a small wireless facility be moved to another location in the right-of-way and placed on an alternative City utility pole or support structure, or may place a new utility pole. The City and the applicant may negotiate the alternative location, including any objective design standards and reasonable spacing requirements for ground-based equipment, for 30 days after the date of the request. At the conclusion of the negotiation period, if the alternative location is accepted by the applicant, the applicant must notify the City of such acceptance and the application shall be deemed granted for any agreed upon new location and all other locations in the application. If an agreement is not reached, the applicant must notify the City of such non-agreement, and the City must grant or deny the original application within 90 days after the date the application was filed. A request for an alternative location, an acceptance of an alternative location, or a rejection of an alternative location must be in writing and provided by electronic mail. If the City does not use the 30-day negotiation period provided herein regarding collocation alternatives, the parties may mutually agree to extend the 60-day application review period. The City shall grant or deny the application at the end of the extended period. 
(3)  The City shall process all applications on a nondiscriminatory basis. Except as extended by the 30-day negotiation period provided in subsection (2) above, if the City fails to approve or deny a complete application within 60 days after receipt of the application, the application is deemed approved. The application review period may be extended upon mutual agreement by the parties. 
(4)  A permit issued pursuant to an approved application shall remain effective for one year unless extended by the City. 
(5)  The City shall notify the applicant of approval or denial by electronic mail. The City shall approve a complete application unless it does not meet the applicable provisions of this article. If the application is denied, the City shall specify in writing the basis for denial, including the specific code provisions on which the denial is based, and shall send the documentation to the applicant by electronic mail on the day the City denies the application. The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the City and resubmit the application within 30 days after notice of the denial is sent to the applicant. Failure by the applicant to timely resubmit the application shall result in a final denial of the application. The City shall approve or deny a timely filed revised application within 30 days after receipt, or the application is deemed approved. Any subsequent review shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial. 
(b)  Expert review. The City may require that all permit applications be reviewed by a third-party consultant or expert at the expense of the applicant for compliance with the requirements set forth herein. No permit shall be issued to any applicant that has not fully reimbursed the City for the third-party review fees, which shall be limited to the specifically identified reasonable expenses incurred in the review. 
(c)  Denial of collocation of small wireless facilities. The City may deny a proposed collocation of a small wireless facility in the public rights-of-way if the proposed collocation: 
(1)  Materially interferes with the safe operation of traffic control equipment. 
(2)  Materially interferes with sight lines or clear zones for transportation, pedestrians, or public safety purposes. 
(3)  Materially interferes with compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act or similar federal or state standards regarding pedestrian access or movement. 
(4)  Materially fails to comply with the 2010 edition of the Florida Department of Transportation Utility Accommodation Manual, or latest published version. 
(5)  Fails to comply with applicable codes, the Land Development Code, and the applicable provisions of this article. 
(d)  Limited purpose of communications rights-of-way permit. A communications rights-of-way permit issued by the City constitutes authorization to undertake only certain activities in public rights-of-way in accordance with this article, and does not create any property right or other vested interest, or grant authority to impinge upon the rights of others who may have an interest in the public rights-of-way. Permits shall be granted only for specific routes or locations in the public rights-of-way and for such term as described in the permit. The City's issuance of a permit shall not be construed as a warranty that the placement of any communications facility is in compliance with applicable codes, regulations or laws. 
(e)  Permit processing timeframes; "shot clock". The City's action on proposals to place or maintain communications facilities shall be subject to the applicable standards and time frames set out in F.S. § 365.172, as amended from time to time; and 47 U.S.C. § 1455 (a) and Orders issued by the FCC, as same amended from time to time. All federal and state "shot clock" timeframe guidelines that apply to any particular permit are hereby recognized by the City, and the City will make all reasonable efforts to comply. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 3(Attch. A), 2-6-18)  
Sec. 42-110. - Placement of new utility poles or wireless support structure. 
(a)  The placing of any new utility pole, wireless support structure, or other above-ground structure for the collocation of a small wireless facility or micro wireless facility is subject to the approval of the Planning Manager or designee and these structures shall be erected under the supervision of the Planning Manager or designee or his designee. No new utility pole, wireless support structure, or other above-ground structure shall be allowed in the public rights-of-way unless the applicant demonstrates and the Planning Manager or designee determines that no existing structure, or alternative technology (that does not require the placement of a new structure in a public rights-of-way) can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna or other communication facility. Such a demonstration by the applicant shall not give rise to a right to locate the proposed facility within the public rights-of-way or in any way guarantee City approval of such. An applicant shall submit information requested by the Planning Manager or designee related to the availability of suitable existing structures or alternative technology. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing structure or alternative technology can accommodate the applicant's proposed communications facility may consist of, but is not limited to, the following factors to be considered by the Planning Manager or designee: 
(1)  No existing structures are located within the geographic area which would meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
(2)  Existing structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements, which shall be demonstrated by, at minimum, propagation and coverage maps. 
(3)  Existing structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna or other communications facility and related equipment. 
(4)  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing structures, or the antenna on the existing structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
(5)  The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing structure or to adapt an existing structure for sharing are unreasonable. 
(6)  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing structures unsuitable. 
(7)  The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that does not require the use of new structures, such as cable microcell network using multiple low-powered transmitters/receivers attached to wire line system, is unsuitable. Costs of alternative technology that exceed new structure or antenna development shall not be presumed to render the technology unsuitable. 
(b)  If approved, no such utility pole or other above-ground structure shall be placed in any gutter or drainage area and must be behind the curb to avoid damage to any sidewalk. In areas of the City where either electric utility wires or other communications facilities are above ground and such facilities are moved, either voluntarily or at the direction of the City, to a new utility pole or other above-ground structure, the communications services provider or wireless infrastructure provider shall likewise move all its above-ground facilities on such utility poles or structures to such new utility pole or structure within 30 days after receipt of written notice from either the City or the owner of the new utility pole or structure, without cost to the City. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 3(Attch. A), 2-6-18)  
Sec. 42-111. - Design, placement and collocation standards for communications facilities in the public rights-of-way. 
(a)  Objective design standards. The placement of communications facilities anywhere in the public rights-of-way shall in all cases be designed in such a manner that the facilities and structures are placed in a safe location that do not interfere with the traveling public, and shall be designed to maximize compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood and minimize any negative visual impact on the surrounding neighborhood. The following objective design standards regulating the location context, color, stealth design, and concealment of the proposed small wireless facility shall apply, unless waived by the City: 
(1)  All proposed small wireless facilities for collocation on a wireless support structure or utility pole shall meet one of the following stealth design standards: 
a.  Wires, cables and equipment to be collocated on a utility pole shall be within the utility pole or structure or covered with a shroud. No exposed wires or, cables are permitted. Slim design shall be used wherein the top mounted antenna does not exceed the diameter of the supporting utility pole at the level of the antenna attachment, and side mounted enclosures, if any, do not extend more than 30 inches beyond the exterior dimensions of the existing structure, repurposed structure or utility pole at the level of antenna attachment measured from the edge of the pole to the outermost surface of the antenna; or 
b.  Wires, cables and equipment to be collocated on a utility pole shall be within the utility pole or covered with a shroud. No exposed wires or cables are permitted. A street light fixture shall be used to camouflage the small wireless facility such as through replacement of the cobra head with a new cobra head containing the small wireless facility. Any street light fixture shall be maintained in good working order by the applicant or pole owner. 
(2)  Applicants shall not place or maintain signage on communications facilities in public rights-of-way, unless otherwise required by federal or state law, provided; however, existing structures that lawfully supported signage before being repurposed may continue to support signage as otherwise permitted by law. 
(3)  A small wireless facility shall not have any type of lighted signal, lights, or illuminations unless required by applicable codes, local codes or regulations, or state and federal laws and regulations or as permitted by the City. 
(4)  Ground-mounted small wireless facilities shall be located within a ten foot radius of the structure or utility pole for the collocated small wireless facility and, if possible, in areas with existing foliage or another aesthetic features to obscure the view of the ground-mounted small wireless facility. The ground-mounted small wireless facility shall be designed to appear similar to other at-grade facilities in the same public rights-of-way and may be further concealed with additional plantings. Any additional plantings proposed pursuant to this subsection shall be approved by the City and be maintained by the registrant pursuant to a landscape maintenance agreement. 
(5)  The antennas and related equipment shall be in a color that will provide the most camouflage, as determined by the City Manager or designee, or designee. Ground based small wireless facilities shall be painted forest green, unless determined otherwise by the City Manager, or designee. When on a black pole, wireless facilities shall be painted black, unless determined otherwise by the City Manager, or designee. 
(6)  A new utility pole that replaces an existing utility pole shall be of substantially similar design, material, and color as the existing utility pole. 
(b)  Waiver. The City's design standards set forth in subsection (a), may be waived by the Planning Manager or designee upon a showing by the applicant that the design standards are not reasonably compatible for the particular location of a small wireless facility or that the design standards impose an excessive expense for a small wireless facility. The waiver shall be granted or denied by the Planning Manager or designee within 45 days after the date the request is received by the City. 
(c)  Zoning and land use regulations. Unless otherwise provided herein, all communications facilities shall be subject to the City's zoning and land use regulations, including the performance, construction and design standards set forth in section 4.20 of the Land Development Code. 
(d)  Height requirements. 
(1)  Utility poles and wireless support structures. The height of a new utility pole or wireless support structure installed in conjunction with the collocation of a small wireless facility within the public rights-of-way shall be no greater than: 
a.  Unless waived by the Planning Manager or designee, the height for a new utility pole installed in conjunction with the collocation of a small wireless facility is limited to the tallest existing utility pole as of July 1, 2017. located in the same public right-of-way, other than a utility pole for which a waiver has previously been granted, measured from grade in place, within 500 feet of the proposed location of the small wireless facility. 
b.  If there is no utility pole within 500 feet, the height of the utility pole shall not exceed 50 feet. 
(2)  Small wireless facilities. The height of a small wireless facility, including any attached antennas, shall not exceed ten feet above the utility pole or wireless support structure upon which the small wireless facility is to be collocated. Small wireless facilities are prohibited on utility poles, wireless support structures, or similar structures 15 feet or less in height unless waived upon a showing of good cause by the Planning Manager or designee. 
(e)  Collocation of small wireless facilities on city utility poles. 
(1)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the City may reserve space on City utility poles for future public safety uses. If replacement of a City utility pole is necessary to accommodate the collocation of the small wireless facility and the future public safety use, the pole replacement is subject to the make-ready provisions of this article and the replaced pole shall accommodate the future public safety use. 
(2)  The City shall not enter into an exclusive arrangement with any person for the right to attach equipment to City utility poles. 
(3)  The City hereby levies, establishes, and sets an annual rate that shall be paid by all those applicants who file an application to collocate small wireless facilities on City utility poles in the amount of $150.00 per pole per year. The initial payment shall be made as a condition of the granting of the permit, with remaining annual payments to be made in all subsequent years on the same date. 
(4)  For a City utility pole that supports an aerial facility used to provide communications services or electric service by another, the parties shall comply with the process for make-ready work under 47 U.S.C. s. 224 and implementing regulations. The good faith estimate of the person owning or controlling the pole for any make-ready work necessary to enable the pole to support the requested collocation must include pole replacement if necessary. 
(5)  For a City utility pole that does not support an aerial facility used to provide communications services or electric service by another, the City shall provide a good faith estimate for any make-ready work necessary to enable the pole to support the requested collocation, including necessary pole replacement, within 60 days after receipt of a complete application. Make-ready work, including any pole replacement, must be completed within 60 days after written acceptance of the good faith estimate by the applicant. Alternatively, the City may require the applicant seeking to collocate a small wireless facility to provide a make-ready estimate at the applicant's expense for the work necessary to support the small wireless facility, including pole replacement, and perform the make-ready work. 
(6)  If pole replacement is required by the City, the scope of the make-ready estimate is limited to the design, fabrication, and installation of a utility pole that is substantially similar in color and composition. The City may not condition or restrict the manner in which the applicant obtains, develops, or provides the estimate or conducts the make-ready work, subject to usual construction restoration standards for work in the right-of-way. The replaced or altered utility pole shall remain the property of the City. 
(7)  The City may not require more make-ready work than is required to meet applicable codes or industry standards. Fees for make-ready work may not include costs related to preexisting damage or prior noncompliance. Fees for make-ready work, including any pole replacement, may not exceed actual costs or the amount charged to communications services providers other than wireless services providers for similar work and may not include any consultant fee or expense. 
(f)  Placement of utility poles by wireless infrastructure providers in the public rights-of-way in support of collocation of small wireless facilities. A wireless infrastructure provider may apply to the City to place utility poles in the public rights-of-way to support the collocation of small wireless facilities. The application must include an attestation that small wireless facilities will be collocated on the utility pole or structure and will be used by a wireless services provider to provide service within nine months after the date the application is approved by the City. The City shall accept and process the application in accordance with any applicable codes and other local codes governing the placement of utility poles in the public rights-of-way, including but not limited to the provisions applicable to wireless communication facilities set forth in section 4.20 of the Land Development Code, and any applicable requirements set forth in the City Code, as amended from time to time. 
(g)  Prohibited collocations, attachments, installations, and services not authorized. 
(1)  This article does not authorize the following: 
a.  The collocation or attachment of wireless facilities, including any antenna, micro wireless facility, or small wireless facility, on a privately-owned utility pole, a utility pole owned by an electric cooperative or a municipal electric utility, a privately owned wireless support structure, or other private property without the consent of the property owner. 
b.  The provision of any voice, data, or video services or the installation, placement, maintenance, or operation of any communications facilities other than small wireless facilities in the public rights-of-way. 
c.  The collocation of small wireless facilities or micro wireless facilities on a City utility pole, or the erection of a wireless support structure in a location subject to covenants, conditions, restrictions, articles of incorporation, and bylaws of a homeowners' association. 
(2)  This subsection does not affect provisions contained in this article and F.S. § 337.401(6), relating to pass-through providers. 
(3)  This subsection does not apply to the installation, placement, maintenance, or replacement of micro wireless facilities on any existing and duly authorized aerial communications facilities, provided that once aerial facilities are converted to underground facilities, any such collocation or construction shall be only as provided by the City's underground utilities ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 3(Attch. A), 2-6-18)  
Sec. 42-112. - General Conditions. 
As a condition of allowing the placement or maintenance of any communications facility in the public rights-of-way, and under additional authority granted pursuant to F.S. ch. 337, the City hereby imposes the following rules, regulations and general conditions. Unless otherwise provided in this article, these rules, regulations and general conditions shall apply to all communications services providers, including those that are pass-through providers irrespective of whether they place and maintain only conduit, dark fiber or pass-through facilities. 
(a)  Compliance with laws. A communications services provider shall at all times comply with and abide by all applicable provisions of state and federal law and City ordinances, codes and regulations in placing or maintaining a communications facility in the public rights-of-way. Except as provided herein, the placement of a communications facility anywhere in the corporate limits of the City shall in all cases be subject to the City's land use regulations, including those set forth in section 4.20 of the City Land Development Code. The burden of proof shall at all times be on the communications services provider to establish compliance with requirements under this article and state and federal law. 
(b)  Due care. A communications services provider shall use and exercise due caution, care and skill in performing work in the public rights-of-way and shall take all reasonable steps to safeguard work site areas. 
(c)  Power to restrict area. To the extent not otherwise prohibited by state or federal law, the City shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional communications facilities within a particular area of the public rights-of way and deny the issuance of a permit. 
(d)  Responsibility for contractors. Every communications services provider that is registered with the City shall be liable for the actions of contractor(s) hired by them to perform the placement or maintenance of facilities in the public rights-of-way and shall be responsible for making sure that such contractor meets and complies fully with the rules, regulations and general conditions set forth in this article. 
(e)  Provision of as-builts. Within 45 days after completion of any placement or maintenance of a communications facility in the public rights-of-way, the communications services provider shall provide the City with as-builts showing the final location of such facility in the public rights-of-way. 
(f)  Production and filing of as-builts. Every communications services provider that is registered with the City shall produce and keep on file at its principal place of business an accurate and complete set of as-builts of all facilities placed and maintained in the public rights-of-way. The location and identification of facilities and the production of as-builts shall be at the sole expense of the communications services provider. Within 30 days of any written request by the Planning Manager or designee, the communications services provider must provide to the City, at no cost, copies of complete sets of as-builts for the indicated public rights-of-way. The failure of the communications services provider to produce, keep on file, or provide to the City as-builts as required under this article is sufficient grounds for the City to deny the issuance of permits in the future. 
(g)  Removal of facilities placed without permit. Any communications facility placed in the public rights-of-way by the communications services provider without first having obtained the required permit shall be removed within 30 days of written notice by the City to remove the same and in default of compliance with such notice, such facilities may be removed by order of the Planning Manager or designee and the cost of removal shall be borne and paid by the communications services provider upon demand. 
(h)  Underground. A wireless provider shall, in relation to a small wireless facility, utility pole, or wireless support structure in the public rights-of-way, comply with any undergrounding requirements of the City that prohibit above-ground structures in public rights-of-way. Any such requirements may be waived by the City. All communications facilities shall have consistent alignment parallel with the edge of pavement, and a 36 inch depth of cover for, and two feet of horizontal clearance from, other underground utilities and their appurtenances. Where approved by the Planning Manager or designee, facilities to be placed in the street shall be laid according to the permanent grade of the street and at a depth below the surface of the permanent grade as determined by the Planning Manager or designee. 
(i)  Above-ground approval. Attachment to any utility pole or other above-ground structure must be pursuant to a valid and effective pole attachment agreement or similar instrument. 
(j)  Undergrounding of electric utility facilities. The communications services provider or wireless infrastructure provider must, at the time electric utility facilities or other communications facilities are placed underground or are required by the City to be placed underground, concurrently place its communications facilities underground without cost to the City. 
(k)  Placement and maintenance standards. The placement or maintenance of communications facilities in the public rights-of-way shall be performed in accordance with standards and requirements of the following, as is applicable and as each is in force at the time of the respective placement or maintenance of a communications system or facility: 
(1)  The Florida Department of Transportation Utilities Accommodation Guide; 
(2)  The State of Florida Manual of Uniform Minimum Standards for Design Construction and Maintenance for Streets and Highways; 
(3)  The Trench Safety Act (F.S. ch. 553); 
(4)  The Underground Facility Damage Prevention and Safety Act (F.S. ch. 556); 
(5)  All applicable structural requirements with respect to wind speed under the Florida Building Code; 
(6)  The National Electrical Code or the ANSI National Electrical Safety Code; and 
(7)  The "Safety Rules for the Installation and Maintenance of Electrical Supply and Communication Lines" established by the Department of Commerce, Bureau of Standards of the United States. 
(l)  Sunshine State One-Call. Every communications services provider shall utilize, and if permissible, maintain membership in the utility notification one call system administered by Sunshine State One-Call of Florida, Inc. 
(m)  Safety and minimal interference. All placement and maintenance of communication facilities in the public rights-of-way shall be subject to the City Code and other regulations of the City, and shall be performed with the least possible interference with the use and appearance of the public rights-of-way and the rights and reasonable convenience of the property owners who abut or adjoin the public rights-of-way, and in compliance with the rules and regulations of the Florida Department of Transportation. The communications services provider shall at all times employ reasonable care and use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage or injury or be a nuisance to the public. Suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares, or other devices shall be used at such times and places as are reasonably required for the safety of all members of the public. All placement and maintenance shall be done in such a manner as to minimize to the greatest extent any interference with the usual travel on such public rights-of- way. The use of trenchless technology (i.e. microtunneling and horizontal directional drilling techniques) for the installation of communications facilities in the public rights-of-way, as well as joint trenching or the collocation of facilities in existing conduit is strongly encouraged, and should be employed wherever and whenever feasible. 
(n)  Correction of harmful conditions. If, at any time, the City or other authority of competent jurisdiction reasonably determines that any communications facility is, or has caused a condition that is harmful to the health, safety or general welfare of any person, then the communications services provider shall, at its own expense, promptly correct or eliminate all such facilities and conditions. In an emergency, as determined by the Planning Manager or designee, when the communications services provider is not immediately available or is unable to provide the necessary immediate repairs to any communications facility that is damaged or malfunctioning, or has caused a sunken area or other condition and, in the Planning Manager or designee's sole discretion, is deemed a threat to public safety, then the City, when apprised of such an emergency, shall have the right to remove, make repairs to or eliminate same with the total cost being charged to and paid for by the communications services provider upon demand. 
(o)  Remedy of hazardous conditions. If, at any time, a condition exists that the City or other authority of competent jurisdiction reasonably determines is an emergency that is potentially hazardous or life threatening to any person or is a threat to the health or safety of the general public, and to remedy such condition the City or other authority of competent jurisdiction reasonably determines that a communications services provider must temporarily relocate or temporarily shut off service or transmissions through a specific facility, then the City, as an appropriate exercise of its police powers, may order the communications services provider to immediately perform such temporary relocation or shut off until the condition has been remedied, and to do so at its own expense and without liability to or recourse against the City. In such an emergency, when the communications services provider is not immediately available or is unable to provide the necessary immediate relocation or shut off of the specific communications facility, then the City shall have the right to perform, or cause to be performed, such temporary relocation or shut off until the condition has been remedied with the total cost being charged to and paid for by the communications services provider upon demand. 
(p)  Interference with other facilities. A communications services provider shall not, in violation of any applicable laws or regulatory standards, design, place or maintain its communications facilities in a manner that will interfere with the signals or facilities of any municipal or county police, fire or rescue department, the facilities of any public utility, or the communications facilities of another communications service provider, including any cable service provider. 
(q)  Relocation or removal of facilities. 
(1)  The grant of a permit under this article shall not limit the authority and discretion of the City to regulate and control the public rights-of-way, and the city may at any time require the removal or relocation of a wireless or other communications facility within the rights-of-way in the interests of the public welfare, health, or safety, or as otherwise authorized by law. The registrant must remove its wireless facilities within 30 days notice that the City will remove a utility pole. 
(2)  Removal or relocation at the direction of the City of a registrant's communications facility in public rights-of-way shall be governed by applicable requirements of F.S. §§ 337.403 and 337.404, as amended, in addition to any other applicable City regulations or provisions of law. Unless otherwise provided by law, this City Code, or an agreement, a registrant shall bear all costs of any removal or relocation of its facilities. 
(r)  Temporary raising or lowering of facilities. A communications services provider, upon request of any person holding a validly issued building or moving permit from the City to temporarily encroach on or perform moving operations in or across the public rights-of-way, shall temporarily raise or lower its communications facilities to accommodate such temporary encroachment or move. The expense of such temporary raising or lowering of facilities shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the communications services provider shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The communications services provider shall be given not less than 20 days advance written notice from such person to arrange for the temporary relocation, which notice must detail the time and location of the permitted activity, and not less than 24 hours advance notice from the permit holder advising of the actual operation. The City is not subject to, nor shall it be liable for, any such expense or notice requirement for the moving of houses or structures unless performed by the City or its contractors. 
(s)  Coordination. In an effort to minimize the adverse impact on the public rights-of-way and other municipal improvements, a communications services provider may be required by the Planning Manager or designee to coordinate the placement or maintenance of its facilities with any work, construction, installation in or repairs of the public rights-of-way or other facilities that is occurring or is scheduled to occur within a reasonable time from application for a permit as determined by the Planning Manager or designee. Every communications services provider shall make space in its trench and/or conduit within the public rights-of-way available to other providers consistent with the federal requirements of 47 U.S.C. 224. Every communications services provider shall utilize existing conduits, pathways and other facilities whenever possible, and shall not place or maintain any new, different, or additional poles, conduits, pathways or other facilities, whether in the public rights-of-way or on privately-owned property, until written approval is obtained from the City or other appropriate governmental authority, and, where applicable, from the private property owner. 
(t)  Collocation and joint use. A communications services provider, in an effort to minimize the adverse impact on the useful life of the public rights-of-way, shall, whenever possible, enter into joint use agreements with the City and other parties who have registered with, or who are expressly authorized by, the City to use its public rights-of-way; provided that the terms of such agreements are satisfactory to the communications services provider. Nothing herein shall mandate that the communications services provider enter into joint-use agreements with parties other than the City. However, prior to placement of any new or additional underground conduit in the public rights-of-way, a communications services provider is required to certify in writing to the Planning Manager or designee that it has made appropriate inquiry to all existing utilities and other entities possessing a right to occupy the public rights-of-way as to the availability of existing or planned conduit that the particular communications services provider could reasonably utilize to meet its needs, and that no such conduit is available or planned at a reasonable cost by any other entity on the time schedule reasonably needed. The communications services provider shall not be permitted to perform any placement or maintenance of facilities in those segments of the public rights-of-way where there exists vacant or available conduit, dark fiber or surplus fiber owned by the City or another governmental body which is, or through a reasonable amount of effort and expense, can be made compatible with, the communications services provider's system or network. Under such circumstances the communications services provider shall have the opportunity to enter into a use agreement or lease arrangement with the City at or below reasonable and prevailing market rates for such conduit or fiber or, where owned by another governmental body, shall, in good faith, first exhaust all means of obtaining use of such conduit or fiber before applying for a permit from the City. 
(u)  Maintenance-of-traffic. In the event that placement or maintenance of communications facilities conducted by the communications services provider requires streets or traffic lanes to be closed or obstructed, the communications services provider must, pursuant to the requirements of existing or subsequently enacted City ordinances, obtain all necessary permits from City, and shall obtain approval of its maintenance-of-traffic plan from the Planning Manager or designee. 
(v)  Restoration of the public rights-of-way. After completion of any placement or maintenance of a communications facility in the public rights-of-way or each phase thereof, the communications services provider shall, at its own expense and in a manner reasonably acceptable to the City, restore without delay the public rights-of-way so disturbed to its original condition immediately prior to the placement or maintenance work. If the communications services provider fails to make such restoration within 30 days following the completion of such placement or maintenance, the City may perform such restoration and charge the costs of the restoration to the communications services provider in accordance with F.S. § 337.402, as it may be amended. The communications services provider shall, to the satisfaction of the Planning Manager or designee, maintain and correct any restorations made pursuant hereto for a period of 12 months following the date of its completion. Failure to comply with this subsection shall be deemed sufficient grounds for denial of any future permits for the placement or maintenance of communications facilities. 
(w)  Disruption or destruction of other facilities or property. A communications services provider shall not knowingly place or maintain any facility in a manner that shall in any way disrupt, displace, damage or destroy any sewer line, gas line, water main, pipe, conduit, wires, fiber-optics or other facilities, or property belonging to the City or any other person lawfully occupying the public rights-of-way, without first obtaining the consent of the City. The communications services provider shall bear all responsibility and costs for any such conduct where City consent has not been obtained, and shall pay such costs upon demand. 
(x)  Preservation of public rights-of-way for planned public projects. To the extent not otherwise prohibited by state or federal law, the City shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement of new or additional communications facilities within a particular area of public rights-of-way and may consider, among other things and without limitation, the sufficiency of space to accommodate all of the present communications facilities and pending applications to place and maintain facilities in that area of the public rights-of-way, the sufficiency of space to accommodate City announced plans for public improvements or projects that the City determines are in the public interest, the impact on traffic and traffic safety, and the impact upon existing facilities in the public rights-of-way. 
(y)  City not liable. Except for acts of willful misconduct or gross negligence and to the extent permitted by applicable law, neither the City nor its officials, boards, commissions, consultants, agents, employees or independent contractors shall have any liability to the communications services provider for any claims for any damages, costs, expenses or losses resulting from the City's breakage, removal, alteration or relocation of any facilities of any communications services provider which arose out of or in connection with any emergency or disaster situation, or was, in the sole discretion of the Planning Manager or designee, deemed necessary to facilitate any public works project, public improvement, alteration of a City structure, change in the grade or line of any public rights-of-way, or the elimination, abandonment or closure of any public rights-of-way, or was found by City Council to be in the best interest of the health, safety or general welfare of the public; nor shall any charge be made by the communications services provider against the City for any related damages, costs, expenses or losses. 
(z)  No exemption from permits. Except as provided herein, nothing in this article shall exempt any communications services provider from obtaining permits for work done within the public rights-of-way. 
(aa)  Subject to police powers. The rights of the communications services provider shall be subject to all lawful exercise of police power by the City, and to such other reasonable regulation of the public rights-of-way as the City shall hereafter by resolution or ordinance provide in the interest of the health, safety and general welfare of the public. Any inconsistency or ambiguity between the provisions of this article and any lawful exercise of the City's police power shall be resolved in favor of the latter. 
(bb)  City inspection. The City shall have the right to make such inspections of a communications system or facilities placed or maintained in the public rights-of-way as it finds necessary to ensure compliance with this article. This article shall not be construed to create or hold the City responsible or liable for any damage to persons or property by reason of any inspection by the City of the placement or maintenance of a communications system or facility as authorized herein or failure by the City to so inspect. 
(cc)  Access to manholes. The City, in the proper exercise of its municipal powers and duties with respect to the public rights-of-way, shall have access at any time to all hand holes and manholes in the City belonging to a communications services provider. Before accessing any manhole, the City will make a reasonable good faith effort to provide the communications services provider prior notice to afford an opportunity to have trained personnel present, unless determined by the City to be an emergency situation. 
(dd)  Compatibility, capacity and interference issues. To properly manage and control the use of the public rights-of-way, and to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the public, the City, in its legislative and regulatory role, shall be the final authority on permitting a communications system or facility to be placed in the public rights-of-way and shall exercise such authority in a non-discriminatory manner. It shall be in the sole discretion of the City Attorney whether an easement is compatible with or allows for its use by a communications system or facility. It shall be in the sole discretion of the Planning Manager or designee, based on the nature, design, size, configuration or proposed location of any communications system or facility, whether there is sufficient capacity in a particular section of the public rights-of-way or whether such system or facility will interfere with the facilities or equipment of any municipality, county, public utility, cable operator, or other communications service provider. 
(ee)  No warranty of fitness or suitability. The City makes no express or implied warranties or representations regarding the fitness, suitability, or availability of the public rights-of-way for any communications system or facility or its right to authorize the placement or maintenance of any communications system or facility in the public rights-of-way. Any performance of work, costs incurred or services rendered by a communications services provider shall be at such provider's sole risk. Nothing in this article shall affect the City's authority to acquire or add public rights-of-way, or to vacate or abandon public rights-of-way as provided for in the City Code or applicable law. The City makes no express or implied warranties or representations regarding the availability of any acquired, added, vacated or abandoned public rights-of-way for a communications system or facility. 
(ff)  Taxes. A registrant shall pay any personal property or other taxes or assessments that may be imposed on the registrant's small wireless facility, micro wireless facility, or utility pole for collocation of a small wireless facility placed or maintained in the public rights-of-way or on the City's property, including a City utility pole, as a result of registrant's collocation on a City utility pole. A registrant shall reimburse the City for taxes paid by the City as a result of registrant's facilities being placed or maintained in the public rights-of-way or on a City owned utility pole. 
(gg)  Tree protection. Trees may not be damaged or removed during placement or maintenance of small wireless facilities, utility poles, or wireless support structures in the public rights-of-way. Tree removal is not permitted within the public rights-of-way to increase signal strength or provide a line-of-sight. Landscaping may only be damaged or removed pursuant to a City permit during placement or maintenance of small wireless facilities, utility poles, or wireless support structures. The City will require that any landscaping so removed be replaced in accordance with the approved restoration plan. 
(hh)  Airport airspace. A structure granted a permit and installed pursuant to this article shall comply with F.S. ch. 333, and federal regulations pertaining to airport airspace protections. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 3(Attch. A), 2-6-18)  
Sec. 42-113. - Suspension of permits. 
The City may suspend a permit for work in the public rights-of-way for one or more of the following reasons subject to section 42-114 of this article: 
(1)  Violation of permit conditions, including conditions set forth in the permit, this article or other applicable City ordinances, codes or regulations governing placement or maintenance of communications facilities in public rights-of-way; 
(2)  Misrepresentation or fraud by registrant in a registration or permit application to the City; or 
(3)  Failure to properly renew or ineffectiveness of registration. 
(4)  Failure to relocate or remove facilities as may be lawfully required by the City. 
The City shall provide notice and an opportunity to cure any violation of (1) through (4) above, each of which shall be reasonable under the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 3(Attch. A), 2-6-18)  
Sec. 42-114. - Appeals. 
Final, written decisions of the City Manager or designee suspending or denying a permit, denying an application for a registration or denying an application for renewal of a registration are subject to appeal. An appeal must be filed with the City Manager or designee within 30 days of the date of the final, written decisions to be appealed. Any appeal not timely filed as set forth above shall be waived. The City Council shall hear the appeal as set forth in the City Code. The hearing shall occur within 30 days of the receipt of the appeal, unless waived by the registrant, and a written decision shall be rendered within 20 days of the hearing. Upon correction of the grounds that gave rise to a suspension or denial, the suspension or denial shall be lifted (the same does not apply to the revocation of a permit). 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 3(Attch. A), 2-6-18)  
Sec. 42-115. - Duty to notify City of resellers; conditional use of public rights-of-way. 
Within 30 days of any registered communications services provider using its facilities to carry the communication services of any reseller, such communications services provider shall notify the City of the name and address of such reseller. A reseller's lease, interconnection or other use of facilities belonging to a communications services provider duly registered in accordance with section 42-105 and properly permitted to place or maintain its facilities in the public rights-of-way, does not, and shall not, afford such reseller any right, claim or cause of action to impede the lawful exercise of the City's rights or police powers, including, but not limited to, requiring the registered communications services provider to remove such facilities from the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 3(Attch. A), 2-6-18)  
Sec. 42-116. - Existing communications facilities in public rights-of-way. 
A communications services provider with an existing communications facility in the public rights-of-way of the City has 60 days from the effective date of this article to comply with the terms of this article, including, but not limited to, registration, or be in violation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 3(Attch. A), 2-6-18)  
Sec. 42-117. - Insurance. 
(a)  A registrant shall provide, pay for and maintain, satisfactory to the City, the following types of insurance described herein. All insurance shall be from responsible companies admitted and duly authorized to do business in the State of Florida and shall have assigned by A.M. Best Company, a minimum of Financial Strength Rating of "A" and a minimum Financial Size Category of "IX" (i.e., a size of $250,000,000.00 to $500,000,000.00 based on capital, surplus, and conditional reserve funds). All liability policies shall provide that the City, and its council members, officers, and employees, are named as additional insureds with respect to any covered liability arising out of or relating to the placement or maintenance of communications facilities in the public rights-of-way or other activities under this article. 
(b)  The limits of coverage of insurance required shall be not less than the following: 
(1)  Employer's liability: 
$500,000.00 limit per each accident. 
$500,000.00 limit per each employee. 
(2)  Comprehensive general liability: 
Bodily injury and property damage—$5,000,000.00 combined single limit each occurrence. 
(3)  Automobile liability: 
Bodily injury and property damage—$5,000,000.00 combined single limit each accident. 
(4)  Worker's compensation: 
Florida statutory requirements. 
(c)  The required coverages must be evidenced by properly executed certificates of insurance forms. The certificates, including all endorsements and riders, must be signed by the authorized representative of the insurance company and must be filed and maintained with the City annually. Thirty days advance written notice by registered, certified or regular mail or facsimile, as determined by the City, must be given to the City of any cancellation, intent not to renew, or reduction in the policy coverages. The certificates of insurance must indicate the following: 
(1)  The policy number; name of insurance company; name and address of the agent or authorized representative; name and address of insured; that the policy coverage "pertains the requirements of Section 42-117 of the City of Palm Coast Communications Right-of-Way Ordinance;" policy expiration date; and specific coverage amounts; and 
(2)  Any applicable deductibles or self-insured retentions; and 
(3)  That the City, its council members, officers and employees are additional insureds; and 
(4)  That the City must receive 30 days' advance written notice of cancellation, intent not to renew or reduction in coverage; and 
(5)  That the commercial general liability insurance policy is primary as to any other valid or collectible insurance that the City may possess, including any self-insured retentions the City may have; and any other insurance the City does possess shall be considered excess insurance only and shall not be required to contribute with this insurance. 
(d)  Under extraordinary circumstances, a registrant may satisfy the insurance requirements of this article by providing documentation of self-insurance that, in the sole discretion of the City Manager or designee, demonstrates incontrovertibly the adequacy to defend and cover claims of any nature that might arise from the placement and maintenance of facilities in the public rights-of-way. The registrant must be authorized as a self-insurer by the Department of Insurance under the laws of the State of Florida. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 3(Attch. A), 2-6-18)  
Sec. 42-118. - Indemnification. 
(a)  A registrant shall, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the City, its officials, boards, members, agents, and employees, against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings, judgments for damages or equitable relief, and costs and expenses incurred by the City arising out of or in connection with the placement or maintenance of its communications system or facilities in public rights-of-way by the registrant, or its agent or hired contractor, regardless of whether the act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this article, provided, however, that a registrant's obligation hereunder shall not extend to any claims caused by the negligence, gross negligence or wanton or willful acts of the City. This indemnification provision includes, but is not limited to, such damages and penalties arising out of claims (1) by any person whatsoever on account of (i) bodily injury to a person or persons, (ii) death of a person or persons; or (iii) property damage, where any of the foregoing is occasioned by the operations of the registrant, or alleged to have been so caused or occurred; or (2) involving the registrant's violation of any easement or private property rights. 
(b)  Indemnified costs and expenses shall include, but not be limited to, all out-of-pocket expenses and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in defending against any such claim, suit or proceedings, and shall also include the reasonable value of any services rendered by the City Attorney, or any consultants, agents, and employees of the City. The City agrees to notify the registrant, in writing, within a reasonable time of the City receiving notice of any issue it determines may require indemnification. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the City from participating in the defense of any litigation by its own counsel and at its own cost if, in the City's reasonable belief, there exists or may exist a conflict, potential conflict, or appearance of conflict. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed or interpreted as (a) denying to either party any remedy or defense available to such party under the laws of the State of Florida; or (b) as a waiver of sovereign immunity beyond the waiver provided in F.S. § 768.28, as it may be amended. 
(e)  The indemnification requirements shall survive and be in effect after the termination or cancellation of a registration. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 3(Attch. A), 2-6-18)  
Sec. 42-119. - Maintenance bond. 
A maintenance surety for the communications system shall be submitted upon release of the performance surety. The maintenance surety provides a guarantee that the improvements were completed without defects in workmanship or materials, and guarantees timely removal. The expiration date shall be the date of the eventual removal of the equipment from the right-of-way. 
(a)  Maintenance surety amount . The amount of the maintenance surety shall be based on 20 percent of the actual/present day costs of construction, as certified under seal by the project engineer of record, and subject to approval by the Planning Manager. 
(b)  Maintenance surety release. The maintenance surety may be released by the Planning Manager upon the eventual removal of the improvements from the right-of-way. This action must be initiated, in writing, by the registrant. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 3(Attch. A), 2-6-18)  
Sec. 42-120. - Security fund. 
At or prior to the time of registration, after the effective date of this article, the registrant must file with the City, for City approval, an annual bond, cash deposit or irrevocable letter of credit in the sum of $25,000.00 having as a surety a company qualified to do business in the State of Florida, and acceptable to the City, which shall be referred to as the "security fund". The security fund shall be maintained from such time through the earlier of: 
(1)  Transfer, sale, assignment or removal of all communications facilities in public rights-of-way; or 
(2)  Twelve months after the termination or cancellation of any registration. The security fund shall be conditioned on the full and faithful performance by the registrant of all requirements, duties and obligations imposed upon registrant by the provisions of this article. The security fund shall be furnished annually or as frequently as necessary to provide a continuing guarantee of the registrant's full and faithful performance at all times. In the event a registrant fails to perform its duties and obligations imposed upon the registrant by the provisions of this article, subject to section 42-122 of this article, there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the security fund, any damages or loss suffered by the City as a result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost of removal, relocation or abandonment of any facilities of the registrant in public rights-of-way, plus a reasonable allowance for attorneys' fees, up to the full amount of the security fund. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City may in its discretion not require a security fund or may accept a corporate guarantee of the registrant or its parent company. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 3(Attch. A), 2-6-18)  
Sec. 42-121. - Performance Bond. 
(a)  Before any registrant is permitted to begin the placement or maintenance of an initial build, any substantial rebuild, upgrade or extension of its communications system, or when construction plans show that there would be at least 1,000 feet of open trenching in the public rights-of-way at any given time, the registrant is required to obtain, pay for, and file with the City a performance bond. The performance bond must name the City as obligee and be in the face amount of $250,000.00 conditioned upon the full and faithful compliance by the registrant with all requirements, duties and obligations imposed by the provisions of the City of Palm Coast Communications Rights-of-Way Ordinance, during, and through completion of, the placement or maintenance project. The performance bond shall be in a form acceptable to the City Attorney and must be issued by a surety having a rating reasonably acceptable to the Planning Manager or designee and authorized by the Florida Department of Insurance to issue performance bonds in the state of Florida. 
(b)  The performance bond must be issued as non-cancelable and be for a term consistent with the reasonably expected duration of the particular placement or maintenance project (including restoration and City inspection), but in no event less than 18 months. In the event the term of any performance bond expires, or is reasonably expected to expire, prior to the completion of such placement or maintenance project, including restoration and City inspection, the registrant shall immediately obtain, pay for, and file with the City a replacement bond. 
(c)  The City's requirement of a performance bond is not in lieu of any additional bonds that may be required under this article or through the permitting process. The City's right to recover under the performance bond shall be in addition to all other rights of the City, whether reserved in this article, or authorized by other law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to the performance bond will affect or preclude any other right the City may have. Any proceeds recovered under the performance bond may be used to reimburse the City for such additional expenses as may be incurred by the City as a result of the registrant's failure to comply with the responsibilities imposed by this article, including, but not limited to, attorney's fees and costs of any action or proceeding, and the cost of removal or abandonment of any property. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 3(Attch. A), 2-6-18)  
Sec. 42-122. - Enforcement remedies. 
(a)  A communications services provider's failure to comply with provisions of this article shall constitute a violation of this article and shall subject the communications services provider to the code enforcement provisions and procedures as provided in Article IV. of Chapter 2 of the City's Code of Ordinances. In addition, violation of this article may be punishable as provided in F.S. § 162.22. 
(b)  No provision of this article shall be deemed to bar the right of the City to seek or obtain judicial relief from a violation of any provisions of this article, the registration provisions, or any rule, regulation, or general condition provided for hereunder, whether administratively, judicially or both. Neither the existence of other remedies identified in this article nor the exercise thereof shall be deemed to bar or otherwise limit the right of the City to recover fines, penalties, or monetary damages (except where liquidated damages are otherwise prescribed) for such violation by the communications services provider. The remedies available to the City shall be cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law or equity. The laws of the state of Florida shall govern with respect to any proceeding in law or equity pertaining to the enforcement of this article or any cause or action arising out of or in connection herewith. 
(c)  In any proceeding before the City Council where there exists an issue with respect to a communications services provider's performance of its obligations pursuant to this article, the communications services provider shall be given the opportunity to provide such information as it may have concerning its compliance with the terms and conditions of this article. The City may find a communications services provider that does not demonstrate compliance with the terms and conditions of this article in default and apply any appropriate remedy or remedies as authorized by this article. In determining which remedy is appropriate, the City Council shall take into consideration the nature of the violation, the person bearing the impact of the violation, the nature of the remedy required in order to prevent further violations, and such other matters as the City Council determines are appropriate to the public interest. 
(d)  Failure of the City to enforce any requirements of this article shall not constitute a waiver of the City's right to enforce that violation or subsequent violations of the same type or to seek appropriate enforcement remedies. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 3(Attch. A), 2-6-18)  
Sec. 42-123. - Abandonment of a communications facility. 
(a)  Upon abandonment of a communications facility owned by a registrant in public rights-of-way, the registrant shall notify the City within 60 days. 
(b)  The City may direct the registrant by written notice to remove all or any portion of such abandoned facility at the registrant's sole expense if the City determines that the abandoned facility's presence interferes with the public health, safety or welfare, which shall include, but shall not be limited to, a determination that such facility: 
(1)  Compromises safety at any time for any public rights-of-way user; 
(2)  Compromises safety of other users or persons performing construction or maintenance of facilities in the public rights-of-way; 
(3)  Prevents another person from locating facilities in the area of public rights-of-way where the abandoned facility is located when other alternative locations are not reasonably available; or 
(4)  Creates a maintenance condition that is disruptive to the public rights-of-way use. 
In the event of [subsection] (3), the City may require the third person to coordinate with the registrant that owns the existing facility for joint removal and placement, where agreed to by the registrant. 
(c)  In the event that the City does not direct the removal of the abandoned facility, the registrant, by its notice of abandonment to the City, shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by the City or another person at such third party's cost. 
(d)  If the registrant fails to remove all or any portion of an abandoned facility as directed by the City within the time period specified in the written notice, which time period must be reasonable under the circumstances, the City may perform such removal and charge the cost of the removal against the registrant. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 3(Attch. A), 2-6-18)  
Sec. 42-124. - Force majeure. 
In the event a registrant's performance of or compliance with any of the provisions of this article is prevented by a cause or event not within the registrant's control, such inability to perform or comply shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result, provided, however, that such registrant uses all practicable means to expeditiously cure or correct any such inability to perform or comply. For purposes of this article, causes or events not within a registrant's control shall include, without limitation, acts of God, floods, earthquakes, landslides, hurricanes, fires and other natural disasters, acts of public enemies, riots or civil disturbances, sabotage, strikes and restraints imposed by order of a governmental agency or court. Causes or events within registrant's control, and thus not falling within this section, shall include, without limitation, registrant's financial inability to perform or comply, economic hardship, and misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance by any of registrant's directors, officers, employees, contractors or agents. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 3(Attch. A), 2-6-18)  
Sec. 42-125. - Fees applicable to those not subject to communications services tax. 
While the Florida Legislature has prohibited municipalities from requiring providers of communications services who have registered with the Florida Department of Revenue from having to enter into franchise agreements or license arrangements as a condition to placing or maintaining communications facilities in public rights-of-way, the City expressly reserves the right to require the payment of consideration or regulatory fees by persons using or occupying the Public rights-of-way in other capacities. The City reserves the right to require such payments based on the type of user and to the extent as follows: 
(a)  Dealer . Except as provided in subsection 42-112(t), a communications services provider who meets the definition of dealer as set forth in this article and who has registered in accordance with section 42-105 is not required to enter into a franchise agreement or license arrangement with the City as a condition to placing or maintaining communications facilities in the public rights-of-way, nor is a dealer required to make payment of any franchise fees, license fees or other user fees to the City as consideration for the use or occupancy of the public rights-of-way for the provision of communication services. 
(b)  Pass-through provider and pass-through facilities . A communications services provider who meets the definition of pass-through provider as set forth in this article and who is not subject to the City of Palm Coast's Local Communications Services Tax imposed pursuant to F.S. §§ 202.19 and 202.20, shall pay the City the maximum annual amount allowed under F.S. § 337.401(6)(b), as amended. For purposes of calculating payments hereunder, each separate pole or tower installed or maintained by a pass-through provider for purposes of supporting Antennas for other over-the-air radio transmission or reception equipment in the public rights-of-way shall comprise a separate communications facility subject to assessment of a separate permit fee in the amount of $500.00 per linear mile, or portion thereof, up to the maximum amount allowed under F.S. § 337.401(6)(b), whichever is higher. The annual amount referred to above shall be due and payable on October 1 of every year beginning on October 1, 2017. Fees not paid within ten days after the due date shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from the date due until paid. The acceptance of any payment required hereunder by the City shall not be construed as an acknowledgment that the amount paid is the correct amount due, nor shall such acceptance of payment be construed as a release of any claim which the City may have for additional sums due and payable or authorization to install any facilities in the public rights-of-way. 
(c)  Other persons . All other persons, except government, are required to pay the City, as consideration for the use or occupancy of the public rights-of-way for the placement or maintenance of communications facilities, an amount based on and in accordance with subsection 42-125(b) of the City Code. 
(d)  Government . A government is not required to pay the City consideration for the use or occupancy of the public rights-of-way for the placement or maintenance of communications facilities, unless such facilities are being used by such government or a communications services provider, including resellers, to offer or provide communication services other than for such government's internal non-commercial use, in which event the government, where not subject to the City of Palm Coast's Local Communications Services Tax imposed pursuant to F.S. §§ 202.19 and 202.20, is required to pay the City, as consideration for the use or occupancy of the public rights-of-way by or through its facilities, an amount based on and in accordance with subsection 42-125(b) of the City Code or such other amount or rate of compensation as mutually agreed to in writing by the Government and the City. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 3(Attch. A), 2-6-18)  
Sec. 42-126. - Reservation of rights and remedies. 
(a)  The City hereby expressly reserves the following rights: 
(1)  To exercise its municipal home rule powers, now or hereafter, to the fullest extent allowed by law with regard to the access, use and regulation of the public rights-of-way. 
(2)  To amend this article as it shall find necessary in the lawful exercise of its municipal authority and police powers. 
(3)  To adopt or enact by resolution or ordinance, in addition to the provisions contained herein and in any existing applicable ordinances, such additional reasonable regulations as the City Council finds necessary in the exercise of the City's police powers. 
(4)  To exercise the power of eminent domain, consistent with applicable federal and state law, to acquire property that may include that property owned or leased by a communications services provider. 
(5)  As and when deemed necessary by the City Council to be in the interest of the City or its residents, to abandon portions of the public rights-of-way within the proper exercise of its municipal authority and without notice to or the consent of any communications services provider. The City shall not be responsible for any costs, damages, loss or other expense to the communications services provider as a result of the City's abandonment of any public rights-of-way. 
(6)  To place and maintain, and permit to be placed or maintained, sewer, gas, water, electric, storm drainage, communications, and other types of facilities, cables or conduit, and to do, and to permit to be done any underground and overhead installation or improvement that may be deemed necessary or proper by the City in the public rights-of-way occupied by any communications services provider. 
(7)  Without limitation, to alter, change, or cause to be changed, the grading, installation, relocation, or width of any public rights-of-way within the limits of the City and within said limits as same may from time to time be altered. 
(8)  To require a reseller to register in accordance with section 42-105 to the extent such reseller wants the right to place or maintain communication facilities in the public rights-of-way. Any person using or leasing communication facilities owned by a registered communications services provider is not, therefore, entitled to any rights to place or maintain communications facilities in the public rights-of-way, unless such person themselves registers with the City. 
(b)  This article shall be applicable to all communications facilities placed in the public rights-of-way on or after the effective date of this article and shall apply to all existing communications facilities in the public rights-of-way prior to the effective date of this article, to the full extent permitted by state and federal law. 
(c)  The adoption of this article is not intended to affect any rights or defenses of the City or a communications service provider under any existing franchise, license or other agreements with a communications services provider. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall affect the remedies the City or the registrant has available under applicable law. 
(e)  Any person who uses the communications facilities of a registrant, other than the registrant that owns the facilities, shall not be entitled to any rights to place or maintain such facilities in excess of the rights of the registrant that places or maintains the facilities. 
(f)  If provisions of this article conflict with any other provision of the City Code of Ordinances, or the Land Development Code, the more restrictive provisions shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 3(Attch. A), 2-6-18)  
Sec. 42-127. - Special provisions for eligible facilities modifications. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the City shall not deny any eligible facilities request for a modification to an existing wireless tower or base station within public rights-of-way of the City which does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station provided the procedure and requirements set forth in section 4.20.12, of the Land Development Code, are satisfied. Except as may otherwise be provided in this article, and not withstanding any other provisions in the City Code, the provisions of section 4.20.12 shall be the sole and exclusive procedure for review and approval of an eligible facilities request which the applicant asserts is subject to review under section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012 ("Spectrum Act") as interpreted by the FCC Acceleration of Broadband Deployment Report and Order dated October 21. 2014. To the extent that other provisions of the City Code establish a parallel process for review and approval of a project application for a proposed eligible facilities request, the provisions of section 4.20.12 shall control. In the event that an application for a project incudes a proposal to modify an eligible support structure. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 3(Attch. A), 2-6-18)  
ARTICLE V. - PROTECTION OF STREETS, ROADS AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-05,, §§ 1—3, adopted February 18, 2003, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion as Art. V, §§ 42-139—42-141 was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 42-139. - Recitals; legislative intent. 
(a)  The above recitals set forth in the whereas clauses to this Ordinance represent and constitute the legislative intent of the City Council of the City of Palm Coast. 
(b)  In addition to addressing future actions, it is the intent of this Ordinance to be remedial in nature and to address all unremedied spills of concrete and other similar materials when the person or entity causing the spill has been identified. 
(Ord. No. 03-05, § 1, 2-18-03)  
Sec. 42-140. - Spillage of concrete, other similar cementitious materials on City streets, roads and rights-of-ways. 
(a)  It is unlawful to spill or otherwise locate concrete and other similar cementitious materials upon the streets, roads or rights-of-way located within the City of Palm Coast without a right-of-way utilization permit specifically authorizing the placement of such materials in such locations. 
(b)  Any person or entity utilizing a truck or other motor vehicle, as defined by Section 320.01(1), Florida Statutes, who disburses or distributes concrete and other similar cementitious materials using the roads and streets located within the City of Palm Coast, shall have installed and shall use on such truck or other motor vehicle a chute cap or other equipment that prevents spillage of said material on the streets, roads and rights-of-way located within the City of Palm Coast. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person or entity spilling or placing concrete and other similar cementitious materials upon the roads and streets located within the City of Palm Coast to fail to immediately remove said material from the streets, roads and rights-of-way located within the City of Palm Coast in a manner that is safe under the circumstances of the traffic within such streets, roads and rights-of-way. Activities permitted by means of a duly issued The City's Public Works Director, or his or her designee, shall be immediately advised as to such spills and the proposed efforts to remedy the spillage. right-of-way utilization permit issued by the appropriate authority shall not be prohibited. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person or entity utilizing a truck or other motor vehicle who disburses or distributes concrete and other similar cementitious materials, using the roads and streets located within the City of Palm Coast to fail to have installed upon and use on such truck or other motor vehicle a chute cap or other equipment that prevents spillage of said materials on the streets, roads and rights-of-way located within the City of Palm Coast. 
(Ord. No. 03-05, § 2, 2-18-03)  
Sec. 42-141. - Penalties; enforcement. 
(a)  The violation of this article constitutes a civil infraction. 
(b)  The penalty for violation of this article shall be $500.00 per violation plus any applicable court costs. 
(c)  A civil penalty of $500.00 will be imposed upon any person or entity who, after issuance of the citation, does not contest the citation. 
(d)  Any code enforcement officer designated by the City Manager and deputy sheriffs of Flagler County may issue citations under this article. For issuance of a citation, a code enforcement officer or deputy sheriff must have reasonable cause to believe that a person has committed an act in violation of this Ordinance. 
(e)  In addition to any other procedure relating to the enforcement of the codes and ordinances of the City of Palm Coast, this article may be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Part II, Chapter 162, Florida Statutes, or successor provisions, which are hereby adopted into this article by reference. Citations shall be issued and processed in accordance with the provisions of Section 162.21, Florida Statutes. 
(f)  In the case of spills of concrete and other similar cementitious materials, prior to issuing a citation, a code enforcement officer or deputy sheriff shall provide notice to the person or entity who is violating this article that the person or entity has committed a violation of this article and shall establish a time period within which the person or entity must correct the violation. If, upon personal investigation, a code enforcement officer or deputy sheriff finds that the person or entity has not corrected the violation within the stated time period, the code enforcement officer or deputy sheriff may issue a citation to the person or entity who has committed the violation. A code enforcement officer or deputy sheriff shall not be required to provide the person or entity who has committed a violation of this article with a reasonable time period to correct the violation prior to issuing a citation and may immediately issue a citation if the code enforcement officer or deputy sheriff finds that a violation of 42-142(b), or (d) has occurred has reason to believe that the violation presents a threat to the public health, safety, or welfare, or if the violation is impacting the roads, streets or rights-of-way located within the City of Palm Coast, or if the violation is adversely impacted the traveling public on the roads and streets located within the City of Palm Coast. 
(g)  Issuance of a citation to a business may be accomplished by leaving a copy with the driver of the truck or motor vehicle from which the concrete and other similar cementitious materials spilled or was disbursed or distributed or at the business office of the company using the truck or motor vehicle, during regular business hours, with any employee and informing the employee of the contents, or by registered or certified mail return receipt requested. Each employee of the business shall be deemed to be an agent of the business for service of citations. 
(h)  A citation issued by a code enforcement officer or deputy sheriff shall be in a form prescribed by the City and shall contain at a minimum: 
(1)  The date and time of issuance; 
(2)  The name and address of the person to whom the citation is issued; 
(3)  The date and time the civil infraction was committed; 
(4)  The facts constituting reasonable cause to believe that a violation of this article has occurred; 
(5)  The number of this ordinance: 
(6)  The name and authority of the code enforcement officer or deputy sheriff; 
(7)  The procedure for the person or entity to follow in order to pay the civil penalty or to contest the citation; 
(8)  The applicable civil penalty if the person or entity elects to contest the citation; 
(9)  The applicable civil penalty if the person or entity elects not to contest the citation; 
(10)  A conspicuous statement that, if the person fails to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed, or fails to appear in the county court to contest the citation, the person or entity shall be deemed to have waived the right to contest the citation and that, in such case, judgment may be entered against the person or entity for an amount up to a maximum civil penalty. 
(i)  Any person or entity receiving a citation issued under this article must sign and accept a citation indicating a promise to: 
(1)  Pay the applicable civil penalty within 30 days of issue; or 
(2)  Appear in Flagler County Court within 30 days of issue to receive a hearing date, the time and location of which shall be determined by the clerk of the county court. 
(j)  At any hearing pursuant to this part of this article, the commission of a violation must be proved by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(k)  The Florida Rules of Civil Procedure and the Florida Evidence Code shall be applicable to any hearing. 
(l)  After issuing a citation to an alleged violator, the code enforcement officer or deputy sheriff shall: 
(1)  Deposit the original citation and one copy of the citation with the City Clerk. 
(2)  Provide the alleged violator with one copy; and 
(3)  Retain one copy in the code enforcement officer's or deputy sheriff's file and, in the event the citation is issued by a deputy sheriff, the City's Code Enforcement Supervisor shall be provided a copy. 
(m)  Each violation of this article is a separate civil infraction. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate civil infraction. A violation occurring on consecutive days may be treated as separate violations and result in a penalty for each day of violation. Separate spills or placement of concrete and other similar cementitious materials shall be separate violations of this article. 
(n)  If the person or entity cited refuses to sign a citation, the code enforcement officer or deputy sheriff shall write the words "Refused" or "Refused to Sign" in the space provided for the person's signature. The code enforcement officer or deputy sheriff shall then leave a copy of the citation with the person or entity cited, if possible, and if a deputy sheriff is not the person issuing the citation, shall contact the Flagler County Sheriff's Department to file the necessary reports alleging a violation of Section 162.21(6), Florida Statutes, which provides a person or entity who willfully refuses to sign and accept a citation issued by a code enforcement officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of second degree punishable as provided in Section 775.082, Florida Statutes, or Section 775.083, Florida Statutes. 
(o)  The code enforcement officer or deputy sheriff is hereby authorized to issue a warning notice to any person or entity for violation of this article when, based upon personal investigation, the code enforcement officer or deputy sheriff has reasonable cause to believe that violation has occurred. 
(p)  In addition to all other remedies available to the City, the City may pursue, by all legal means available to the City, the recoupment of all expenses incurred by the City in remedying the impacts of a spill. The person or entity causing a spill shall be obligated to reimburse the City for all costs incurred by the City in remedying a spill. 
(Ord. No. 03-05, § 3, 2-18-03)  
ARTICLE VI. - CITY PARKS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-12, §§ 1—18, adopted May 15, 2007, added provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, said provisions were included herein as §§ 42-161—42-178. 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 8; environment, ch. 24; health and sanitation, ch. 28; park system impact fee, ch. 29, art. III; nuisances, offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 35; solid waste, ch. 41. 
 
Sec. 42-161. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
City Park means land owned, maintained by the City of Palm Coast and designated as a "City Park" by a resolution or any land which has been dedicated for use as a City Park developed or undeveloped which has been accepted by the City Council. Included in the definition of the term "City Park" are the City's community centers and all natural resources, wildlife, facilities, improvements, waters and materials in, on or under the lands so designated. Properties in any system of trails owned by the City are intended to be designated as a City Park. 
Civic Center shall be a public location where members of the community can gather for group activities, social support, public information, and other purposes. 
(Ord. No. 07-12, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 2013-3, § 2, 4-2-13)  
Sec. 42-162. - Hours of operation and general use. 
(a)  All City Parks shall be open during such hours as are set forth by the City Council or as set forth in the administrative rules adopted by the City Manager in implementation of this article. 
(b)  The City Manager may close any City Park or Parks as deemed appropriate in the event of an emergency or an imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(c)  Persons using any City Park do so at their own risk. 
(d)  Adults are responsible for children that they bring to a City Park or who are otherwise under their care, custody or control. 
(e)  Central Park in Town Center is hereby designated as a City of Palm Coast Civic Center. 
(Ord. No. 07-12, § 2, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 2013-3, § 3, 4-2-13)  
Sec. 42-163. - Traffic. 
(a)  The State Uniform Traffic Control Laws, Chapter 316, Florida Statutes, are incorporated by reference and made part of this article and shall apply to the operation of all motor vehicles, as defined in Chapter 316, on streets and roads in all City Park(s), unless modified herein. Law enforcement officers and City employees are hereby authorized to direct traffic whenever necessary within the City Park(s). 
(b)  It is unlawful to operate, drive or park any motor vehicle or other vehicle upon any road, driveway, path, trail, parking area, or other area within a City Park except when the area has been marked, permitted or approved for such activity or activities either by permanent signage or markings or when permitted by the City in the course of a public event or activity. 
(c)  It is unlawful to cause any vehicle for hire to stand upon any part of a City Park for the purpose of soliciting passengers. 
(d)  It is unlawful to drive a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding ten miles per hour in any City Park unless the City has posted a greater speed limit. 
(e)  It is unlawful to enter or exit from any City Park in any vehicle except at entrances and exits designated for such purpose by the City. 
(Ord. No. 07-12, § 3, 5-15-07)  
Sec. 42-164. - Pollution and litter. 
(a)  It is unlawful to throw or place or cause to be thrown or placed, any litter, dirt, filth, or foreign matter into the waters of any lake, pond, pool, river, inlet, tank or reservoir in any City Park or on the grounds of any City Park. 
(b)  It is unlawful to cause any pollutant, as defined in Section 206.9925 or Section 376.031, Florida Statutes, to be placed in or to otherwise pollute the lands or waters of a City Park. 
(Ord. No. 07-12, § 4, 5-15-07)  
Sec. 42-165. - Removal of natural resources. 
(a)  It is unlawful to remove any beach sand, whether submerged or not, any soil, rock, stones, plants, wood, flora, fauna or their materials from the City Park unless issued a general or specific permit to do so by the City for the purposes of educational activities or good husbandry. 
(b)  It is unlawful to cause or make any excavation by tools, equipment, blasting or other means or agency at a City Park unless issued a general or specific permit to do so by the City for the purposes of educational activities or good husbandry. 
(c)  It is unlawful to use golf clubs within a City Park unless the City Park is designated and authorized for use as a City public golf course, putting green or driving range. Otherwise, the possession of a golf club within a City Park shall be rebuttably presumed to be a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 07-12, § 5, 5-15-07)  
Sec. 42-166. - Fireworks; destructive devices; weapons; other potentially dangerous uses. 
(a)  It is unlawful to carry, fire or discharge any destructive device or explosive as those terms are defined in F.S. § 790.001, (including, however, in this prohibition, the items excepted as destructive devices), Florida Statutes, or any fireworks, as defined in F.S. § 791.01, of any description in a City Park. 
(b)  It is unlawful to carry, fire or use rockets at a City Park unless such uses are specifically permitted for a special occasion. 
(Ord. No. 07-12, § 6, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 2011-16, § 3, 10-4-11) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 2011-16, adopted Oct. 4, 2011, changed the title of § 42-166 from "Firearms; fireworks; destructive devices; weapons; other potentially dangerous uses" to "Fireworks; destructive devices; weapons; other potentially dangerous uses."  
Sec. 42-167. - Hunting/wildlife preservation and conservation. 
(a)  It is unlawful to harass, hunt, catch, harm, kill, trap, shoot, shine lights at or throw missiles at any animal, of any type or species, in any City Park. 
(b)  It is unlawful to use nets to catch fish in any publicly owned body of water or within any City Park. 
(c)  It is unlawful to use troutlines to catch fish in any publicly owned body of water or within any City Park. 
(d)  It is unlawful for a person to remove or have in his or her possession any wild animal, of any type or species, or the eggs or nest of young reptile or bird which is or was located in a City Park. 
(e)  It is unlawful to introduce into or leave any wild animal in a City Park. 
(f)  The City may issue permits to allow activities and actions that are otherwise contrary to the provisions of this section if the City determines that the activities and actions will be accomplished for management, scientific or husbandry purposes and are consistent with the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 07-12, § 7, 5-15-07)  
Sec. 42-168. - Domestic and other animals. 
(a)  It is unlawful to allow any pet or domestic animal, as defined in Section 585.001 or Section 823.041, Florida Statutes, under a person's care, custody or control into any City Park unless the rules promulgated by the City with regard to the particular City Park specifically authorizes such animals to be present and, in the event of such rules being promulgated, a person may act in accordance with such rules. 
(b)  It is unlawful to abandon any domestic animal, as defined in Section 585.01 or Section 823.041, Florida Statutes, into or at a City Park. 
(c)  It is unlawful to feed any animal at a City Park unless the rules promulgated by the City, or a permit issued by the City, with regard to the particular City Park or specific activity specifically authorizes the feeding of animals. 
(d)  The rights of persons to use dog guides, service dogs or primates of the genus Cebus , in accordance with the provisions of Section 413.08, Florida Statutes, shall not be violated or abridged by application of the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 07-12, § 8, 5-15-07)  
Sec. 42-169. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 2013-2, adopted March 19, 2013, repealed § 42-169, which pertained to alcoholic beverages/tobacco products, and derived from Ord. No. 07-12, § 9, adopted May 15, 2007.  
Sec. 42-170. - Trespass. 
It is unlawful for a person to enter or remain in a City Park without a permit when a City Park is closed or the person is barred from being present at the City Park. 
(Ord. No. 07-12, § 10, 5-15-07)  
Sec. 42-171. - Fires. 
It is unlawful to ignite, set or maintain any fire in a City Park unless such fire is within an area designated for fires in signage and postings displayed at the City Park. Included in this prohibition are activities such as the use of portable cooking equipment of whatever type or nature. 
(Ord. No. 07-12, § 11, 5-15-07)  
Sec. 42-172. - Camping and sleeping. 
It is unlawful to sleep, camp, lodge or park a vehicle overnight in a City Park without a permit or, upon obtaining a permit, to sleep, camp, lodge or park a vehicle overnight in areas not designated for such purposes in signage and postings displayed at the City Park. 
(Ord. No. 07-12, § 12, 5-15-07)  
Sec. 42-173. - Signs/defacement of trees, etc. 
(a)  It is unlawful to post or affix to any tree, shrub, plant, fence, building, structure, monument, wall, table, apparatus, bridge, post, bench, gate or any other physical object located in a City Park any sign, poster or printed matter without a City permit. 
(b)  It is unlawful to mark, deface, disfigure or injure any tree, building, equipment, property or facility located on a City Park. 
(Ord. No. 07-12, § 13, 5-15-07)  
Sec. 42-174. - Noise and related conduct. 
(a)  It is unlawful to play any musical instrument or audio amplification system or engage in any activity in such a manner as creates a nuisance or disturbance in a City Park as set forth in sections 35-51 and 35-52 of this Code without a City permit. 
(b)  It is unlawful to use abusive, offensive, profane, obscene or foul language at a City Park. 
(Ord. No. 07-12, § 14, 5-15-07)  
Sec. 42-175. - Peddling/distribution of materials. 
It is unlawful to engage in any commercial activity or sell or offer for sale any tangible or intangible stock, object, merchandise or thing, or solicit for any trade, occupation, business or profession for any consideration within a City Park without a permit issued by the City. 
(Ord. No. 07-12, § 15, 5-15-07)  
Sec. 42-176. - Injuring, interfering with, etc., buildings and other property. 
It is unlawful to mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or remove any building, bridge, table, bench, fireplace, railing, paving or paving material, waterline or other public utility or part or appurtenance thereof, sign, notice, or placard whether temporary or permanent, monument, stake, post, or other structure, equipment or any facilities, property or appurtenances whatsoever, located at a City Park. 
(Ord. No. 07-12, § 16, 5-15-07)  
Sec. 42-177. - Interference with personnel/park operations. 
(a)  It is unlawful to interfere with, hinder, or oppose any Law Enforcement Officer or City employee in the discharge of his or her duties or with the enforcement of this article. 
(b)  It is unlawful to interfere with the operations of a City Park by gathering in groups that are not engaged in bona fide recreational activities consistent with the facilities of the City Park. 
(Ord. No. 07-12, § 17, 5-15-07)  
Sec. 42-178. - Promulgation of rules. 
(a)  The City Manager is hereby authorized to adopt administrative rules supplemental to the provisions of this article that he or she deems necessary and appropriate to implement the provisions of this article relative to the use of City Parks and the violation of such rules shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(b)  In addition to matters otherwise provided for in this article, the rules of the City may pertain to the appropriate and harmonious use of trails consistent with the multiple uses that will be authorized on the trails, the location of particular recreational activities and other activities at City Parks, whether parks are to be used for active or passive recreational activities, access management with regard to traffic control and management within City Parks, the operation of motor vehicles and other forms of transportation within City Parks, pollution and litter within City Parks, the harming or removal of animals or natural resources within or from City Parks, the use of dangerous instrumentalities within City Parks, the use of alcoholic beverages within City Parks, hunting and fishing within City Parks, domestic animals within City Parks, use of City Park property and the conditions relating thereto, trespass upon and disturbance within City Parks, disorderly conduct and loitering within City Parks, fires and illumination within City Parks, and such other related matters which address the protection of public property located in and good order in City Parks. 
(c)  The provisions of this article and the rules adopted by the City, or a sign or notice providing for the location of such documents, shall be posted at a conspicuous place in each City Park. 
(d)  A general condition of each permit to use a City Park is that the permittee shall abide by and adhere to the provisions of this article and the rules promulgated by the City, except as may be otherwise specifically permitted by the City by means of a permit issued for a specific event or activity. 
(e)  The City Manager shall regularly review, or cause to be reviewed, the use of and conditions within each City Park in order to minimize public liability relating to City Parks. 
(f)  The City Manager shall regularly review, or cause to be reviewed, the use and condition of each City Park to ensure compliance with the Americans With Disabilities Act and other laws, rules and regulations where applicable. 
(Ord. No. 07-12, § 18, 5-15-07)  
Chapter 43 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; alcoholic beverages, ch. 7; businesses and business regulations, ch. 16; franchise regulations, ch. 27. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL  
ARTICLE II. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION 
 
Sec. 43-31. - Authority and purpose. 
This article is adopted pursuant to the specific authority of Section 6(f), Article VII of the Florida Constitution; F.S. § 196.075, and the City's home rule powers granted by F.S. ch. 166, and the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 00-54, § 1, 11-7-00)  
Sec. 43-32. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Department of revenue means the State of Florida Department of Revenue. 
Household means a person or group of persons living together in a room or group of rooms as a housing unit, but the term does not include persons boarding in or renting a portion of the dwelling. 
Household income means the adjusted gross income, as defined in Section 62 of the United States Internal Revenue Code, of all members of the household. 
May is permissive when used herein. 
Property appraiser means the Flagler County Property Appraiser. 
Shall is mandatory when used herein. 
Sixty-five years of age means a person who has attained the age of 65 prior to January 1st of the tax year for which the additional homestead exemption is sought. 
(Ord. No. 00-54, § 2, 11-7-00)  
Sec. 43-33. - Entitlement to additional homestead exemption. 
(a)  Any person 65 years of age or older who has legal or equitable title to real estate located within the City and who maintains thereon his or her permanent residence, which residence qualifies for and receives homestead exemption pursuant to Section 6(a), Article VII of the Florida Constitution, and whose household income does not exceed $20,000.00 per year shall be entitled to make application for an additional homestead exemption of $50,000.00 as provided in this article. 
(b)  The additional homestead exemption, if granted, shall be applicable to all ad valorem tax millage rates levied by the City and, if applicable, shall be subject to the provisions of F.S. §§ 196.075, 196.131 and 196.161. If title to the property is held jointly with right of survivorship, the person residing on the property and otherwise qualifying for the additional homestead exemption may receive the entire amount of the additional homestead exemption provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 00-54, § 3, 11-7-00; Ord. No. 07-13, § 1, 5-15-07)  
Sec. 43-34. - Annual adjustment of income. 
Beginning January 1, 2002, and continuing every January 1st thereafter, the $20,000.00 income limitation shall be automatically adjusted by the percentage of change in the average cost-of-living index in the period of January 1st through December 31st of the prior year as compared to the same period for the year prior to that year. As used herein, the term "index" shall be the average of the monthly consumer-price index figures for the stated 12-month period, for the United States as a whole, issued by the United States Department of Labor. 
(Ord. No. 00-54, § 4, 11-7-00)  
Sec. 43-35. - Requirements for claiming additional homestead exemption. 
(a)  Every person claiming the additional homestead exemption pursuant to this section must file an application with the property appraiser no later than March 1st of each year for which such exemption is claimed. The application shall be on a form prescribed by the Florida Department of Revenue and shall include a sworn statement of household income for all members of the household. On or before June 1st of each year, each applicant must file supporting documentation with the property appraiser, including copies of all federal income tax returns, wage and earning statements (W-2 forms), and such other documentation as may be required by the property appraiser, including documentation necessary to verify the income received by all members of the household for the prior year. The applicant's statement shall attest to the accuracy of all documentation provided, and the property appraiser shall not grant the exemption without the required documentation. 
(b)  Failure to file the application and sworn statement by March 1st, or failure to file the required supporting documentation by June 1st, of any given year shall constitute a waiver of the additional exemption privilege for that year. 
(Ord. No. 00-54, § 5, 11-7-00)  
Sec. 43-36. - Reporting requirements. 
The City Manager shall annually report to the City Council the economic impact associated with this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-54, § 6, 11-7-00; Ord. No. 07-13, § 2, 5-15-07)  
ARTICLE III. - LIENS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY  
DIVISION 2. - LIENS AGAINST PROPERTY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-09, §§ 1—9, adopted April 3, 2007, added provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, said provisions were included herein as §§ 43-76—43-84. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 15. 
 
Sec. 43-76. - Short title. 
This division shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Palm Coast Lien Ordinance" and shall apply to the enforcement and collection of all liens levied against property by the City of Palm Coast. 
(Ord. No. 07-09, § 1, 4-3-07)  
Sec. 43-77. - Legislative findings and intent. 
The City Council of the City of Palm Coast hereby finds that, in the absence of this division, property owners do not always bear the burden of paying for improvements to their properties accomplished by the City or services provided by the City that benefit their properties as required by the codes and ordinances of the City of Palm Coast. The express intent of this division is to provide a method whereby the City can recover the costs of improvements and benefits inuring to private property as a result of City action and services provided to and for the benefit of such properties by the City and as required by the codes and ordinances of the City. 
(Ord. No. 07-09, § 2, 4-3-07)  
Sec. 43-78. - Liens included/excluded from affect of division. 
(a)  This section applies to all liens imposed that are due and owing to the City as set forth in this division. 
(b)  Liens that are the subject of this division include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Nuisance abatement liens; 
(2)  Sanitation (garbage and trash removal) liens; 
(3)  Stormwater utility liens; 
(4)  Water, sewer, and other related utility liens; 
(5)  Liens/debts relating to permits issued by the City; and 
(6)  Impact fee liens. 
(c)  Liens resulting from Code Enforcement Board orders imposing fines are excluded from the provisions of this division as are liens against homestead property, except for those specifically authorized by law. Liens arising from Code Enforcement Board proceedings shall be subject to the controlling provisions of law. Liens may be satisfied upon full payment or the City Council, or City Manager to the extent of delegated powers, may settle and satisfy liens at amounts less than the total amount of liens. 
(Ord. No. 07-09, § 3, 4-3-07)  
Sec. 43-79. - Priority of liens. 
Liens created by the City of Palm Coast and recorded in the Public Records of Flagler County shall remain liens coequal with the liens of all State, County, district, and municipal taxes, superior in dignity to all other liens, titles and claims, until paid, and may be foreclosed pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 173, Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 07-09, § 4, 4-3-07)  
Sec. 43-80. - Notices of lien. 
Within ten days after a lien against a property is recorded in the Public Records of Flagler County, the City Manager, or designee, shall mail to the property owner of record a notice of lien, informing the property owner of the existence of the lien, the amount of the lien and the work performed by the City for which such lien was imposed. If more than one person owns the property, notice to one owner shall be conclusively deemed to be notice to all owners. 
(Ord. No. 07-09, § 5, 4-3-07)  
Sec. 43-81. - Appeal of lien. 
(a)  Within 30 days after a notice of lien is mailed by the City Manager, or designee, to the property owner, the property owner may file an appeal to the City Manager or City Council as set forth herein to contest the existence of the lien or the amount of the lien. 
(b)  The form used to appeal such a lien must be substantially as follows: 
In re the lien on: (Legal description and address of property). 
Notice of Lien Appeal 
I am the (owner or representative legally authorized to represent the owner) of the parcel of property located at ___________. I received a notice dated ________ that a lien in the amount of _____ has been levied on this property due to the City of Palm Coast's performance of the following labor performed or service provided on or fees relating to that property: 
(List labor performed or service provided by the City or fees due to the City) 
I wish to appeal to the (City Manager/City Council) the filing of such lien and/or the amount of such lien. 
The basis on which I appeal the lien is as follows: 
(State basis for appeal) 
___________ 

Owner or authorized 

representative (Signature) 
(c)  The notice of lien appeal must be filed with the City Manager, or designee, within 30 days of the City's mailing of the notice of lien. This time requirement is jurisdictional. Failure to file the appeal with the City, and pay any applicable fee established by the City Council for the filing of said appeal, within 30 days shall be conclusively deemed to be abandonment of any right to appeal or to otherwise contest the lien. 
(d)  Upon receipt, the notice of lien appeal with regard to liens of $1,000.00 or less, the appeal will be forwarded to the City Manager, who shall be empowered to adjust, settle, compromise, or adjudicate any appeal on behalf of the City under the provisions of this division within that jurisdictional amount. 
(e)  The City Council shall have authority with regard to all liens exceeding $1,000.00 and may adjust, settle, compromise, or adjudicate any appeal on behalf of the City in accordance with the provisions of this division. Upon receipt, the notice of lien appeal within the jurisdictional limits of the City Council, the City Manager shall schedule an appeal hearing before the City Council. 
(f)  Decisions of the City Manager or the City Council, within their respective jurisdictional amounts, shall be final and appeals therefrom shall be to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 07-09, § 6, 4-3-07)  
Sec. 43-82. - Collection of liens. 
All liens shall become due and payable 30 days after the mailing of the notice of lien by the City Manager, or designee, to the property owner, except in such cases where an appeal is filed pursuant to section 43-81, in which case the lien is due and payable 30 days from the decision of the City Manager or City Council as the case may be. After the respective due dates above fixed, all unpaid liens shall become delinquent and shall thereafter bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum; provided, however, that if said interest amount exceeds the maximum amount permitted by State law, then the interest rate shall be established at the maximum amount permitted by State law. 
(Ord. No. 07-09, § 7, 4-3-07)  
Sec. 43-83. - Service charge for lien search. 
There shall be a service charge, established by resolution, for the preparation of a written confirmation of a lien search for the determination of whether a property has any liens owed to the City and the amounts owed, if any. 
(Ord. No. 07-09, § 8, 4-3-07)  
Sec. 43-84. - Promulgation of rules. 
The City Manager is hereby authorized to adopt administrative rules supplemental to the provisions of this division that he or she deems necessary and appropriate to implement the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 07-09, § 9, 4-3-07)  
DIVISION 3. - AD VALOREM TAXATION 
 
Sec. 43-106. - Actions upon approval of referendum election. 
(a)  Upon a majority vote of the electors of the City of Palm Coast voting at the referendum election called in Section 3 in favor of the authority vested in Article VII, Section (3)(c), Constitution of the State of Florida, and F.S. § 196.1995, the City Council, at its discretion, by ordinance may exempt from ad valorem taxation up to 100 percent of the assessed value of all improvements to real property made by or for the use of a new business within the City of Palm Coast and of all tangible personal property of such new business, or up to 100 percent of the assessed value of all added improvements to real property made to facilitate the expansion of an existing business within the City of Palm Coast and of the net increase in all tangible personal property acquired to facilitate such expansion of an existing business, provided that the improvements to real property are made or the tangible personal property is added or increased on or after the day the ordinance is enacted. Property acquired to replace existing property shall not be considered to facilitate a business expansion. The ad valorem tax exemption shall apply only to taxes levied by the City of Palm Coast. The exemption shall not apply, however, to taxes levied for the payment of bonds or to taxes authorized by a vote of the electors pursuant to Article VII, Section 9(b) or Section 12 of the Constitution of the State of Florida. Any such exemption shall remain in effect for up to ten years with respect to any particular facility, regardless of any change in the authority of the City of Palm Coast to grant such exemptions. The exemption shall not be prolonged or extended by granting exemptions from additional taxes or by virtue of any reorganization or sale of the business receiving the exemption. 
(b)  Property annexed into the City shall be controlled by the provisions of State law relating to annexed properties. 
(c)  The authority to grant exemptions under this article shall expire ten years after the date such authority was approved in the referendum election called in Section 3 of Ordinance Number 2003-14, but such authority may be renewed for another period of ten years in a referendum called and held pursuant to the provisions of Florida law. 
(d)  Any person, firm, or corporation which desires an economic development ad valorem tax exemption shall, in the year the exemption is desired to take effect, file a written application on a form prescribed by the Florida Department of Revenue with the City Council. The application shall request the adoption of an ordinance granting the applicant an exemption pursuant to this article and shall include, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  The name and location of the new business or the expansion of an existing business; 
(2)  A description of the improvements to real property for which an exemption is requested and the date of commencement of construction of such improvements; 
(3)  A description of the tangible personal property for which an exemption is requested and the dates when such property was or is to be purchased; 
(4)  Proof, to the satisfaction of the City Council, that the applicant is a new business or an expansion of an existing business, as defined in F.S. §§ 196.012 (15) or (16), and 
(5)  Other information deemed necessary by the Florida Department of Revenue and the City. 
(e)  Before it takes action on the application, the City Council shall deliver a copy of the application to the Flagler County Property Appraiser. After careful consideration, the Property Appraiser shall report the following information to the City Council: 
(1)  The total revenue available to the City for the current fiscal year from ad valorem tax sources, or an estimate of such revenue if the actual total revenue available cannot be determined; 
(2)  Any revenue lost to the City for the current fiscal year by virtue of exemptions previously granted under this article, or an estimate of such revenue if the actual revenue lost cannot be determined; 
(3)  An estimate of the revenue which would be lost to the City during the current fiscal year if the exemption applied for were granted had the property for which the exemption is requested otherwise been subject to taxation; and 
(4)  A determination as to whether the property for which an exemption is requested is to be incorporated into a new business or the expansion of an existing business, as defined in F.S. § 196.012 (15) or (16), or into neither, which determination the Property Appraiser shall also affix to the face of the application. Upon the request of the Property Appraiser, the Florida Department of Revenue shall provide to him or her such information as it may have available to assist in making such determination. 
(f)  Any ordinance enacted by the City Council granting an exemption pursuant to this article shall be adopted in the same manner as any other ordinance of the City and shall include, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the new business or expansion of an existing business to which the exemption is granted; 
(2)  The total amount of revenue available to the City from ad valorem tax sources for the current fiscal year, the total amount of revenue lost to the City for the current fiscal year by virtue of economic development ad valorem tax exemptions currently in effect, and the estimated revenue loss to the City for the current fiscal year attributable to the exemption of the business named in the ordinance; 
(3)  The period of time for which the exemption will remain in effect and the expiration date of the exemption; and 
(4)  A finding that the business named in the ordinance meets the requirements of this article and F.S. §§ 196.012 (15) or (16). 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 4, 8-5-03)  
Sec. 43-107. - Advertisement/duties of city manager and city clerk. 
The City Manager is hereby directed to provide for such administrative actions as may be necessary and convenient in order to implement the provisions of this article. The City Clerk is hereby directed to ensure that the referendum election occurs in accordance with the provisions of Section 8 of the City of Palm Coast Charter and that notice of this referendum shall be advertised in accordance with the provisions of F.S. § 100.342. Proof of publication shall be provided to the City Manager by the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall also coordinate all activities necessary to conduct the referendum election called for in Section 3 of this article with the Supervisor of Elections for Flagler in order to ensure the effective implementation of the referendum election. 
(Ord. No. 03-14, § 5, 8-5-03)  
Chapter 44 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; animals, ch. 8; businesses and business regulations, ch. 16; environment, ch. 24; impact fees, ch. 29; streets, roads, bridges and other public places, ch. 42. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 44-1. - School crossing safety zones. 
(a)  Established. Safety zones for school crossings on Belle Terre Parkway and Parkview Drive at Belle Terre Middle School and Wadsworth Elementary School are established. Suitable signs, pavement markings, and traffic signals shall be installed at the safety zones establishing the limits of the safety zones. 
(b)  Speed limit. 
(1)  A speed limit of 20 miles per hour is hereby established in the safety zones when flashing yellow signals are in operation. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to exceed a speed of 20 miles per hour in the safety zones when flashing signals are in operation. 
(3)  Penalties for violation of the speed limit within the safety zones shall be in accordance with F.S. § 316.655. 
(Ord. No. 00-26, § 1, 3-14-00)  
ARTICLE II. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 
 
Sec. 44-32. - Penalty. 
Any person who directly or indirectly violates the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a nonmoving violation and, in accordance with F.S. § 316.1967, shall be subject to a fine of $25.00 for the first offense, $50.00 for the second offense, and $100.00 for the third or subsequent offenses. 
(Ord. No. 00-26, § 1, 3-14-00; Ord. No. 01-9, § 6, 3-20-01)  
Sec. 44-33. - Parking on public rights-of-way. 
(a)  Paved rights-of-way. Except in the case of emergencies as defined in the Florida Statutes, the parking of vehicles, private passenger or recreational vehicles in the paved rights-of-way of City roads is prohibited. 
(b)  Unpaved rights-of-way. The parking of vehicles in the unpaved rights-of-way (including, but not limited to, swales) is prohibited between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person who directly or indirectly violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a nonmoving violation and, in accordance with F.S. § 316.1967, shall be subject to a fine of $25.00 for the first offense, $50.00 for the second offense, and $100.00 for the third or subsequent offenses. 
(Ord. No. 00-26, § 1, 3-14-00; Ord. No. 01-9, § 4, 3-20-01; Ord. No. 06-02, § 2, 2-21-06)  
Sec. 44-34. - Parking and storage of vehicles generally. 
(a)  It is prohibited and unlawful to park or store any unlicensed motor vehicle on any improved or unimproved lot in excess of 12 hours, except where a vehicle has just been acquired and the homeowner or home occupant or agent applies for a Florida motor vehicle registration the first business day following delivery of the vehicle. 
(b)  It is prohibited and unlawful to park, locate, use or store a vehicle of any description on an undeveloped lot, parcel or unplatted land, except when otherwise lawfully permitted under the following conditions: 
(1)  For vehicles actively involved during daylight hours in construction, survey, repair, mowing, delivery or similar services on the lot or property on which the vehicle is parked; 
(2)  For emergency and governmental service vehicles, while in active service; 
(3)  On unplatted lands not posted by the owner, for recreational access during daylight hours only; 
(4)  For designated public or private parking areas authorized by the City; and 
(5)  For trailers and mobile construction equipment parked on active and permitted construction sites. 
(c)  It is prohibited and unlawful to park or store a motor vehicle overnight in a residential zone, except passenger vehicles, as defined herein. Such vehicles must be parked in a garage or carport, or parked in a driveway or designated residential parking lot. A passenger vehicle is an automobile, motorcycle, moped, passenger van, sport utility vehicle, or a pickup truck. Pickup truck means any motor vehicle designed primarily for the transportation of property or cargo within a permanently attached open cargo box and having a carrying capacity of one ton or less. A pickup truck which is equipped with a standard flatbed topper which does not exceed the height of the cab portion of the vehicle by more than 12 inches shall not be considered a commercial vehicle. It is prohibited and unlawful to park or store a commercial vehicle anywhere in City limits as posted per Florida State Statute 316.1945 at any time unless at a residence for a residential service call. A commercial vehicle means any agricultural, construction or industrial equipment; any motor vehicle upon which advertising markings have been affixed which occupy in excess of three square feet per side; any motor vehicle having a carrying capacity of more than one ton; any motor vehicle to which has been added a platform rack or other similar apparatus designed for carrying property or cargo, but excluding a standard luggage rack; any pickup truck to which has been added a cargo box, or similar carrying device, which is located outside the flatbed portion of the vehicle, or which is located within the flatbed portion but exceeds the height of the cab portion of the vehicle; any motor vehicle equipped with a hoist or other similar mechanical equipment. The term may include, but is not limited to, a bus, step van, tractor, trailer, semitrailer, or semitruck, limousine, cab, ice cream truck, tow truck or any vehicle which requires a commercial driver's license to operate. The allowance of passenger vehicles, as defined herein, shall not be used by owners of residential lots as a pretext for storing commercial supplies and goods in violation of the City's home occupation use special exception standards. 
(d)  Recreational vehicle restrictions. All noncommercial recreational vehicles, including, but not limited to, motor homes, travel trailers, campers, vessels, boats, boat trailers, or similar vehicles, equipment or apparatus, otherwise lawful and in compliance with controlling law, may be parked or stored in a noncommercial, nonindustrial, or non- recreational vehicle permitted neighborhood, subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  It is prohibited and unlawful to park or store a recreational vehicle within any required front or side yard setback areas. 
(2)  It is prohibited and unlawful to park or store a recreational vehicle for more than a total of three days, or any part thereof in any consecutive seven-day period on a residential driveway as set forth herein, unless for the purposes of repair, maintenance or bona fide preparation for off-premises use. Any part of a day shall be considered a full day for enforcement purposes. 
(3)  Resident-owned vehicles, otherwise lawful and in compliance with controlling law, may be parked or stored in designated screened areas outside of the driveway, provided the owner or occupant establishes that such area has been permitted and constructed pursuant to the City's land development code or has been approved in writing by the architectural review committee. The permit or approval must pre-date March 14, 2001. Proof of such permit or approval must be presented to the City by the owner or occupant within three days of the first code enforcement warning notice, and the owner or occupant must further establish current compliance with all of the conditions associated with the permit or approval. Failure to timely present a permit or approval within said three day period shall result in a waiver of the exception granted herein. 
(4)  A recreational vehicle owned by a guest of a resident of such premises, otherwise lawful and in compliance with controlling law, may be parked for temporary periods, not to exceed any part of seven consecutive days in the resident's driveway, as far from the street right-of-way as practicable, but it is prohibited and unlawful to use, park or store such recreational vehicle for the purposes of overnight lodging. It is prohibited and unlawful to use serial stays to attempt to extend the length of time a recreational vehicle may be parked on such a driveway. 
(5)  It is prohibited and unlawful to park or store a recreational vehicle within any space that obstructs any window, entrance or exit from the dwelling necessary to, or serving the health, safety and general welfare of occupants of the dwelling or lot. 
(e)  Parking or movement of motor vehicles on or across any bicycle or pedestrian path accessible to the general public, except at public road crossings and driveways, is prohibited and unlawful except for maintenance vehicles when engaged in bona fide maintenance activities and governmental or governmentally authorized and permitted emergency vehicles. 
(f)  The parking of automobiles and other motor vehicles, except upon paved driveways of improved lots or portions of driveways constructed and approved by the City after adoption of this section, is prohibited and unlawful. 
(g)  The overnight parking and storage of any motor vehicle on any road right-of-way is prohibited and unlawful. 
(h)  The overnight placement of any moving and/or storage structure, whether temporary or permanent and regardless of size, type or nature, in the paved or unpaved portion of any driveway, or any location on a lot, or in or on any road right-of-way is prohibited and unlawful. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a temporary moving and/or storage structure may be placed on the paved driveway portion of a parcel in conjunction with a bona fide move to or from the parcel resulting from a change in occupancy; provided, however, that, in no event, may the moving and/or storage structure remain on the premises for a period exceeding seven consecutive days; provided, further, however, that only one placement of such a structure may occur on a parcel during each calendar year absent written proof being provided in advance to the City's Code Enforcement Administrator that a bona fide additional move will occur during the same calendar year relative to the same premises. 
(i)  It is prohibited and unlawful to park a vehicle, vessel, dumpster, portable toilet, or any type of equipment or structure for any period of time on a median of a road, except in bona fide; emergency circumstances. 
(j)  Any person asserting the need for reasonable accommodation under the Americans with Disabilities Act; must provide written documentation to perfect such assertion prior to using a vehicle or property in a manner that violates the provisions of this section. The City Manager or designee, shall evaluate the assertion and render a written decision in a timely manner relative to the assertion. The decision of the City Manager shall be final and appeal therefrom may be filed in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 00-26, § 1, 3-14-00; Ord. No. 01-9, § 5, 3-20-01; Ord. No. 2004-11, § 1, 5-4-04; Ord. No. 06-02, § 1, 2-21-06)  
Sec. 44-35. - Vehicles on roads or streets within City; action by Law Enforcement Officer. 
(a)  Definitions. The terms used in this section shall, unless otherwise specified, be defined as set forth in F. S. ch. 316, as amended. 
(b)  Upon any road or street inside the City, no person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main-traveled part of the road or street when it is practical to stop, park or so leave the vehicle off such part of the road or street; but in any event, an unobstructed width of the road or street opposite a standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles, and a clear view of the stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each direction upon the road or street. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to the driver or owner of any vehicle which is disabled while on the paved or main-traveled part of a road or street in such a manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in such position, or to passenger-carrying buses temporarily parked while loading or discharging passengers, where road or street conditions render such parking off the paved portion of the road or street hazardous or impractical. 
(d)  Whenever any Law Enforcement Officer finds a vehicle standing upon a road or street in violation of any of the foregoing provisions of this section, the officer is authorized to move the vehicle, or require the driver or other persons in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the paved or main-traveled part of the road or street. 
(e)  Officers are hereby authorized to provide for the removal of any abandoned vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety, cost of such removal and storage to be a lien against the motor vehicle, when the abandoned vehicle is found unattended upon a bridge or causeway or on any public road or street in the following instances: 
(1)  Where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction of traffic; 
(2)  Where such vehicle has been parked or stored on the public right-of-way for a period exceeding 48 hours, in other than designated parking areas, and is within 30 feet of the pavement edge; 
(3)  Where a vehicle has been parked or stored in the public right-of-way for a period exceeding ten days, in other than designated parking areas, and is more than 30 feet from the pavement edge. 
(f)  Whenever any Law Enforcement Officer receives a report of or finds a vehicle that is without a current license tag or inspection sticker standing on the public right-of-way, the owner will be notified to remove the vehicle. After 24 hours the officer will treat it as an abandoned vehicle and remove it immediately. 
(Ord. No. 01-9, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-01)  
Sec. 44-36. - Parking prohibited for certain purposes. 
No person shall park a vehicle upon any road or street or right-of-way for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale. 
(2)  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessary in an emergency. 
(3)  Displaying advertising. 
(4)  Selling merchandise from such vehicle, except in a duly established marketplace, or when so authorized or licensed under the ordinance of the City. 
(5)  Storage, or as junkage or dead storage for more than 24 hours. 
(Ord. No. 01-9, § 3, 3-20-01)  
Sec. 44-37. - Parking prohibited in certain areas. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of any other Code or ordinance provision, in order to implement the provision of F.S. § 316.008(1)(a), which permits local authorities to regulate "with respect to streets and road or streets under their jurisdiction" in order to provide for the "reasonable exercise of the police power" and to prohibit or regulate the "stopping, standing, or parking" of motor vehicles on said streets and road or streets, parking on rights-of-way within the City is prohibited whenever the right-of-way is posted with a sign designating the area as a "no parking" area. The City's Public Works Director is hereby delegated the power and authority to post areas as "no parking" areas for motor vehicles when such areas are deemed to present either safety hazards to the traveling public, which cause adverse impacts to roadway or right-of-way, or which are otherwise deleterious to and jeopardize the public health, safety or welfare. The City Manager and the City Council shall be advised when such areas are posted. 
(b)  It is unlawful to park a motor vehicle on a street or road or street that is posted in accordance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park, stop or stand a vehicle in any parking space designated in accordance with the provisions of F.S. ch. 316, for use only by the disabled, unless the vehicle displays a parking permit issued pursuant to F.S. § 320.0848 or § 316.1958 and such vehicle is transporting a person eligible for such parking permit. Any person who is chauffeuring a disabled person shall be allowed, without need for an identification parking permit, momentary parking in such parking space for the purpose of loading or unloading a disabled person and no penalty shall be imposed upon the driver for such momentary parking. 
(d)  Penalty . Any person who directly or indirectly violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a nonmoving violation and, in accordance with F.S. § 316.1967 shall be subject to a fine of $100.00. or as otherwise designated in section 2-227 for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 01-19, §§ 1, 2, 8-21-01; Ord. No. 2018-16 , § 1, 8-7-18)  
Sec. 44-38. - Enforcement of parking violations. 
Any civil citation relating to parking violations set forth in the Code of Ordinances of the City of Palm Coast may be referred by the City to the Civil Traffic Infractions Hearing Officer for Flagler County, Florida and the violation will, thereupon, be enforced and disposed of in accordance with the general state law applicable to citations. 
(Ord. No. 06-14, § 2, 9-5-06)  
ARTICLE III. - SPEED LIMITS AND SPEED ZONES  
DIVISION 1. - SPEED LIMITS 
 
Sec. 44-51. - Establishment of speed limits; speed zones. 
(a)  Thirty-five miles per hour. The speed limit is hereby established at 35 miles per hour and it is unlawful to drive a motor vehicle at a rate in excess of such speed. 
Club House Drive. 
(b)  Forty miles per hour. The speed limit is hereby established at 40 miles per hour and it is unlawful to drive a motor vehicle at a rate in excess of such speed. 
East Hampton Boulevard. 
(c)  Forty-five miles per hour. The speed limit is hereby established at 45 miles per hour and it is unlawful to drive a motor vehicle at a rate in excess of such speed. 
Rymfire Drive. 
Sesame Boulevard. 
(Ord. No. 04-03, § 3, 2-17-04)  
DIVISION 2. - BELLE TERRE PARKWAY 
 
Sec. 44-71. - Legislative findings and purposes of the division. 
(a)  The purpose of this division is to: 
(1)  Provide for the acceptance of the study, dated July 2002, conducted by the engineering firms of CPH and Traffic Planning & Design, Inc., entitled "Speed Zoning Study, Belle Terre Parkway, Palm Coast, Florida". 
(2)  Provide for the future acceptance of speed zone and speed limit studies by the City Manager, after consultation with the City Engineer, when such studies have been prepared by registered engineers who are qualified to conduct such studies. 
(3)  Provide for the establishment of speed limits and speed zones for various segments of Belle Terre Parkway. 
(4)  Delegate the authority to establish speed zones and speed limits to the City Manager after consulting with the City Engineer. 
(5)  Provide a model for the process and procedures relating to the acceptance of speed zones and speed limit studies and the establishment of speed zones and speed limits by the City Manager. 
(b)  The recitals to this division (whereas clauses) are hereby adopted as additional legislative findings. 
(Ord. No. 2002-36, § 1, 12-3-02)  
Sec. 44-72. - Acceptance of Belle Terre Parkway Study. 
(a)  The study, dated July 2002, conducted by the engineering firms of CPH and Traffic Planning & Design, Inc., entitled "Speed Zoning Study, Belle Terre Parkway, Palm Coast, Florida" is hereby accepted by the City Council of the City of Palm Coast. 
(b)  Establishment of speed limits/speed zones/Belle Terre Parkway. 
(1)  The speed limit for the segment of Belle Terre Parkway between Matanzas Woods Parkway to Burroughs Drive is hereby established at 45 miles per hour and it is unlawful to drive a motor vehicle at a rate in excess of such speed. 
(2)  The speed limit for the segment of Belle Terre Parkway between Burroughs Drive and Palm Cost Parkway is hereby established at 45 miles per hour and it is unlawful to drive a motor vehicle at a rate in excess of such speed. 
(3)  The speed limit for the segment of Belle Terre Parkway between Palm Coast Parkway to Parkview Drive is hereby established at 45 miles per hour and it is unlawful to drive a motor vehicle at a rate in excess of such speed. 
(4)  The speed limit for the segment of Belle Terre Parkway between Parkview Drive to White View Parkway is hereby established at 45 miles per hour and it is unlawful to drive a motor vehicle at a rate in excess of such speed. 
(5)  The speed limit for the segment of Belle Terre Parkway between White View Parkway to Royal Palms Parkway is hereby established at 45 miles per hour and it is unlawful to drive a motor vehicle at a rate in excess of such speed. 
(6)  The speed limit for the segment of Belle Terre Parkway between Royal Palms Parkway to State Road 100 (Moody Boulevard) is hereby established at 45 miles per hour and it is unlawful to drive a motor vehicle at a rate in excess of such speed. 
(7)  The speed limit for the segment of Belle Terre Parkway between State Road 100 (Moody Boulevard) to United States Highway 1 is hereby established at 50 miles per hour and it is unlawful to drive a motor vehicle at a rate in excess of such speed. 
(Ord. No. 2002-36, §§ 2, 3, 12-3-02)  
Sec. 44-73. - Conflicts. 
(a)  Chapter 316, Florida Statutes, known as the "Florida Uniform Traffic Control Law", is applicable in the City of Palm Coast, Florida, and supersedes this division in the event of any irreconcilable conflict. 
(Ord. No. 2002-36, § 6, 12-3-02)  
ARTICLE IV. - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
 
Sec. 44-151. - Legislative purpose. 
The legislative purpose of this article is to regulate the vehicles for hire business within the City in order to preserve the health, safety, morals and welfare of the citizens and visitors of the City and the protection of their property, and to promote safe, reliable, and economically viable vehicles for hire service within the City. The use of a passenger vehicle for hire shall be presumed to be the use of a vehicle for hire. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 1, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 44-152. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the following meanings except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Automobile means a four door, full-sized passenger vehicle capable of seating four to six adults. 
Cause to be operated means a person who either (i) provides lease or non-lease vehicles to a driver to be used or operated as a vehicle for hire or (ii) operates a vehicle for hire as a single unit permittee, or (iii) operates a central dispatch for one or more vehicles for hire. 
City means the City of Palm Coast, Florida. 
City Council means the City Council of the City. 
Compensation means any fare, reward, tip, donation, or other thing of value which a driver or owner of a vehicle accepts or receives or offers to accept or receive in return for furnishing such service. 
Driver means any person operating or in charge of a vehicle for hire. 
Driver permit means a permit issued pursuant to this article which entitles a person to drive or operate a vehicle for hire within the jurisdictional limits of the City. 
Employee means any manager, dispatcher, mechanic, driver, contract driver, agent, or other individual who is compensated by a certificate holder in the conduct of its business. 
Limousine means a luxury sedan or luxury van or a motor vehicle that is a chauffeur-driven passenger vehicle which has been built or modified-for-the-purpose as a limousine on an automobile chassis of a luxury sedan (e.g., formal or extended limousine). 
Manifest means the daily record prepared by the driver for the vehicle for hire that he or she operates. 
Meter or taxicab meter means any mechanical, digital or electronic device which services and monitors the distance, time and mileage to determine the fare to be charged a passenger of a vehicle for hire. 
Motor vehicle means a vehicle that is motorized or self-propelled by power other than muscular power or by animals, but does not include traction engines, road rollers, bicycles, mopeds or motorcycles. 
Operate or operation means providing vehicle for hire services by the (i) vehicle driver or (ii) vehicle permit holder. 
Owner means the person to whom a certificate has been issued. 
Passenger vehicle means a motor vehicle used for the transportation of persons. 
Permit means the permit issued pursuant to this article which grants the privilege to operate as a vehicle for hire service or a driver within the jurisdictional limits or upon the public roadways of the City. 
Permit holder means any person who holds a permit for the operation of any category of vehicle for hire within the jurisdictional limits of or upon the public roadways of the City. For purposes of interpretation within this article, the term permit holder includes any agent, employee or any person acting with the permit holder's knowledge, consent or permission, whether express or implied. The term permit holder also includes a taxicab permit holder. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation or association, however organized, and by whatever name and existing in whatever form. 
Prior calendar period or prior period means span of time from the last calendar year (January 1 to December 31) in which new permits were issued through the calendar year immediately preceding the current calendar year. 
Scheduled means the transportation of persons on pre-determined points of origin, destination, or schedules of service. 
Scheduled service means operating on a time schedule and/or a fixed route. Services are typically pre-arranged and pre-sold which means prior to the arrival of the passenger at the place of origin for the vehicle trip. The driver and the vehicle shall remain with the hiring party during the period for which the driver and the vehicle have been hired. 
Shuttle service means a chauffeur-driven passenger vehicle providing scheduled vehicle for hire services. 
Statistical Metropolitan Area (SMA) means all of the land area within the City limits of the City. 
Taxicab means any vehicle for hire that solicits to carry, attempts to pick up, or picks up one or more persons for transportation from one place to another for a fee. This term excludes buses with seating capacities of 16 or more passengers (including the driver) operating upon fixed routes and between fixed termini. This term also excludes charter services or limousine services. The terms taxicab, taxi, and cab are synonymous. Evidence of intent to operate as a taxicab may include, but is not limited to, markings on a vehicle or sign, beckoning from or near a vehicle to pedestrians, or parking or stopping in a marked taxi stand. 
Unsafe means that the condition of the vehicle, whether a major violation or defect or an aggregate of minor defects, could reasonably pose a safety or health risk to the traveling public. 
Van means a passenger vehicle recognized as either a mini-van, full-size passenger van, or a passenger vehicle on a van or truck chassis. The term shall not include a cargo or panel van. 
Vehicle for hire means any passenger vehicle engaged in the transportation of persons from or entirely within the City limits of the City with the intent to receive direct or indirect compensation for providing such transportation. 
Vehicle for hire administrator means the person who has been designated, by the City Manager, to administer, enforce, regulate and interpret the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 2, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 44-153. - Administration. 
(a)  The City Manager shall designate a vehicle for hire administrator who shall administer, enforce, regulate and interpret the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The vehicle for hire administrator shall have the powers and duties set forth in this article under the direction of the City Manager. 
(c)  The vehicle for hire administrator, after consultation with the City Attorney, as needed, shall interpret the provisions of this article upon application and payment of any fee established. Interpretations may be in writing upon request of an affected person. 
(d)  Decisions made pursuant to and interpretations of this article by the vehicle for hire administrator shall be binding. An affected person may appeal a decision or an interpretation to the City Manager for a de novo review upon application and payment of any fee established by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 3, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 44-154. - Vehicle registration; classifications; requirements. 
(a)  Any vehicle for hire operated, caused to be operated, or driven with the intent to pick up passengers, originate one-way transportation, or provide return service for a round-trip transportation within the jurisdictional limits of or upon the public streets of the City shall be subject to the regulations, restrictions and conditions set forth in this article. 
(b)  The following categories of vehicles for hire shall be exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Ambulances licensed by the State of Florida; 
(2)  Hearses, operated or limited exclusively to use by a licensed mortician; 
(3)  Passenger vehicles seating more than 20 persons that are not used for a transportation related commercial purpose; 
(4)  Passenger vehicles owned, operated, leased or controlled by a governmental agency; 
(5)  Shuttle services using a van owned and operated directly by a hotel or motel for transportation limited to registered guests thereof (it shall be presumed that this exemption is not applicable if the van does not bear any advertising or identification of the hotel or motel); 
(6)  Exclusive ride-sharing vehicles as defined in Section 341.031(9), Florida Statutes, as amended; 
(7)  School buses subject to the provisions of Chapters 234 and 316, Florida Statutes, as amended; 
(8)  Vehicle for hire services provided that the vehicles used to provide such services shall be clearly and distinctively marked as disadvantaged transportation; and provided, further, that any of the vehicles used to provide disadvantaged transportation shall be operated by a driver holding a driver permit providing for transportation services: 
a.  As outlined in Section 427.015(2), Florida Statutes, to the transportation disadvantaged, as defined in Section 427.011(1), Florida Statutes, as amended; or 
b.  By a transportation operator, as defined in Section 427.011(6), Florida Statutes, as amended; or 
c.  Pursuant to a contract authorized in Section 427.0155, Florida Statutes, as amended, with the Community Transportation Coordinator, as defined in Section 427.011(5), Florida Statutes which contract is on file with the vehicle for hire administrator; 
(9)  Transportation services operated: 
a.  As a bona-fide tour company by a seller of travel as defined in Section 559.927, Florida Statutes, as amended, or 
b.  Operated by a person who, as determined in writing by the vehicle for hire administrator, provides the vehicle for hire service to the passengers as an ancillary part of a primary scheduled service or tour. 
(10)  The single motor vehicle independent contractor who operates without connection with any other driver, association of drivers, or any entity, of whatsoever type or nature, providing transportation services in the nature of a vehicle for hire. However, such operators shall be registered with the City and pay the established registration fee. 
(c)  Every vehicle for hire permitted pursuant to this article shall be classified according to one of the following categories: 
(1)  Taxicab; 
(2)  Limousine; or 
(3)  Shuttle service. 
(d)  The applicant for a permit shall request the particular category on the application for a vehicle permit submitted. The classification shall be made by the vehicle for hire administrator. 
(e)  The purposes of the classifications are to: 
(1)  Ensure that different forms of vehicle for hire service are recognized; 
(2)  Avoid misleading information or creating confusion among the traveling public; and 
(3)  Provide notice to the permit holder of the classification and the applicable limitations and regulations pertaining to the category. 
(f)  Vehicle for hire permit holders shall only provide the services specified below: 
(1)  A permit holder in the taxicab classification may only: 
a.  Provide general transportation of persons not on regular schedules with the routes traveled or the destination determined by the passengers; 
b.  Provide good and reasonable service at all times to all parts of the City 24 hours a day, each and every day of the year, unless prevented by a labor strike or an act of God; 
c.  Maintain a business office with sufficient employees to answer all calls 24 hours a day, each and every day of the year; 
d.  Base the fare charged to the passenger on the use of the vehicle without regard to the number of passengers carried; 
e.  Determine the fare by a meter; and 
f.  Provide the taxicab service in an automobile, station wagon or van that is capable of comfortably seating at least four adult passengers, and the driver and a maximum of nine adult passengers. 
(2)  A permit holder in the limousine classification may provide the transportation of persons as follows: 
a.  Limited to a limousine luxury sedan or luxury van; 
b.  Leased, rented or charged upon for a minimum time period of one hour (60 minutes); 
c.  With the fare determined on an hourly basis and not by a meter or mileage for the use of the vehicle; and 
d.  Pre-arranged or arranged through a third party (e.g., guest service desk or concierge desk). 
(3)  A permit holder in the shuttle service classification may provide the transportation of persons as follows: 
a.  Limited to a van; 
b.  On a scheduled service; 
c.  With the fare determined on a per capita basis and not by a meter or mileage; and 
d.  Pre-arranged or arranged through a third party (e.g., guest service desk or concierge desk). 
(g)  Each permit holder shall strictly comply with the regulations and requirements for the particular category of a vehicle for hire as outlined in this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 4, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 44-155. - Permit application and permit procedure for vehicle-for-hire services. 
(a)  An application for a permit shall be filed with the vehicle for hire administrator with an application fee established by resolution of the City Council. The application fee shall not apply to renewal or additional permit applications which shall be subject to additional fees. 
(b)  The application shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  The name of the applicant; 
(2)  The name of the applicant's business and trade name under which the business will operate and a copy of proof of payment or occupational license taxes; 
(3)  If the business is a partnership, whether general or limited, the partnership instrument or certified copy thereof, and the business address of the partnership; 
(4)  If the business is a corporation, the certificate of incorporation or certified copies thereof, and the business address of the corporation; 
(5)  If the business is to be conducted under another name than that of the applicant, a copy of the fictitious name certificate, if required; 
(6)  The applicant's business location; 
(7)  The applicant's business mailing address; 
(8)  The applicant's business phone number; 
(9)  The applicant's home address and home phone number; 
(10)  The category of permit requested; 
(11)  The seating capacity, make, model, year of manufacture, mileage, equipment and amenities for each vehicle to be used; 
(12)  The color scheme of the vehicles the applicant intends to operate; 
(13)  The type and make of radios or communication devices the applicant will be using in the vehicles; 
(14)  The names and addresses of any and all persons holding a ten percent or greater beneficial interest in the applicant's business or company; 
(15)  The date the application is filed with the vehicle for hire administrator; 
(16)  The names, addresses and telephone numbers of at least three references from persons not related to the applicant who have knowledge of the applicant; 
(17)  A proposal for submission of appropriate insurance coverage or proof of coverage; 
(18)  If applicable, a proposed agreement with telephone directory(ies) that is distributed within the entire corporate limits of the City, indicating required advertising and the telephone number which will be used by customers to contact the business for service; 
(19)  A factual statement and documentation indicating the portion(s) of the vehicle for hire market to be served and such other pertinent information as the applicant may desire to present; 
(20)  Any other information required, as deemed appropriate by the vehicle for hire administrator, of any applicant for the particular classification of vehicle for hire service. The additional requirements shall be consistent with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Within three business days after receipt of an application and payment of the application fee, the vehicle for hire administrator shall review the application to ensure that the application is complete and all information required has been provided. The vehicle for hire administrator shall, with the completeness review, categorize the vehicle for hire service in the appropriate classification. Permits shall be issued or denied within 15 days after the date of completeness determination. Failure to disclose any person holding an interest in the proposed permit shall be grounds for the rejection of the application. 
(d)  In making a determination as to whether the permit will be issued to the applicant, the vehicle for hire administrator shall consider the following criteria: 
(1)  Completeness of the application as required by this article; 
(2)  Completeness of the application support documentation as required by this article; 
(3)  Whether the color scheme, logo, trade name and exterior design are sufficiently unique from any other permit holder as to prevent confusion for the riding public and infringement of an existing permit holder's color scheme, logo, trade name and exterior design; 
(4)  Verification of references; and 
(5)  The applicant's experience in operating a vehicle for hire or in operating a vehicle for hire business. 
(e)  In addition to other requirements set forth in this article, the following criteria shall apply for the issuance of additional permits to an existing permit holder: 
(1)  Adherence of the permit holder, and its drivers, to the provisions of this article, other applicable ordinances of the City and of the Code of the City of Palm Coast; 
(2)  Whether or not the requirements for issuance of any initial permit as described in this article continue to be met; 
(3)  Any evidence received from citizen complaints or the City as to the quality of service provided by the permit holder and its drivers and compliance with the provisions of this article; 
(4)  Trip reports and business records of the permit holder and its drivers; and 
(5)  Any other relevant or pertinent information from either the general public or the City. 
(f)  If after review of the application, the vehicle for hire administrator finds that the applicant does not meet the application requirements, the vehicle for hire administrator shall deny the application. The denial may be: 
(1)  Conditional and affording the applicant an opportunity to provide further information or take other action which may result in approval of the applicant by the vehicle for hire administrator; or 
(2)  Final. 
(g)  Upon a determination that a permit shall be issued, the vehicle for hire administrator shall issue the permit upon submission of the following documents: 
(1)  Insurance certification proving that the applicant has met the insurance requirements; 
(2)  Vehicle inspection certification from an inspection facility, as designated by the City Council, certifying that the vehicle(s) to be permitted meet(s) the safety and equipment, a requirement of this article; provided, however, any person or company holding permits for 25 vehicles or more and operating a facility for maintaining and repairing said vehicles and such inspections are performed by A.S.E. (Automotive Service Excellence) certified mechanics, may conduct the safety inspections of those vehicles as required by this article. All permit holders qualifying as self inspectors must be in compliance with the A.S.E. requirements. Said certification shall have been issued not more than 30 days prior to the issuance of the permit. This requirement may be waived for any vehicle with a manufacture date that is less than 365 days from the date such permit is to be issued and which has less than 10,000 miles in mileage. The vehicle for hire administrator or designee shall conduct, at no cost, an inspection of such vehicle to determine compliance with requirements such as a "Doing Business As" tag and two-way communication device; 
(3)  If required, a receipt or certified copy from applicable telephone carrier(s) for advertisement in the upcoming yellow pages; 
(4)  Submission of every vehicle identification number, state license plate number, mileage and the original or copy of the State of Florida registration; and 
(5)  Proof of payment of occupational license taxes. 
(h)  Prior to issuance of the vehicle permit(s) by the vehicle for hire administrator, the applicant shall pay a permit fee for each permit established by resolution of the City Council. 
(i)  Permits shall be valid for one year until the last day of the month in which the permit was issued the year prior. 
(j)  Permits shall be issued for the classification approved by the vehicle for hire administrator. 
(k)  The permit decal for the permit shall be affixed to each vehicle for hire in a manner determined by the vehicle for hire administrator. 
(l)  Each permit holder shall maintain in active operation each vehicle for which the permit was issued. Any permit which remains dormant for more than 90 consecutive days or 150 days in any calendar year may be revoked and declared void by the vehicle for hire administrator. 
(m)  A permit issued, renewed, awarded or transferred herein shall not vest the permit holder with any property rights in said permit. 
(n)  Sixty days prior to the expiration of a permit, the permit holder may renew the permit for an additional 12-month term by submitting an application for renewal to the vehicle for hire administrator. The renewal application shall contain the same information as the original application. The vehicle for hire administrator shall review each application and, within ten days of the receipt of a completed application, either approve or deny the application. Upon approval of the renewal permit, the renewal permit shall be issued upon the payment of a fee established by resolution of the City Council. Permit holders who renew a permit after the expiration date shall be assessed a late fee established by resolution of the City Council. Permit renewals after 30 days shall be processed as an additional permit request. A late renewal of permit shall be presumptive evidence of operating without a permit. 
(o)  If a decal for the permit is lost or destroyed or a replacement decal is requested, the permit holder may obtain a duplicate decal upon the payment of a service charge established by resolution of the City Council. It is prohibited and unlawful for any person to place, or cause another to place, a permit decal on any vehicle other than that vehicle to which the permit decal was assigned. 
(p)  The transfer from one permit holder to another shall not be effective until the transfer permit has been issued by the vehicle for hire administrator. The transfer of a permit to a person who is not a current permit holder licensed herein, shall not be effective until the proposed transferee/assignee submits an application, pays the application fees, and obtains approval. 
(q)  It is prohibited and unlawful for a permit holder to sell, bargain, grant, demise, lease, option or assign (hereinafter collectively "transfer") a permit except as provided for in this article. Any attempted transfer of any permit, not provided for in this article shall result in an automatic revocation of the permit. 
(r)  Any permit holder may lease or contract for dispatch and vehicle maintenance services with another permit holder. A permit holder leasing dispatch or vehicle maintenance services from another permit holder must operate under the color scheme of the permit holder that is providing the leased services. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 5, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 44-156. - Driver permits. 
(a)  Any person who operates or drives a vehicle for hire within the City of or upon any street in the City shall first obtain a driver permit, as set forth in this article. 
(b)  Any person being 18 years of age or older may make application to the City for a driver permit. The application shall include, at a minimum, the following items: 
(1)  Applicant's name, date of birth, social security number, sex, race or national origin, and any aliases or former legal names used during the preceding five-year period; 
(2)  Applicant's home address and mailing address as well as e-mail addresses; 
(3)  Applicant's home phone number, cellular telephone number and existing work phone number; 
(4)  Proof that the applicant holds a valid Florida driver's license; 
(5)  The names, addresses, and phone numbers of the applicant's existing employer, and any other employer during the preceding three years; 
(6)  The addresses of each and every place of residence or domicile of the applicant during the preceding three years; 
(7)  Two photographs of the applicant of the size and type as determined by the City; 
(8)  A sworn affidavit by the applicant which states that the applicant has not been convicted of within the past five years, or he/she does not have any charges pending against him/her for any of the following crimes: 
a.  Driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol, 
b.  Vehicular manslaughter, 
c.  Reckless driving, 
d.  Murder, manslaughter, armed robbery, assault with a deadly weapon, or aggravated assault, 
e.  Any crime which is designated as a felony, 
f.  Any crime involving the sale or possession of a controlled substances as defined by Section 893.03, Florida Statutes, 
g.  The Florida RICO Act, 
h.  Exposure of the sexual organs and any crime defined under Chapter 800, Florida Statutes, or 
i.  Any crime defined as Prostitution under Chapter 796, Florida Statutes, including, but not limited to, assignation or solicitation for prostitution. 
(9)  The name, address and phone number of the permit holder for vehicle for hire services for which the applicant is working or intends to work; 
(10)  Such other information as the City may require of all applicants, including but not limited to, a Florida Department of Law Enforcement inquiry; 
(11)  Payment of an application fee, established by resolution of the City Council. 
(c)  Upon receipt of an application and evidence of the payment of the application fee, the vehicle for hire administrator shall review the application to ensure that the application is complete and all information requested has been provided. The vehicle for hire administrator shall determine whether the applicant understands and is reasonably conversant in the English language for the demands of a driver and the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If the application is deemed complete by the vehicle for hire administrator and the applicant successfully shows that he/she is reasonably conversant in the English language, then the application and the affidavits shall be verified for accuracy by the vehicle for hire administrator. 
(e)  A driver's permit shall not be issued if within the last five years immediately preceding the application, the applicant has been convicted of, or has pending charges for, any of the following: 
(1)  Driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol, 
(2)  Vehicular manslaughter, 
(3)  Reckless driving, 
(4)  Murder, manslaughter, armed robbery, assault with a deadly weapon, or aggravated assault, 
(5)  Any crime which is designated as a felony, 
(6)  Any crime involving the sale or possession of controlled substances as defined by Section 893.03, Florida Statutes, 
(7)  The Florida RICO Act, 
(8)  Exposure of the sexual organs and any crime defined under Chapter 800, Florida Statutes, or 
(9)  Any crime defined as Prostitution under Chapter 796, Florida Statutes, including, but not limited to, assignation or solicitation for prostitution. 
(f)  The applicant shall have the burden of proof to show by substantial competent evidence that the applicant has been reformed, rehabilitated, and without any reasonable doubt, does not pose a safety risk to members of the traveling public. Substantial competent evidence shall not include testimony of the applicant without verification by independent sources such as employment records, parole records, evidence of completion of drug and/or alcohol rehabilitation and testimony of third parties. Ten days prior to the hearing, the applicant shall provide a list of the evidence and witnesses to the vehicle for hire administrator. Failure to list the evidence or witnesses shall bar the submission of the unlisted evidence or witnesses to the City. 
(g)  If after review of the application, the vehicle for hire administrator finds that the applicant does not meet the application requirements, the vehicle for hire administrator shall deny the application. The denial may be: 
(1)  Conditional and affording the applicant an opportunity to provide further information or take other action which may result in approval of the applicant by the vehicle for hire administrator; or 
(2)  Final. 
(h)  Each driver permit issued shall bear the driver's name, photograph, permit number, and expiration date. The City shall maintain a photograph of the driver on file. 
(i)  Every driver shall have his/her permit visibly displayed on the exterior of the driver's blouse or shirt or in any vehicle operated at all times when on duty, and shall produce it upon demand of any passenger, City code enforcement officer or administrator or City, County, or State Law Enforcement Officer. 
(j)  Driver permits shall be valid for a period of three years from the date of issuance. 
(k)  If any of the information supplied by the driver in the application is no longer accurate, the driver shall then provide current and accurate information to City within 30 days of the date the change occurs. The information filed with the vehicle for hire administrator, or designee, shall be assumed correct and exclusively relied upon as the correct address for all notices and enforcement proceedings herein. Failure to maintain the accuracy of the application information on file shall result in automatic suspension of said permit. Unless otherwise prohibited by this article, the City Code or any other applicable law, rule or regulation, no driver shall refuse any request for transportation from any orderly passenger where the destination of the trip is within the Flagler County area. Any driver may request or demand advance payment prior to commencement of a trip, and refuse to initiate such trip and may terminate a trip and/or may request payment if the driver has reason to believe the passenger(s) may cause bodily injury to him/her, or the passenger(s) become unruly, rowdy or cause physical damage to the vehicle or the driver. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 6, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 44-157. - Safety and equipment standards. 
(a)  Every vehicle for hire shall meet the following minimum safety and equipment standards: 
(1)  Tires shall be of the size appropriate for the vehicle for hire and with no mismatched tires. There shall be no cuts into the tire cord or sidewall area or localized worn spots that expose the ply. No tire is permitted with less than two-thirty second ( 2/32 ) inches remaining when measured in any two grooves at three equally spaced intervals around the circumference of the tire, or when the tire has tread wear indicators that are visible. 
(2)  The vehicle for hire shall be equipped with an operational horn with the actuating button mounted in the location designated by the vehicle manufacturer and operated in the manner designed and assembled by the vehicle manufacturer. 
(3)  The windshield, side and rear windows shall operate as designed and be assembled with no breakage, cracks or pits that may impair visibility or hinder the safety of passengers. It is prohibited and unlawful for any windows on a vehicle for hire to be composed of, covered by, or treated with, any material which would cause the vehicle to be in violation of Section 316.295, Florida Statutes. 
(4)  All doors must have operating handles that allow opening from the inside and outside. Handles, knobs and armrests shall be free of breaks and must be securely mounted. Door hinges and hold stops shall function correctly. Door seals and gaskets shall be intact and operating to seal water and odors from entering the passenger compartment from outside. All door panels shall be intact to prevent accidental injuries on door and window mechanisms. 
(5)  The interior condition of each vehicle for hire shall comply with the following: 
a.  All standard interior equipment shall be complete and intact including, but not limited to, interior lights, headliner, dashboard, head rests, window cranks and gear shifts. 
b.  Seat covers shall be permanently attached or fixed to all seats in the vehicle for hire, and shall have no exposed wire or sharp edges either from metal or hardened vinyl. The rear seat shall be of a type, size and mounting approved by the vehicle manufacturer. Broken springs, sagging or horizontal slippage in any seat are prohibited and unlawful. 
c.  Floor covering material shall be secure and contain no rips or loose folds. The floor board of the vehicle for hire shall be free of rust and holes. 
d.  Loose or moving objects or externally mounted speakers shall not be placed on the deck behind the rear seat, or on the front dash board. Decorations or other objects hanging from permanently mounted fixtures in a vehicle for hire. 
(6)  Each vehicle for hire shall have seat belts available for passengers in all seats except jump seats, spaces designed to accommodate wheelchairs or where the seat belts are not required by law. Seat belts shall be provided in good and effectual operating condition and easily accessible by all passengers. Seat belts shall be clean and free of grease and other objectionable substances. Seat belts which are placed under the seat or between the lower and upper portions of the seat are hereby conclusively deemed not easily accessible. 
(7)  Each vehicle for hire shall have standard operational windshield wipers for the entire front windshield which shall be controlled electronically or by vacuum and operated from the interior of the vehicle for hire. The wiper blades shall be in such a condition as to make firm contact with the windshield when operational and shall not be torn or badly worn. 
(8)  Each vehicle for hire shall contain an operational parking brake and a primary brake system which acts effectively on all four vehicle wheels. There shall be no visible leaks in the brake line, wheel cylinder or any part of the brake system and no frayed cables. All primary brake systems shall demonstrate a reasonable and safe total braking force when tested, using the "quick stop method" and with the vehicle for hire operating at a speed of at least 20 miles per hour. Brake linings and disc pads, when measured at the thinnest point, shall not be less than one-sixteenth of an inch. Brake linings and/or pads shall be firmly attached to the brake shoe and/or disk coupler. Disc brake rotors and brake drums shall be of a size and type appropriate for the vehicle, with no cracks or other damage which change or impair the functional surface. 
(9)  Every vehicle for hire shall be equipped with operational State of Florida-approved headlights, and turn indicating lamps or devices on the front and rear of the vehicle and a foot brake activated stop light on the rear of the vehicle. Each vehicle for hire shall have a tail lamp so situated on the vehicle as to illuminate the rear license plate with a white light and render it clearly legible. 
(10)  Steering mechanisms shall neither be worn or jammed, nor shall there be more than two inches play to the left or right of center, measured at the steering wheel rim with the road wheels in a straight ahead position, on wheels up to 18 inches in diameter, or three inches of play on wheels over 18 inches. 
(11)  There shall be no leakage of exhaust gas at the manifold gasket, manifold and exhaust line gasket, muffler and muffler connections or at any other point in the exhaust system as determined through a visual and audible inspection. The tail pipe shall discharge exhaust from the rear or sides of the passenger and luggage compartment. It is prohibited and unlawful for any part of the exhaust system to pass through or leak into the part of the vehicle for hire occupied by passengers, as determined by visual inspection. 
(12)  Every vehicle for hire shall be equipped with an adequately operating air conditioning and heating system, and windshield defrost or defogging system, which controls the temperature of the interior of the vehicle between 68°F to 78°F. 
(13)  Every vehicle for hire permit holder shall repair or replace any equipment or parts of the vehicle found to be worn out, defective or creating a safety hazard by the vehicle inspection facility as a result of the inspection. 
(14)  Every taxicab shall be equipped with a "taxicab meter" or "meter" for registering the fare to be charged. Each taxicab meter shall be inspected, approved and sealed pursuant to Chapter 531, Florida Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 7, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 44-158. - Meters. 
(a)  Every meter in use shall be placed in the taxicab at a location that will be plainly visible at all times to the passengers of the taxicab. Between the hours of sunset and sunrise, the dial of the meter shall be illuminated whenever the ignition of the vehicle is on. 
(b)  Whenever a taxicab is not hired, the meter shall show no fare. When a taxicab is hired, the meter shall be in the calculating position. Upon the completion of service by a taxicab, the meter shall be returned to the non-calculating position and its dial cleared. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the taxicab permit holder to have the meter in good working condition and operating accurately as to the registration of mileage and fare. Meters shall be sealed in a manner that will prevent any person from tampering with or changing the adjustment of the meter. 
(d)  It is prohibited and unlawful for any category of vehicle for hire, except a taxicab, to be equipped, have installed, or possess within its interior a taxicab meter, whether or not the meter is in operation. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 8, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 44-159. - Communication devices. 
(a)  All vehicles for hire shall be equipped with either cellular telephones or reliable and accessible communications systems such that office dispatchers may immediately and effectively notify drivers of requests for service in order that drivers may immediately and effectively request assistance should assistance be needed. 
(b)  Any electrical device such as radar detectors/"fuzz busters", police two-way or similar scanners, or two-way radio frequency monitors are prohibited and unlawful to be located within a vehicle for hire or in the possession of a driver. Hand-carried AM-FM radios, televisions or other similar entertainment musical devices are allowed. 
(c)  It is prohibited and unlawful for a permit holder to possess at its place of business, dispatch operation or in any building or vehicle for hire any device used for the monitoring of a competitor's radio frequency. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 9, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 44-160. - Liability insurance or surety bond. 
(a)  Each permit holder shall possess a liability and property damage insurance policy issued by an insurance company or surety company who is authorized to do business in the State of Florida, or who has a current license under Federal law as a risk retention group for purposes of insurance. 
(b)  The coverage for each vehicle equipped to carry six or fewer passengers, including the driver, shall be maintained, at a minimum, in the following amounts: 
(1)  One hundred thousand dollars for injuries per person in any one occurrence or accident and $300,000.00 per occurrence or accident; and 
(2)  An amount of not less than $50,000.00 for property damage in any one accident. 
(c)  The coverage for each vehicle equipped to carry seven or more passengers, including the driver, shall be issued in the amount of $1,000,000.00 combined, single incident, or its equivalent. Any separate policy acquired in order to achieve the higher level of coverage must have the same expiration date as the main policy. 
(d)  Each insurance policy shall list the City as an additional insured with all notices of any kind (including, but not limited to, termination, cancellation, reduction in coverage, renewal, or non-renewal) sent to the City at the address of the vehicle for hire administrator. The insurance policy shall contain, at a minimum, a 30 day written notice period prior to the effective date of termination, cancellation, reduction of coverage, renewal or non-renewal. 
(e)  All vehicle permits issued to a vehicle permit holder shall be covered under one master policy held by that permit holder. 
(f)  A permit holder may self-insure for the insurance requirements if: 
(1)  The permit holder is certified for financial responsibility as a self-insurer, and is current in standing with the insurance licensing offices of the State of Florida; 
(2)  The retention of exposure by the vehicle permit holder is no greater than allowed by the controlling provisions of the Florida Statutes; and 
(3)  The excess policies, at a minimum, satisfy the policy limits listed in paragraph (1), above. 
(g)  No policy of required insurance shall be canceled until the expiration of 30 days after notice of intended cancellation thereof has been given in writing to the vehicle for hire administrator by mail or personal delivery of such notice. 
(h)  Should a vehicle for hire at any time cease to be covered by a policy of insurance as required by this article, the vehicle permit shall be automatically suspended without the need for any action of the City and may only be reinstated in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 10, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 44-161. - Trade name and color scheme. 
(a)  Every permit holder shall operate under a trade name which is distinctive from and not substantially similar to any existing business, company or service operated or provided by a permit holder. All trade names are subject to approval by the vehicle for hire administrator as a condition to the issuance of the permit. Non-taxicab permit holders may contract with each other or other dispatch services under a collective trade name, provided the permit holder informs the vehicle for hire administrator in writing of the use of the collective trade name. 
(b)  Every taxicab permit holder shall: 
(1)  Display a uniform and distinct color scheme on all vehicles. All color schemes shall be subject to approval by the vehicle for hire administrator. 
(2)  Have conspicuously and permanently affixed on such vehicle, on each side of the vehicle and in letters not less than four inches in height; 
(3)  Be painted with the uniform color scheme; 
(4)  Conspicuously and permanently display a company vehicle number on the front and rear bumpers and on each side of the outside of the vehicle in figures two to three inches in height and in the color approved by the vehicle for hire administrator; and 
(5)  Be equipped with a permanently installed roof mounted device commonly known as a top light which shall be illuminated whenever the meter is on, or when headlights and/or parking lights are illuminated. 
(c)  Every shuttle permit holder shall: 
(1)  Have conspicuously and permanently affixed on each vehicle, on each side of the vehicle and in letters not less than six inches in height, the trade name approved; 
(2)  Conspicuously and permanently display a company vehicle number on the front and rear bumpers and on both sides of the outside of the vehicle in figures two to three inches in height and in a color approved by the vehicle for hire administrator; 
(3)  Not place any type or form of light device or other device on the roof, commonly known as a top light or top hat, whether or not permanently or temporarily affixed to the vehicle; 
(4)  Not have any light device within the possession of the interior of the vehicle, except for the area exclusively limited to the storage of baggage behind the rearmost seat; and 
(5)  Not have the words or a sign with the words "taxicab," "taxi," "cab," "limousine," "limo," "luxury sedan" or "luxury" or form thereof, placed or affixed permanently or temporarily on any portion of the outside vehicle, or anywhere within the interior of the vehicle, except in the area exclusively limited to the storage of baggage behind the rearmost seat. 
(d)  Every limousine permit holder shall: 
(1)  Display the trade name or the approved collective trade name on the front license plate of the vehicle and the approved City vehicle number shall be on the front and rear bumpers of the vehicle in figures two to three inches in height and in the color approved by the vehicle for hire administrator; 
(2)  Not be painted the uniform color or design scheme of any permitted taxicab vehicle for hire; 
(3)  Not have the words or a sign with the words "taxicab," "taxi," "cab," "shuttle," or "shuttle service" or any form or translation thereof, placed or affixed permanently or temporarily on any window or portion of the outside vehicle, or anywhere within the interior of the vehicle excluding the trunk. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 11, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 44-162. - Advertisement regulations. 
(a)  Every taxicab permit holder shall obtain, at first opportunity, and thereafter continue to maintain for the duration of the taxicab permit, a listing in the taxicab section of the yellow pages of each telephone book distributed to a substantial majority of the residents and businesses within the City. The listing shall include the trade name approved for the taxicab permit holder and phone number(s) where the public can reach the taxicab permit holder's dispatch in order to obtain taxicab service. 
(b)  A non-taxicab permit holder may advertise, but is not required to do so. 
(c)  It is prohibited and unlawful for a taxicab permit holder to advertise, or allow or cause to be advertised, in any telephone directory, newspaper, brochure, bulletin, flyer, radio or television commercial, or hotel leaflet, an advertisement or solicitation for business which includes the word(s) "shuttle service," "limousine," "limo," or "shuttle" or "custom/luxury van," "van" or any form of these words. 
(d)  It is prohibited and unlawful for a limousine vehicle permit holder to advertise, or allow or cause to be advertised, in any telephone directory, newspaper, brochure, bulletin, flyer, radio or television commercial, or hotel leaflet, an advertisement or solicitation for business which includes the word(s) "shuttle service," "taxicab," "taxi," "cab," "luxury sedan," "shuttle" or "custom/luxury van," or any form of these words. 
(e)  It is prohibited and unlawful for a shuttle service permit holder to advertise, or allow or cause to be advertised, in any telephone directory, newspaper, brochure, bulletin, flyer, radio or television commercial, or hotel leaflet, an advertisement or solicitation for business which includes the word(s) "taxicab," "taxi," "cab," "limousine," "limo," "luxury sedan," or any form of these words. 
(f)  A permit holder, who has been issued permits for multiple categories, may use in one advertisement the terms for each particular category of permit issued to the permit holder. 
(g)  If the permit holder operates outside the City limits a category of vehicle for hire service for which no permit has been issued by the City, then the permit holder shall segregate the advertisement of the services into two separate advertisements: one for City service and one for non-City service. In the non-City advertisement, the vehicle permit holder shall not use, or allow the use of, the word "Palm Coast" in the advertisement for the vehicle for hire service operated outside the City. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 12, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 44-163. - Driver standards. 
(a)  Every permit holder shall require and ensure that every driver under its control or using its vehicles: 
(1)  Is hygienically clean, with his/her body well-groomed, neat, odor free, and clean in appearance, and the clothing clean and odor free; 
(2)  If a beard or mustache is worn, ensure that it is well-groomed and neatly trimmed at all times; 
(3)  Wear trousers or females may wear skirts or dresses providing that the hem is not more than two inches above the top of the knee joint and is not strapless or halter type, a shirt with a collar and sleeves, shoes and socks and appropriate outer garments, and shall not wear T-shirts, underwear worn as outer garments, tank tops, body shirts, swim wear, jogging or bathing shorts, sweat suits, work out clothing, trunks or suits, or similar types of attire, or outer garments or footwear that is frayed, ragged, holed or open, except that females may wear open toe footwear providing that such footwear is high-heeled and is not clogs, thongs, shower shoes or sandals. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 13, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 44-164. - Vehicles for hire rates and fares. 
(a)  All rates and surcharges imposed herein shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council. A meeting for the purpose of adopting the resolution shall be advertised ten days in advance in the local newspaper and the existing and proposed rates and/or surcharges shall be published in the advertisement. In the resolution, the City Council shall set an effective date for the new rates and/or surcharges. 
(b)  In establishing any rate or surcharge, the City Council shall be guided by the following criteria: 
(1)  The rates or surcharges established by other governments and in other similarly situated metropolitan areas across the nation; 
(2)  The Consumer Price Index for the transportation expenses for the past year; 
(3)  Historical data relating to the revenue generated by vehicle permit holder(s) in the City; 
(4)  Information provided by the American Automobile Association, or other similar local, regional or national transportation information source; 
(5)  The expenses and income of vehicle permit holders; and 
(6)  The expenses and income of drivers, if available. 
(c)  The vehicle for hire administrator shall have the right to examine all books and records of all permit holders and drivers. 
(d)  Any such rate or surcharge imposed, required or collected by any permit holder or driver shall be in strict conformance with the adopted rates and/or surcharges. 
(e)  The rates and/or any surcharges adopted by the City Council shall be posted by the vehicle for hire administrator and provided to each permit holder. 
(f)  Printed schedules of the current applicable rates, and/or surcharges shall be available at all times for inspection in all vehicles for hire. Within each taxicab, the schedule of the current adopted rates and/or surcharges adopted by City Council shall be permanently posted in a place with a view to the general public within the interior and on each door-side of the outside of the taxicab. In addition, if the City Council adopts any rate or surcharge charge for the particular category of vehicle for hire, then the vehicle permit holder shall post a sign or decal at least two inches by three inches at a location, to be determined and approved by the vehicle for hire administrator, in the interior, exterior or window of the vehicle, which states: 
(g)  It shall be the duty of the vehicle for hire permit holder to post the following signs within the interior of every vehicle for hire: 
(1)  A comment/complaint sign on the lower left corner of the right rear door window which states: If any comments or complaints, call the City of Palm Coast at (386) 986-3700. The City permit number of shall be at least two by three inches and approved by the vehicle for hire administrator; and 
(2)  The rate and/or surcharge sign. 
(h)  Every permit holder shall place on file with the vehicle for hire administrator the most current rates for its vehicle for hire service. 
(i)  Any rate or surcharge imposed, required or collected by any permit holder or driver shall be in conformance to the rate or surcharge established by the City Council. 
(j)  It is prohibited and unlawful for a driver to charge or attempt to charge any passenger a greater rate of fare than that which is currently allowed. 
(k)  It is prohibited and unlawful for a driver to accept or receive any money or other gratuity including money commonly referred to as turkey money from any hotel, motel, restaurant, or other business in consideration for diverting or attempting to divert a passenger from a business establishment to another business establishment. 
(l)  It is prohibited and unlawful for a taxicab driver to operate a taxicab unless a taximeter is used to determine the fare to be charged. The taximeter must be a meter approved by the City to be used in the specific taxicab in which it is being used. It is prohibited and unlawful to operate a taxicab with a taximeter that has not been approved by the City for that specific taxicab. It is prohibited and unlawful for a driver to operate a taxicab in which the driver knows the taximeter in the taxicab is not accurate. 
(m)  For a destination that is outside the City limits, the driver shall provide each passenger with a flat rate prior to transport. The rate must be agreed upon between the driver and the passenger before the trip begins. The agreement may include, with regard to taxicabs, running the taximeter the entire trip, as opposed to a flat rate. The taximeter must be in activation while inside the City limits, in the event the passenger(s) decides to terminate the trip before leaving the City. 
(n)  A driver may refuse any trip to a destination outside the City limits. Permit holders are encouraged to establish uniform rates to area airports and cities to make these rates available to their dispatchers. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 14, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 44-165. - Trip reports/records. 
(a)  The permit holder shall require that every driver will keep a trip report which shall show the following minimum information for each trip: 
(1)  The name of permit holder; 
(2)  The company unit number of the vehicle; 
(3)  The name of the driver; 
(4)  The date and time of trip origin; 
(5)  The origin and destination of the trip; 
(6)  The fare charged or the voucher number for the trip; and 
(7)  The number of passengers transported on the trip. 
(b)  Each trip report shall be consecutively numbered and shall be recorded on a form approved by the vehicle for hire administrator. 
(c)  Each driver shall, on a daily basis, submit said trip reports to the permit holder who shall keep them for a period of at least 90 days. The trip reports shall be submitted daily, except drivers who lease the vehicle from the permit holder for a period longer than one day may submit the trip reports at the end of the lease period or weekly, whichever is shorter. 
(d)  All trip reports shall be at all times open to inspection by the vehicle for hire administrator or inspector(s) and shall be produced on demand. The trip reports shall be kept at the business office of the permit holder. 
(e)  If the permit holder uses dispatcher(s), the permit holder shall make a record of each call received, the time it is received, the point of origin, the time the request for service is dispatched, the time of pick-up and the destination, if indicated by the prospective passenger. Such record shall be kept in the dispatch office for a minimum period of 90 days. 
(f)  Each taxicab permit holder shall maintain records detailing the following information for a period of no less than two years: 
(1)  The total number of taxicab trips originating from an airport; 
(2)  The total number of taxicab service requests dispatched; 
(3)  The total number of taxicab trips made by all taxicabs excluding those taxicab trips originating at an airport; 
(4)  The total number of pick-ups that are over 20 minutes from the time dispatched; 
(5)  The total revenues generated for all taxicab metered miles for all taxicabs excluding those metered miles that originated from an airport; 
(6)  The total revenues generated for all taxicab metered miles for all City-permitted taxicabs originating from an airport; and 
(7)  The total taxicab metered miles driven for all taxicabs excluding those originating at an airport; and 
(8)  The total taxicab metered miles driven for all taxicabs originating from an airport; and 
(9)  The total vehicle miles driven for all taxicabs; and 
(10)  The average taxicab lease rate for a taxicab for one 24-hour period. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 15, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 44-166. - Conduct of drivers. 
(a)  A driver shall use the most direct available route on all trips unless the passenger specifically requests to change the route. A driver shall be able to provide a reasonable and prudent amount of change, and if correct change is not available, no additional charge will be made to the passenger in attempting to secure the change. If demanded by the passenger, the driver shall deliver to the person paying for the hiring of the same, at the time of such payment, a receipt therefore in legible writing, containing the trade name of the permit holder, the company number and the driver's name, showing upon such receipt all items for which a charge is made, the total amount paid and the date of payment. 
(b)  A driver who occupies a taxicab stand shall occupy it at the end of the line and move into the first out position on the stand in orderly, single file. Once obtaining the first out or loading position, he or she shall accept the first request for transportation, except that a driver shall not be obligated to accept trips terminating beyond the City limits. Such taxicab stands shall be for exclusive use by City permitted taxicabs. The parking on such taxicab stands by a vehicle that is not a City permitted taxicab shall be prima facie evidence of a violation. 
(c)  Each driver shall keep a trip report as required by this article. Each driver shall, on a daily basis, submit said trip reports to the permit holder, except for drivers who lease the vehicle(s) from the permit holder for a period longer than one day may submit the trip reports at the end of the lease period or weekly, whichever is shorter. All trip reports shall be at all times open to inspection by the vehicle for hire administrator. 
(d)  It is prohibited and unlawful for any person, without being authorized by the City or without having made a prior agreement to provide vehicle for hire services to a specific patron, offers to engage in any business, trade, or commercial transaction involving the rendering to another person of any vehicle for hire services. Unlawful solicitation occurs when a driver solicits passengers: 
(1)  From a location other than the driver's compartment, or the immediate vicinity of his or her vehicle for hire; 
(2)  In a way that annoys or obstructs the movement of a person, or follows any person for the purpose of unlawful soliciting; 
(3)  In a loud, boisterous or annoying manner of voice, or by sign, or in any other annoying manner; or 
(4)  By paying an employee of another business to solicit passengers for or give preferential treatment in directing passengers to the driver's vehicles for hire. 
(e)  It is prohibited and unlawful for a person to solicit vehicle for hire services at any local airport, hotel, motel, bed and breakfast, restaurant, retail or wholesale facility, government facility or center, any entertainment facility or center, transportation facility or center, or any other location of public gathering. 
(f)  It is prohibited and unlawful for a driver to use obscene or profane language, or to be abusive to passengers. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 16, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 44-167. - Permit holder general responsibilities. 
(a)  A permit holder shall maintain on file for inspection by the City the names of all employees, drivers, their addresses, telephone numbers and driver license numbers. A permit holder shall maintain a file of all complaints received for inspection by the City. Permit holders are responsible for the actions of their employees when on-duty. 
(b)  A permit holder is responsible for the conduct of its drivers. The permit holder is also responsible for the condition of all of its vehicles and equipment operated as vehicles for hire. Actions of drivers or employees in violation of this article shall be imputed to the permit holder whose responsibility it shall be to ensure compliance. 
(c)  All permit holders shall maintain a place of business within the City limits, from which they conduct their operations and shall comply with applicable provisions of the City's Land Development Code. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 17, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 44-168. - General prohibitions relative to drivers. 
(a)  It is prohibited and unlawful for any person to operate, or cause to be operated, or drive with the intent to pick up passengers, originate one-way transportation, or provide return service for non-continuous transportation, within the jurisdictional limits or upon the public streets of the City without a permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  It is prohibited and unlawful for any permit holder or any person to operate, cause to be operated, allow to be operated or drive a vehicle for hire in or upon any street unless and until such person driving the vehicle shall have first obtained a driver's permit. 
(c)  It is prohibited and unlawful for the permit holder or driver to permit any person to accompany or use such vehicle for, or to direct, take or transport, any other person with knowledge or reasonable cause to believe that the purpose of such directing, taking or transporting is to accomplish a criminal activity. 
(d)  It is prohibited and unlawful for any person to reproduce, alter, manufacture, use, display, or otherwise employ any facsimile or reproduction of the permits provided for in this article. 
(e)  It is prohibited and unlawful for a hotel, motel, or restaurant, their agents or employees, or any skycaps or bellmen to offer or pay any money or other gratuity including money, commonly referred to as "turkey money," to a permit holder or a driver as consideration for diverting or attempting to divert a passenger or passengers from one hotel, motel, or restaurant to another hotel, motel, or restaurant, or from a particular vehicle classification to another. 
(f)  It is prohibited and unlawful for a hotel, motel, or restaurant, their agents or employees, or skycaps or bellmen to receive or accept any money or other gratuity including money, commonly referred to as "turkey money," from a permit holder or driver as consideration for diverting or attempting to divert a passenger or passengers from a transportation company or particular classification of vehicle for hire to another permit holder company, driver, or other classification of vehicle for hire service. 
(g)  Whenever any taxicab is occupied by a passenger or passengers the driver shall not permit any other person to occupy or ride in such taxicab if the original passenger or passengers object thereto. If a child under 14 years of age is the original passenger, no other passenger shall be permitted in such taxicab without the consent of the parent or guardian of the original passenger. 
(h)  It is prohibited and unlawful for any person to solicit patronage for a vehicle for hire in a loud or annoying tone of voice, or by any sign or in any manner to annoy any person or to obstruct the movement of any person. It is prohibited and unlawful for a person to follow or touch another person or the luggage or belongings of another person for the purpose of soliciting service without the consent of that other person. 
(i)  It is prohibited and unlawful for a driver to refuse or neglect to transport any orderly person, upon request, unless the vehicle for hire is already engaged or forbidden by the provisions of this article. Nothing herein shall prohibit the requirement of prepayment or deposit by a driver from a passenger. 
(j)  All drivers shall comply with all reasonable and lawful requests of any passenger as to the speed of travel and the route to be taken. 
(k)  It is prohibited and unlawful for a driver to continue on duty for more than 12 hours of active driving time or more than 16 hours of on-duty time during any 24-hour period. Each driver shall record the time of commencing active duty and the times of ending active duty on the driver manifest. 
(l)  It is prohibited and unlawful for a driver to use cigarettes or cigars while transporting a passenger. The use of tobacco products by a driver is prohibited and unlawful by any passenger(s) while in a vehicle for hire, if so ordered by the driver. 
(m)  Every driver shall thoroughly search the interior of each vehicle for hire at the termination of each trip for any article of value that may be left in the vehicle for hire by a passenger. An article found in a vehicle for hire shall immediately be returned the passenger who left the article. If the owner of the article is not known or unable to be located, the driver shall deposit the article with the permit holder at the end of the driver's tour of duty. The permit holder shall file a written notice with the City within 24 hours, describing the article, date and time of loss, and the origin and destination of the trip of the passenger who lost the article. 
(n)  When requested by a passenger, every driver shall give a legible receipt showing the permit holder's name, the driver's name, the vehicle number and any item for which a charge was made. The receipt shall also include that total amount paid and the date of such payment. 
(o)  It is prohibited and unlawful for a driver or any other person to solicit passengers for a vehicle for hire except when sitting in the driver's seat of the vehicle for hire or while standing within five feet of the vehicle for hire. 
(p)  It is prohibited and unlawful for the driver of a vehicle for hire to receive or discharge a passenger while impeding the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Drivers shall receive and discharge passengers in appropriate taxicab stands, loading zones and curbsides out of the flow of traffic. Drivers shall discourage passengers from entering and exiting vehicle for hire while stopped at traffic signals and in travel lanes and shall be responsible for any and all occurrences relating to such stops. 
(q)  Drivers may communicate with dispatchers and a potential passenger(s) by portable telephone communication. However, a driver shall not pick up or transport any passenger without first notifying his or her dispatcher of the trip and recording the trip as required by this article. Single unit drivers are not required to notice a dispatcher, but are required to record the trip. 
(r)  It is prohibited and unlawful for a driver to operate a vehicle for hire, whether on duty or off duty, with any alcoholic beverage, whether opened or unopened, in the passenger compartment of the vehicle for hire. The provisions of this article do not prohibit the possession of an alcoholic beverage in the possession of a bona fide passenger. It is prohibited and unlawful for a driver to allow a passenger to violate City or State laws regarding alcoholic beverages while in their vehicle for hires. 
(s)  It is prohibited and unlawful for a driver to permit more persons to be transported in a vehicle for hire at any one time than the seating capacity of such vehicle allows, as established by the vehicle manufacturer. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 18, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 44-169. - Suspension or revocation of permits. 
(a)  Whenever there is reasonable cause to believe that a permit holder or driver is violating, or has violated, the provisions of this article, the vehicle for hire administrator may initiate enforcement proceedings. The permit holder or driver shall be advised in writing, of the date, time and place of a hearing on the matter, mailed to the address on file with the vehicle for hire administrator, no later than 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. Failure to appear shall result in an automatic suspension or revocation of the permit, and may be grounds for revocation of said permit(s). The vehicle for hire administrator shall conduct the hearing. 
(b)  As may be permitted by controlling state or federal law, any citation issued for a violation may result in the immediate removal and impoundment of the vehicle by the City. The vehicle shall be released to the owner upon payment of any tow, storage, inspection costs, and any other fines or penalties. 
(c)  The vehicle for hire administrator may temporarily suspend any permitted vehicle for hire upon finding that a vehicle is unsafe or the observation of a patent defect of the vehicle for the transportation of the traveling public. The suspension shall take effect immediately upon notice to the driver by issuance of a notice of suspension. The vehicle for hire administrator shall affix a decal to both door-sides of the vehicle which states that the vehicle is suspended pending further investigation and correction of safety and/or equipment violations, and that the vehicle shall not transport any person for hire. The decal shall remain affixed to the vehicle until either the permit holder corrects the safety and/or equipment violations and has the vehicle inspected by the City, and pays the reinstatement fee, or successfully appeals the determination to the City Manager. The operation of a suspended vehicle or the unauthorized removal or alteration of the decals affixed to the vehicle shall result in revocation of the vehicle permit. 
(d)  The following shall constitute grounds for suspension of a vehicle for hire permit: 
(1)  If a permit holder operates, allows, leases or causes to be operated any vehicle for hire which has been issued a vehicle permit without said vehicle permit affixed to the motor vehicle; 
(2)  If a permit holder charges, receives, or obtains any fare from a passenger that is not strictly consistent with any rates and surcharges approved by the vehicle for hire administrator; 
(3)  If a permit holder charges, receives, or obtains any fare from a passenger that is not consistent with approved rates; 
(4)  If a permit holder gives, leases or borrows to the driver or installs or equips in the interior of the vehicle any electrical device such as radar detector/"fuzz buster," police two-way or similar scanners, or two-way radio frequency monitors; 
(5)  If a permit holder fails to have provided in the vehicle for hire a printed schedule of the current adopted rates and/or surcharges available at all times for inspection in all vehicles for hire; 
(6)  If a permit holder fails to keep and file the applicable trip reports; 
(7)  If a permit holder tampers with or changes the adjustment of a meter; 
(8)  If a permit holder operates, leases or causes to operate a taxicab with the knowledge that the meter does not accurately register the mileage and the approved rate. Evidence of the breaking of an official meter seal of the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services shall constitute prima facie evidence that a meter does not accurately register the mileage and rate; 
(9)  If a permit holder fails to equip and maintain every vehicle for hire with an operational two-way radio or comparable communication devices such that office dispatchers may immediately and effectively notify drivers of requests for service, and such that drivers may immediately and effectively request assistance should assistance be needed; 
(10)  If a permit holder has in its possession at its place of business, dispatch operation or in any building or vehicle under its control and possession any device used for the monitoring of a competitor's radio frequency; 
(11)  If a permit holder fails to have permanently posted in a place with a view to the general public within the interior and on each door-side of the outside of each vehicle for hire, the schedule of the current adopted rates, charges and/or surcharges; 
(12)  If a permit holder operates, leases, or causes to be operated a vehicle for hire that does not comply with any of the safety and equipment standards; 
(13)  If the City Council adopts any rate or surcharge for the particular category of vehicle for hire and a permit holder fails to post the informational sign or decal; 
(14)  If a permit holder operates, leases, or causes to operate a vehicle for hire under a trade name, color scheme or logo not approved; 
(15)  If a permit holder offers or pays any money or other gratuity including money, commonly referred to as "turkey money," to a hotel, motel, or restaurant, their agents or employees, or skycaps or bellmen, as consideration for diverting or attempting to divert a passenger or passengers from a classification of vehicle for hire, transportation company, permit holder or drivers to its company or drivers; 
(16)  If a permit holder receives or accepts any money or other gratuity including money, commonly referred to as "turkey money," from a hotel, motel, or restaurant, their agents or employees, or skycaps or bellmen, as consideration for diverting or attempting to divert a passenger or passengers from a hotel, motel, or restaurant to another hotel, motel, or restaurant; 
(17)  If a permit holder intentionally or knowingly misleads, by any act or word, a passenger or potential passenger about: 
a.  The time or place of arrival or departure of a train, airplane, any vehicle for hire or bus; 
b.  The location of any building or place, or the distance between two points; 
c.  The cost or amount of the trip; or 
d.  Information on the cost, availability or quality of another permit holder or driver; 
(18)  If a permit holder operates, or causes to be operated, a permitted vehicle for hire in a non-permitted classification; 
(19)  If a permit holder fails to require and enforce the driver dress code; 
(20)  If a permit holder provides, leases, gives, borrows or uses a taxicab top light, sign, or other roof device in a non-taxicab vehicle for hire; 
(21)  If a permit holder fails to supply the City with a current automobile liability insurance certificate or binder; 
(22)  If a permit holder engages in the unlawful solicitation of passengers; or 
(23)  If the permit holder otherwise violates the provisions of this article. 
(e)  The following shall constitute grounds for revocation of the vehicle for hire permit: 
(1)  If the permit holder fails to provide the insurance required whether by a lapse in coverage or coverage below the minimum amount; 
(2)  If, at the end of a suspension period, the violation or violations have not been corrected, or proof thereof has not been submitted to or accepted by the vehicle for hire administrator, the vehicle for hire permit will be automatically revoked; 
(3)  If a vehicle for hire permit is suspended three or more times in one 365-day period; 
(4)  If the permit holder, its agent or employee operates or causes to be operated a vehicle which is the subject of a suspended vehicle permit; or 
(5)  The permit holder's violations of this article are so pervasive or egregious that revocation is necessary to protect the public interest. 
(f)  The following shall constitute grounds for suspension of a driver's permit: 
(1)  If a driver who operates any vehicle for hire fails to visibly display his/her permit on his/her outer garment or in such vehicle at all times when on duty; 
(2)  If a driver charges, receives, or obtains any fare from a passenger that is not consistent with the rates and surcharges approved by the City; 
(3)  If a driver is in possession of, or it is located within the interior of the vehicle, any electrical device such as radar detector/"fuzz buster," police two-way or similar scanners, or two-way radio frequency monitors. 
(4)  If a driver fails to have printed schedules of the current adopted rates and/or surcharges available at all times for inspection in all vehicles for hire; 
(5)  If a driver fails to keep updated trip reports; 
(6)  If a driver operates a vehicle for hire with any passenger or occupant when the meter is in the non-calculating position, except when operating on a hourly or trip rate; 
(7)  If a driver tampers with or changes the adjustment of a meter; 
(8)  If a driver operates a taxicab with knowledge that the meter does not accurately register the mileage and the rate as set by the City. Evidence of the breaking of an official meter seal of the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services shall constitute prima facie evidence that a meter does not accurately register the mileage and rate; 
(9)  If a driver operating any vehicle for hire fails to produce his/her driver permit upon demand of any passenger, the vehicle for hire administrator, code enforcement officer, or a Law Enforcement Officer; 
(10)  If a driver smokes a cigarette, cigar, pipe or other tobacco substance in the vehicle while such vehicle is occupied by a passenger, unless the passenger(s) consents otherwise; 
(11)  If a driver allows or permits any person not a passenger, other than the driver him/herself, to occupy the vehicle for hire while it is hired; 
(12)  If a driver operates one or more vehicles for hire for more than 12 cumulative hours within any continuous 24-hour period; 
(13)  If a driver offers or pays any money or other gratuity including money, commonly referred to as "turkey money," to a hotel, motel, or restaurant, their agents or employees, skycaps or bellmen as consideration for diverting or attempting to divert a passenger or passengers from one transportation company, or particular category of vehicle for hire to another, permit holder, driver, or other classification of vehicle for hire services to the driver's company or vehicle; 
(14)  If a driver receives or accepts any money or other gratuity including money, commonly referred to as "turkey money," from a hotel, motel, or restaurant, their agents or employees, or skycaps or bellmen, as consideration for diverting or attempting to divert a passenger or passengers from a hotel, motel, or restaurant to another hotel, motel, or restaurant; 
(15)  If a driver intentionally or knowingly misleads, by any act or word, a passenger or potential passenger about: 
a.  The time or place of arrival or departure of a train, airplane, any vehicle for hire or bus; 
b.  The location of any building or place, or the distance between locations; 
c.  The cost or amount of the trip; or 
d.  Information on the cost, availability or quality of another permit holder or driver; 
(16)  Except as provided in this article, if a driver allows the vehicle for hire to remain, park or occupy any space on the streets for the transaction of business other than the picking up of passengers and letting out of passengers; 
(17)  If a driver, operates, or causes to operate, the permitted vehicle for hire in a classification of vehicle for hire service which is not the category authorized by the vehicle permit; 
(18)  If the driver violates the possession of an improper sign or top light; 
(19)  If a driver fails to provide the most current application information to the vehicle for hire administrator; 
(20)  If a driver violates any of the provisions regulating conduct of taxicab stands; 
(21)  If a driver issues receipts as required by this article; 
(22)  If a driver wrongfully terminates or refuses a trip for any reason; 
(23)  If a driver engages in the unlawful solicitation of passengers; 
(24)  If a driver directs obscene, profane or abusive behavior toward his/her passenger(s); 
(25)  If a driver otherwise violates the provisions of this article. 
(g)  The following shall constitute grounds for revocation of the driver's permit: 
(1)  If a driver is suspended three or more times in one 365-day period; 
(2)  If a driver willfully alters, defaces, obliterates or destroys any driver's permit issued herein, or causes the same to be defaced, obliterated or destroyed; 
(3)  If a driver who has had his or her driver's permit suspended operates a vehicle for hire while under suspension; 
(4)  If a driver is convicted of any of the crimes referred to in this article; 
(5)  If the driver's violations of this article are so pervasive or egregious that revocation is necessary to protect the public interest. 
(h)  If the vehicle for hire administrator suspends a permit, the vehicle for hire administrator shall set a time certain for the period of suspension which shall provide reasonable opportunity for the permit holder to contest the suspension. During the period of suspension the driver shall not operate any vehicle for hire. If the permit holder contests suspension and requests a hearing before the City Attorney, the City Attorney shall hold the hearing and make findings of fact and conclusions of law and report same to the City Manager who shall determine whether the suspension should implemented and, if so, to what extent. 
(i)  If the City Manager revokes a permit, the revocation may be: 
(1)  Conditional and affording the permittee an opportunity to provide further information or take other action which may cure the offense(s) and dissolve the revocation; or 
(2)  Final. 
(j)  Decisions of the City Manager shall be final decisions, shall not be reviewed by the City Council by appeal, and shall constitute the final agency action of the City with respect to the decision. Any review of the decision shall be made by writ for petition for certiorari to the circuit court as provided by law. Suspension or revocation actions shall specify the terms and conditions thereof. 
(k)  Notwithstanding and without limiting the general or specific enforcement authority, any violation of any section of this article by either a driver or permit holder shall subject the driver or permit holder to any other code enforcement remedies available to the City. 
(l)  During the period of suspension or revocation the permittee shall not operate, or cause to have operated or allow the operation of a vehicle for hire. 
(m)  The reinstatement fee for a suspended permit shall be established by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 19, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 44-170. - Compliance with article required. 
It is prohibited and unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this article, or to operate or allow to be operated vehicles for hire within the City unless a permit has been issued for its operation. This article shall not apply to vehicles for hire that enter the City solely to drop off passengers if the vehicle for hire is properly licensed by the jurisdiction in which the vehicle for hire picked up the passenger(s) and in which the said trip originated. A permit shall be required whenever a vehicle for hire picks up passengers within the City to originate one or two-way transportation. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 20, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 44-171. - Designation of regulatory personnel. 
The City Manager shall designate City personnel who shall be responsible for the administration of this article. Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the City Manager and his or her designated City employees. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 21, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 44-172. - Vehicle resembling a vehicle for hire. 
It is prohibited and unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle, which is not a licensed vehicle for hire, with painting or markings that would cause a reasonable person to believe that such vehicle is a vehicle for hire. A vehicle for hire that ceases to be authorized as a vehicle for hire shall have its colors and markings removed, changed, or altered so as not to resemble a vehicle for hire before any operation in the City and may not be visible from any public way, until such removal, change, or alteration, is completed. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 22, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 44-173. - Defrauding vehicle for hire. 
It is prohibited and unlawful for any person who engages, uses, employs or hires a vehicle for hire to then fail or refuse to pay the required fare with intent to cheat and defraud the driver. This Section not only applies to intra-City trips, but also to legally licensed taxicabs from other jurisdictions that enter the City to reach a destination, where the failure or refusal to pay occurs within the City. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 23, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 44-174. - Administrative rules. 
The City Manager is hereby authorized to adopt administrative rules that he or she deems necessary and appropriate to implement the provisions of this article to include, but not be limited to, rules relating to the issuance of temporary permits. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 24, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 44-175. - Violations of article/penalties. 
This article may be enforced by the City through any enforcement process available under law and exercising any legal remedy available under law. It is unlawful and prohibited for any person to violate any provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-32, § 25, 7-5-05)  
ARTICLE V. - TRAFFIC LIGHT SAFETY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-24, §§ 1—15, adopted Dec. 19, 2006, amended the Code by adding provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, said provisions were included herein as §§ 44-201—44-215.  Subsequently, section 2 of Ord. No. 2010-09, amended art. V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art V, §§ 44-201—44-215, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 06-24, adopted Dec. 19, 2006. 
 
Sec. 44-201. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to authorize the use of traffic infraction detectors to promote compliance with red light signal directives as set forth in this article, and to adopt a civil enforcement system for red light signal violations, in accord with general law, including Chapter 2010-80, Laws of Florida (2010) (the "Mark Wandall Traffic Safety Act" or "Act") and the amendments to the Act, set forth in Chapter 2013-XX. This article will supplement law enforcement personnel in the enforcement of red light signal violations and shall not prohibit law enforcement from issuing a citation for a red light signal violation in accordance with normal statutory traffic enforcement techniques. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § 2, 7-20-10; Ord. No. 2013-04, § 2, 7-2-13)  
Sec. 44-202. - Use of traffic infraction detectors. 
The City shall utilize traffic infraction detectors pursuant to general law as a means of monitoring compliance with the state laws related to traffic control signals, while assisting law enforcement personnel in the enforcement of such laws, which are designed to protect and improve public health, safety and welfare. This section shall not supersede, infringe, curtail or impinge upon state laws related to red light signal violations or conflict with such laws. The City may utilize traffic infraction detectors as an ancillary deterrent to traffic control and traffic signal violations and thereby reduce accidents and injuries associated with such violations. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § 2, 7-20-10)  
Sec. 44-203. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Intersection means the area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb line; or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two roads which join or intersect one another at, or approximately at, right angles; or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different roads joining at any other angle may come in conflict. 
Local Hearing Officer means the person, designated by resolution of the City Council, who is authorized to conduct hearings related to a notice of violation issued pursuant to F.S. § 316.0083. Alternatively, the City Council may designate the code enforcement board or special magistrate as Local Hearing Officer, or the City may enter into an interlocal agreement to use the Local Hearing Officer of another county or municipality, as provided in F.S. § 316.003(91). 
Motor vehicle means the meaning set forth in the definition in F.S. § 316.003(21), or its successor provision. 
Owner means the person or entity identified by the Florida Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles, or other State vehicle registration office, as the registered owner of a vehicle. 
Recorded Images means images recorded by a traffic infraction detector which is operated in accordance with the Act. 
Red zone infraction means a traffic offense whereby a traffic infraction detector indicates a violation of section 44-204. 
Traffic infraction detector [means] a vehicle sensor(s) installed to work in conjunction with a traffic control signal and a camera or cameras synchronized to automatically record two or more sequenced photographic or electronic images and/or streaming video of only the rear of a motor vehicle at the time the vehicle fails to stop behind the stop bar or clearly marked stop line when facing a traffic control signal steady red light. 
Traffic Infraction Enforcement Officer [means] the City employee designated, pursuant to subsection 44-207(b) herein, to review recorded images and issue red zone infractions based upon those images. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § 2, 7-20-10; Ord. No. 2013-04, § 3, 7-2-13)  
Sec. 44-204. - Adherence to red light traffic control signals. 
(a)  Pursuant to general law, a motor vehicle facing a traffic control signal's steady red light indication shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of an intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until a green indication is shown on the traffic control signal; provided, however, the driver of a motor vehicle which is approaching the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersection roadway before entering the intersection in obedience of a steady red traffic control signal, may make a right hand turn in a careful and prudent manner (unless such turn is otherwise prohibited by posted sign or other traffic control device), but shall yield the right of way to pedestrians and other traffic proceeding as directed by the traffic control signal at the intersection. A notice of violation and a traffic citation may not be issued under this section if the driver of the vehicle came to a complete stop after crossing the stop line and before turning right if permissible at a red light, but failed to stop before crossing over the stop line or other point at which a stop is required. 
(b)  Pursuant to general law, motor vehicles facing a traffic control signal that is malfunctioning, inoperable or is emitting a flashing red light shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the point nearest to the intersection roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. In the event that only some of the traffic control signals within an intersection are malfunctioning, inoperative or emitting a flashing red light the driver of the vehicle approaching the malfunctioning, inoperative or flashing red traffic control signal shall stop in the above prescribed manner. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § 2, 7-20-10; Ord. No. 2013-04, § 4, 7-2-13)  
Sec. 44-205. - Violation. 
A violation of article (red zone infraction) shall occur when a vehicle does not comply with the requirements of section 44-204. Violations shall be enforced pursuant to F.S. § 316.0083. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § 2, 7-20-10)  
Sec. 44-206. - Implementation of general law and designation of Local Hearing Officer. 
In accordance with the provisions of the Mark Wandall Traffic Safety Act as of the effective date of this section or July 1, 2013, whichever occurs later, the City Manager is authorized to implement the provisions and requirements of Chapters 2010-80 and 2013-XX, Laws of Florida, except that the City Council by resolution shall appoint a Local Hearing Officer, as provided by section 44-203, and shall set the amount of the City's administrative costs, in accordance with the provisions of the Mark Wandall Traffic Safety Act. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § 2, 7-20-10; Ord. No. 2013-04, § 5, 7-2-13) 
Editor's note— Section 5 of Ord. No. 2013-04, adopted July 2, 2013, changed the title of § 44-206 from "Implementation of general law" to "Implementation of general law and designation of Local Hearing Officer."  
Sec. 44-207. - Review of recorded images. 
(a)  The owner observed by recorded images committing a red zone infraction, shall be issued a notice of infraction no later than 30 days after the red zone infraction occurs. The recorded image shall be sufficient grounds to issue a notice of infraction. 
(b)  The City shall designate one or more Traffic Infraction Enforcement Officers, who shall meet the qualifications set forth in F.S. § 316.640, or any other relevant statute. The Traffic Infraction Enforcement Officer shall review recorded images prior to the issuance of a notice of infraction to ensure accuracy and the integrity of the recorded images. The Traffic Infraction Enforcement Officer shall also verify that the traffic infraction detector that captured the recorded images was functioning properly at the time the recorded images were captured. Once the Traffic Infraction Enforcement Officer has verified the accuracy of the recorded images and functionality of the traffic infraction detector, he or she shall complete a review of the violation and authorize enforcement action, and a notice of violation/infraction shall be sent to the owner at the address on record with the Florida Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles or any other state's vehicle registration office. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § 2, 7-20-10)  
Sec. 44-208. - Notice of violation. 
Within 30 days after a violation, notification must be sent to the registered owner of the motor vehicle involved in the violation specifying the remedies available under F.S. § 318.14, and that the violator must pay the penalty of $158.00 to the City, elect a hearing before the Local Hearing Officer, or furnish an affidavit supporting an exemption that complies with F.S. § 316.0083 in accordance with paragraph (11) below within 60 days following the date of the notification in order to avoid court fees, costs, and the issuance of a traffic citation. 
(1)  The name and address of the owner; 
(2)  The license plate number and registration number of the vehicle; 
(3)  The make, model, and year of the motor vehicle; 
(4)  Notice that the infraction charged is pursuant to this article; 
(5)  The location of the intersection where the violation occurred; 
(6)  The date and time of the red zone infraction; 
(7)  A statement that the owner has the right to review the recorded images that constitute a rebuttable presumption against the owner, together with a statement of the time and place or internet location where the evidence may be examined and observed. 
(8)  Images depicting the infraction, showing the license tag of the offending vehicle and the traffic control devise being violated; 
(9)  Instructions on all methods of payment of the penalty; 
(10)  A statement specifying the remedies available under F.S. § 318.14; 
(11)  A statement that the owner must pay a penalty of $158.00 to the City, elect a hearing before the Local Hearing Officer, or provide an affidavit that complies with F.S. § 316.0083 within 60 days of the date the notice is issued in order to avoid court fees, costs, and the issuance of a uniform traffic citation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § 2, 7-20-10; Ord. No. 2013-04, § 6, 7-2-13)  
Sec. 44-209. - Uniform traffic citation. 
If an owner receives a notice and fails to pay the penalty imposed by F.S. § 316.0083, to elect a hearing before the Local Hearing Officer, or to provide an affidavit supporting an exemption that complies with the provisions of F.S. § 316.0083 within 60 days of the date that the notice is issued, then a uniform traffic citation shall be issued to the owner as provided by general law. The owner shall be responsible and liable for paying the uniform traffic citation unless the owner furnishes to the City, within 30 days after the date of issuance of the uniform traffic citation, an affidavit supporting an exemption that complies with F.S. § 316.0083. Upon receipt of an affidavit, the person designated as having care, custody, and control of the motor vehicle at the time of the violation may be issued a notice of violation, pursuant to section 44-208, under this article, and shall be responsible for complying with the requirements of section 44-208. Notification under section 44-208 must be sent to the person identified on the affidavit within 30 days after receipt of the affidavit. The submission of a false affidavit is a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided in F.S. § 775.082 or § 775.083. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § 2, 7-20-10; Ord. No. 2013-04, § 7, 7-2-13)  
Sec. 44-210. - Signage. 
When the City installs a traffic infraction detector at an intersection, it shall erect signage at the intersection sufficient to notify the public that a traffic infraction detector may be in use at the intersection and shall include specific notification of intersection safety camera enforcement of violations concerning right turns. Such signage shall meet the specifications for uniform signals and devices adopted by the Department of Transportation pursuant to F.S. § 316.0745. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § 2, 7-20-10)  
Sec. 44-211. - Consistency with state law. 
(a)  This article shall be interpreted and applied so that it is consistent with state law, specifically, the mark Wandall Traffic Safety Act; CS/CS/HB 325. 
(b)  Any amendment to an applicable state law shall automatically apply to the enforcement and application of this article, whether or not this article or any provision hereof has been amended to specifically address such amendment to state law. Without limitation, any future amendment regarding the amount of the civil penalty or the apportionment of the proceeds thereof shall be deemed applied in the enforcement of this article, even prior to a specific amendment to this article to make the article expressly consistent with such change in state law with respect to the amount of the penalty or the apportionment of proceeds thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2010-09, § 2, 7-20-10)  
Sec. 44-212. - Procedures for hearing. 
The following provisions apply to hearings before a Local Hearing Officer: 
(1)  The City Council shall designate by resolution existing staff to serve as the clerk to the Local Hearing Officer. 
(2)  If a hearing is requested, the traffic infraction enforcement officer shall provide a replica of the traffic notice of violation data to the clerk for the Local Hearing Officer having jurisdiction over the alleged offense within 14 days of receipt of the request for hearing. 
(3)  Any person, herein referred to as the "petitioner," who elects to request a hearing under section 44-208 shall be scheduled for hearing by the clerk to the Local Hearing Officer to appear before the Local Hearing Officer with notice to be sent by first class mail. Upon receipt of the notice, the petitioner may reschedule the hearing once by submitting a written request to reschedule to the clerk to the Local Hearing Officer, at least five calendar days before the day of the originally scheduled hearing. The petitioner may cancel his or her appearance before the Local Hearing Officer by paying the penalty assessed under section 44-208, plus $50.00 in administrative costs, before the start of the hearing. 
(4)  All testimony at the hearing shall be under oath and shall be recorded. The Local Hearing Officer shall take testimony from a traffic infraction enforcement officer and the petitioner, and may take testimony from others. The Local Hearing Officer shall review the photographic or electronic images or the streaming video made available under subsection 44-208(7). Formal rules of evidence do not apply, but due process shall be observed and govern the proceedings. 
(5)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the Local Hearing Officer shall determine whether a violation occurred, in which case the hearing officer shall uphold or dismiss the violation. The Local Hearing Officer shall issue a final administrative order including the determination and, if the notice of violation is upheld, require the petitioner to pay the penalty previously assessed under section 44-208, and may also require the petitioner to pay costs as set by resolution of the City Council, which costs shall not exceed $250.00. The final administrative order shall be mailed to the petitioner by first class mail. 
(6)  An aggrieved party may appeal a final administrative order consistent with the process provided under F.S. § 162.11. 
(Ord. No. 2013-04, § 8, 7-2-13)  
Chapter 49 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 15; businesses and business regulations, ch. 16; environment, ch. 24; floods, ch. 26; solid waste, ch. 41; streets, roads, bridges and other public places, ch. 42; land development code, app. A. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 49-1. - Solid waste and stormwater management utility charges on utility bills. 
Should any owner, manager, tenant or lessee or any place or abode or any business or commercial establishment fail or refuse to pay solid waste charges or stormwater management utility charges or fees fixed or assessed against him, her, them or its place of abode or place of business when due, the City shall process such failure to pay in accordance with the provisions relating to water, sewer and other utility facilities. 
(Ord. No. 07-08, § 4, 4-3-07) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-08, § 4, adopted April 3, 2007, added provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, said provisions were included herein as § 49-1.  
ARTICLE II. - REGULATION OF WATER AND SEWER UTILITIES 
 
Sec. 49-31. - Legislative findings. 
(a)  Legislative findings. The recitals set forth in this Ordinance are hereby adopted as legislative findings by the City Council of the City of Palm Coast and form a material part of this Ordinance, and this Ordinance shall amend and supersede Ordinance 2002-01 which provisions, as amended in Section 2 of this section, are hereby ratified and affirmed. 
(b)  Authority pertaining to water and sewer (wastewater) systems. The provisions of section 2 of Ordinance 2002-01 are amended to read as follows: 
The City of Palm Coast reserves its unconditional statutory and constitutional right to acquire or purchase, or permit the City's designee to acquire or purchase, any utility, as defined by Section 367.021(12), Florida Statutes, located within the City Limits of the City of Palm Coast, and up to five (5) miles outside of its City Limits without seeking consent of any regulatory agency. The City of Palm Coast also reserves its unconditional statutory and constitutional right to approve the sale of any utility, as defined in Section 367.021(12), Florida Statutes, located within the City Limits of the City of Palm Coast and up to five (5) miles outside of its City Limits without seeking additional consent of any regulatory agency. No such utility may transfer the utility's ownership, franchise certificate, or facilities located within the City of Palm Coast, in whole or part, to any person or entity without obtaining the written approval of the City Council of the City of Palm Coast for such transfer which shall not be unreasonably withheld. The City of Palm Coast shall avail itself of all powers vested in the City under State law with regard to potable water services, wastewater services and sewage services, reclaimed and alternative water supply services, and all other services relating to the above. 
(Ord. No. 02-1, §§ 1, 2, 2-5-02; Ord. No. 03-21, §§ 1, 2, 9-30-03; Ord. No. 03-22, §§ 1, 2, 9-30-03)  
Sec. 49-32. - Definitions. 
The following terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Backflow shall mean the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances under pressure into the distribution pipes of the public water system from any source(s) other than its intended source. 
Backflow prevention device shall mean any effective device, method or construction used to prevent backflow into the public water system. The type of device used should be based on the degree of hazard, either existing or potential. 
City's utility system shall mean the potable water, reclaimed water, wastewater and raw water systems. 
Cross-connection shall mean any physical arrangement whereby a public water supply is connected, directly or indirectly, with any other water supply system, sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, or other device which contains or may contain contaminated water, sewage or other waste, or liquid of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water supply as the result of backflow. By-pass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeable devices, and other temporary or permanent devices through which or because of which backflow could occur are considered to be cross-connections. 
Customer shall mean any person, property owner, corporation, government entity, homeowners association or other legal entity that receives water, wastewater or reclaimed water services from the utility department or benefits directly from services rendered by the utility department, including the actual user of the water, wastewater or reclaimed water service. 
Manual shall mean the City of Palm Coast "Cross-Connection Control Manual" promulgated by the Utility Director, as may be amended from time to time. 
Public water system shall mean the potable water system which is owned or controlled by the City, including all facilities utilized for the production, treatment, storage, transmission distribution and delivery of potable water. 
Utility department shall mean the City of Palm Coast Utility Department. 
Water service shall mean the supplying of potable water by the public water system to a customer, whether residential or non-residential. 
( Ord. No. 2017-3 , § 2, 4-18-17)  
Sec. 49-33. - Jurisdiction. 
All territory within the City served by the public water system shall be governed by this article to the extent permitted by law. 
( Ord. No. 2017-3 , § 2, 4-18-17)  
Sec. 49-34. - Cross-connection control program and manual. 
(a)  Cross-connection control program. The Utility Director is hereby authorized to establish and implement a cross-connection control program through the adoption of a written policy in accordance with this article, and Rule 62-555,360, "Cross-Connection Control for Public Water Systems," Florida Administrative Code, as may be amended from time to time and which is incorporated herein by reference. The City of Palm Coast "Cross-Connection Control Manual" promulgated by the Utility Director, as may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as part of this article. A copy of the manual shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk for public use, inspection and examination. 
(b)  The manual shall be periodically reviewed and updated by the Utility Director of the City to ensure compliance with applicable statutes, rules and regulations of the State and the United States. 
( Ord. No. 2017-3 , § 2, 4-18-17)  
Sec. 49-35. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  No person shall apply for or obtain water service or complete a water service connection to the City utility system unless the appropriate backflow prevention device, as specified in the manual, is installed at the water service connection, and the service address is otherwise in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  No person shall complete or maintain any cross-connection to the public water system. 
(c)  No person shall complete or maintain any auxiliary water system or other potential cross-connection unless the appropriate backflow prevention device, as specified in the manual, is installed at the water service connection. 
(d)  Modification of any backflow prevention device or backflow installation which results in bypass or failure of the backflow preventer to perform as designed shall be prohibited. 
( Ord. No. 2017-3 , § 2, 4-18-17)  
Sec. 49-36. - Protection of public potable water supply. 
The Utility Department is primarily responsible for protecting the public potable water supply against present or future possible contamination. This responsibility begins at the water supply source, includes the public water system and ends at the point of water delivery to the customer's premises or system. The customer is responsible for his or her on-site water lines, which begin at the discharge side of the meter/backflow prevention device. 
( Ord. No. 2017-3 , § 2, 4-18-17)  
Sec. 49-37. - Minimum backflow protection. 
The manual shall identify categories of customers and shall establish the minimum backflow protection for each category of customer. 
( Ord. No. 2017-3 , § 2, 4-18-17)  
Sec. 49-38. - Potable water backflow prevention devices; fire line devices; testing and maintenance; record keeping. 
(a)  Potable water backflow prevention devices. All connections to the public water system shall be protected by a backflow prevention device acceptable to the Florida Department of Environmental Protection and of a size and design required by the manual. All residential service connections shall have a double-check valve assembly that shall be supplied and installed by the City at the customer's expense. All commercial non-residential connections two inches or smaller shall have a reduced pressure backflow preventer that shall be supplied and installed by the City at the customer's expense. All commercial non-residential connections larger than two inches shall have a reduced pressure backflow preventer that shall be installed at the customer's expense by a licensed contractor, inspected by the City, and certified by a licensed and certified backflow prevention technician or a certified City backflow prevention technician. 
(b)  Fire line devices. All connections for fire lines connected to the public water system shall be protected with an approved double check valve assembly or as otherwise required by the manual. All fire line backflow prevention devices shall be installed at the customer's expense by a licensed fire prevention contractor, inspected by the City, and certified by a licensed and certified backflow prevention technician. Backflow prevention devices on fire lines must be UL listed for fire protection systems. It shall be the responsibility of the customer to install all fire line backflow prevention devices in accordance with the installation criteria specified in the manual. 
(c)  Testing and maintenance. All potable water backflow prevention devices shall be tested, inspected and maintained by the City in accordance with the manual and Rule 62-555.360, Florida Administrative Code. All fire line backflow prevention devices shall be tested, inspected and maintained, with a copy of the test supplied to the City, by a State of Florida licensed fire protection contractor in accordance with the National Fire Protection standards 24 and 25, as adopted by the Florida Fire Protection Code, all at the customer's expense. 
(d)  Recordkeeping. The Utility Department shall retain all records of tests, inspections, surveys and repairs as required by F.S. ch. 119 and ch. 62-550, Florida Administrative Code. All backflow preventers will be inventoried with the testing and repairs archived in the City cross-connection control data base. As applicable, records of the installation, inspection, testing, repair and replacement of required backflow preventers shall be provided to the Utility Department by the customer in accordance with the manual. 
( Ord. No. 2017-3 , § 2, 4-18-17)  
Sec. 49-39. - New facilities. 
All new construction for which a building permit is issued shall have installed on all potable and fire prevention system lines a backflow prevention device as required by this article. The location of the backflow prevention device will be at the property line or an alternative location mutually agreed by the customer and the City. 
( Ord. No. 2017-3 , § 2, 4-18-17)  
Sec. 49-40. - Conflict resolution. 
If any conflict should exist between a provision of the manual and the provisions of this article, the City Plumbing Code, the State Building Codes as adopted by the City, the Florida Safe Drinking Water Act (F.S. § 403.850 et seq.), or any other state, county or federal statute, ordinance, rule or regulation applicable to the City utility system, the more restrictive provision shall apply. Unless otherwise provided in this article, in the event of any conflict between AWWA Manual M14 and any applicable statute, ordinance, rule or regulation, the statute, ordinance, rule or regulation shall apply. 
( Ord. No. 2017-3 , § 2, 4-18-17)  
Sec. 49-41. - Emergency acts. 
(a)  Upon discovery of a prohibited or inappropriately protected cross-connection, the City may interrupt water service to any private water system connected to its public water system when necessary to prevent the continued violation of this article, until such time that a resumption of service to the private water system is deemed appropriate by the City. 
(b)  The Utility Director may take whatever emergency action that he or she deems necessary and appropriate to protect persons or property from any injury, loss, or damage which may reasonably be expected to result from a violation of this article or of any related regulation. The Utility Director shall not authorize any entry into a building or structure under such emergency powers without first obtaining the authorization of either: 
(1)  The property owner or lawful occupant of the structure; or 
(2)  A court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  Advance notice of each interruption of service which is exercised pursuant to this section shall, to the extent practicable, be provided to the affected customers. 
(d)  In the event of known contamination of the public water system or a private water system due to backflow on or from the service address, the customer and property owner shall promptly take reasonable steps to confine contamination of the public water system and shall immediately notify the City. 
( Ord. No. 2017-3 , § 2, 4-18-17)  
Sec. 49-42. - Fees. 
Fees for the administration of this article and the manual shall be set forth in the fee schedule established pursuant to section 49-53, or its successor. Amounts due to the City shall be liens upon the real property at which the service was provided. 
( Ord. No. 2017-3 , § 2, 4-18-17)  
Sec. 49-43. - Violation; liability. 
This article may be enforced by any means authorized by law, including, but not limited to, chapter 2, article V, division I, City of Palm Coast Code of Ordinances. Any person or customer violating this article, the manual, or any rules or regulations adopted pursuant to this article shall be subject to: 
(1)  Possible discontinuation of water service being provided by the City until such time as compliance is achieved; 
(2)  Liability to the City for any expense or loss incurred as a result of physical or structural damage to the City utility system or contamination of the public water system. 
( Ord. No. 2017-3 , § 2, 4-18-17)  
ARTICLE III. - RECLAIMED WATER SYSTEM AND WASTEWATER SYSTEM UTILITIES 
 
Sec. 49-51. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Palm Coast Water System, Reclaimed Water System and Wastewater System Utilities Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 03-23, § 1, 9-30-03)  
Sec. 49-52. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. No. 2008-16, adopted Aug. 19, 2008, repealed § 49-52, which pertained to definitions, and derived from Ord. No. 03-23, § 2, adopted Sept. 30, 2003.  
Sec. 49-53. - Water, reclaimed water and wastewater service fiscal/finance procedures/annexation policies. 
(a)  The City Council may, from time to time, establish by resolution such fee schedules as the City deems equitable and necessary to effectuate the intent and policy of this article; provided, however, said fee schedules shall bear a reasonable relationship to the services provided or costs incurred, including the maintenance of adequate and prudent reserves, rate stabilization and working capital balances, in the administration of this article and the provision of water services, reclaimed water services and wastewater services. 
(b)  The City shall collect revenues pursuant to the adopted fee resolution in accordance with law and generally acceptable public accounting techniques and principles. 
(c)  All revenues derived from charges and fees shall be appropriately obligated and deposited in the water and wastewater system revenue fund (water, reclaimed water and wastewater enterprise fund) and used in accordance with said obligation for the operation and maintenance, construction, acquisition, addition, extension, renewal and replacement to the water system, reclaimed water system and wastewater system of the City as budgeted and approved by the City. 
(d)  Deposits for accounts that have maintained good payment histories, as defined by resolutions of the City, shall be refunded after a time established in rate resolutions as adopted from time-to-time by the City. If a discontinuance of service is requested, the deposit less any amounts due to the City will be refunded. Deposits on accounts that have not maintained good payment histories shall bear interest at the interest rate earned by the water and wastewater system revenue fund; earned interest amounts shall be applied to the respective accounts during the month of December. Amounts due to the City shall be liens upon the real property at which the service was provided. 
(e)  It is the policy of the City to require annexation in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 171, Florida Statutes, or, if the property is not appropriate for immediate annexation, to require the filing and recording of a binding and irrevocable annexation petition as a condition of the property being provided utility service except in the following circumstances: 
(1)  When the property is located in the areas of exception from the annexation policy, as described and depicted in the map which is attached hereto and incorporated herein as if set forth herein verbatim; and 
(2)  When the property is subject to an approved exemption in accordance with the policy adopted by the City Council in Resolution Number 2005-10 which is attached hereto and incorporated herein as if set forth herein verbatim. 
(Ord. No. 03-23, § 3, 9-30-03; Ord. No. 07-03, § 2, 2-20-07)  
Sec. 49-54. - Illegal connections. 
It is unlawful for any person to connect to the City's water system, reclaimed water system or wastewater system without the express permission of the City. A fee for each unauthorized connection in addition to applicable impact fees, meter fees and deposits shall be established in the resolution establishing fee schedules. 
(Ord. No. 03-23, § 4, 9-30-03)  
Sec. 49-55. - Customer and service classifications. 
(a)  Customers shall be classified as retail customers and wholesale customers. 
(b)  Customers within the retail and wholesale classifications shall be subclassified as follows: 
(1)  Residential, single family. All residences, including mobile homes, containing one dwelling unit, individually metered and not connected to a commercial establishment. 
(2)  Residential, multi-family. All residential structures containing two or more dwelling units including, but not limited to, duplexes, quadruplexes, condominiums, apartments, townhouses, patio homes, zero lot line homes, and mobile home parks served by individual or master meters. 
(3)  Commercial. Establishments including, but not limited to, retail and wholesale sales operations, office buildings, shopping centers, warehouses, vending operations, laundries, restaurants, hospitals, schools, churches, government facilities and other related service operations. 
(4)  Metered irrigation service. Residential, both single family and multi-family and commercial customers that have additional water meters installed on their properties for purposes of watering lawns, shrubbery and gardens. 
(5)  Industrial. Customers operating, manufacturing, agricultural, chemical and food processing plants or concerns. 
(6)  Metered reclaimed water service. Residential, both single family and multi-family and commercial customers that have additional water meters installed on their properties for purposes of watering lawns, shrubbery and gardens with reclaimed water or making other appropriate uses of such reclaimed water. 
(c)  Private utilities, municipalities or other governmental entities having their wastewater treated by the City or purchasing water service or reclaimed water service from the City's water system or reclaimed water system as a single resale customer for the purpose of reselling the water to those customers within their jurisdiction are assigned the wholesale customer classification. 
(Ord. No. 03-23, § 5, 9-30-03)  
Sec. 49-56. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. No. 2008-16, adopted Aug. 19, 2008, repealed § 49-56, which pertained to required meters, and derived from Ord. No. 03-23, § 6, adopted Sept. 30, 2003.  
Sec. 49-57. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. No. 2008-16, adopted Aug. 19, 2008, repealed § 49-57, which pertained to backflow prevention devices, and derived from Ord. No. 03-23, § 7, adopted Sept. 30, 2003.  
Sec. 49-58. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. No. 2008-16, adopted Aug. 19, 2008, repealed § 49-58, which pertained to cross connections and interconnections, and derived from Ord. No. 03-23, § 8, adopted Sept. 30, 2003.  
Sec. 49-59. - Payment of capacity fees. 
(a)  Water, reclaimed water or wastewater services shall not be furnished or rendered free of charge to any person, firm or corporation whatsoever and the City, including each of its agencies, departments or instrumentalities which uses water service, reclaimed water service or wastewater service, all of which shall pay the applicable rates for such services. 
(b)  Prior to the provision of water, reclaimed water or wastewater services by the City, an applicant shall apply to the Department to be served with water service, reclaimed water service or wastewater service. The City will allocate water, reclaimed water or wastewater reserve capacity to the applicant consistent with applicable laws and policies pursuant to a utility agreement with the applicant. The applicant shall fully pay all applicable capacity fees for the allocation of reserve capacity in accordance with this applicable law and the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(c)  The Department may audit the actual average daily water consumption and the actual average daily wastewater flows provided to a property owner as it deems appropriate. If the audit determines that actual water, reclaimed water or wastewater flows exceed the estimated flows reserved, then capacity fees shall be adjusted for the excess flow and the increase shall be included in and payable as a part of the next monthly bill. 
(Ord. No. 03-23, § 9, 9-30-03)  
Sec. 49-60. - Condition for building permits. 
The City shall not authorize the issuance of any building permit unless and until all applicable capacity fees and all other rates, fees and charges relative to the provision of water service, reclaimed water service and wastewater service pertaining to the property have been paid. It shall be a condition precedent to the City providing any such service that all such fees and charges have been fully paid, any and all underground water, reclaimed water and wastewater improvements have been constructed, inspected, and accepted by the City or an appropriate performance bond has been posted by the Applicant. 
(Ord. No. 03-23, § 10, 9-30-03)  
Sec. 49-61. - Capacity reservation. 
(a)  Any water, reclaimed water or wastewater capacity allocated to an applicant shall be used and applied only with approval. The capacity allocation shall run with the land and is transferred with ownership of the property if written notification has been first provided to the City on the appropriate City form and if any and all capacity fees and reservation fees have been fully paid. The applicant or owner of a water, reclaimed water and wastewater allocation may not sell, lease, sublet, assign, lend or transfer in any manner a capacity reservation to another property. 
(b)  The City may recapture water, reclaimed water and wastewater capacity allocation under any of the following conditions: 
(1)  Failure of the applicant to meet all financial obligations that are due within the established requirements of the City. 
(2)  Failure of the applicant to comply with any and all Florida Department of Environmental Protection permit requirements within the life of the permit; provided, however, that if the permit authorization is extended, then the applicant shall continue to comply with all said permit requirements. 
(3)  Violation of the prohibition against transfer of water service capacity, reclaimed water service capacity or wastewater service capacity allocation. 
(Ord. No. 03-23, § 11, 9-30-03)  
Sec. 49-62. - Water service fees and related matters. 
Water service fees shall be charged and collected as follows: 
(a)  The City shall charge and receive, from all customers to whom service is furnished, the charges for connecting their property to the water system and delivering the water line to the point of delivery. Charges or meter deposits, as appropriate, shall be charged for the meter and meter service box. 
(b)  Water service charges shall be established by resolution as adopted from time to time by the City. The City may adopt differing schedules of charges for the different customer classifications and subclassifications and may further provide for particular charges for particular uses within each classification. 
(c)  Water service charges shall be billed and collected monthly by the City. 
(d)  Homebuilders and contractors shall be charged a monthly service charge rate for water service until the account is transferred to a customer or tenant. Contractors using fire hydrants as a water supply shall be charged at the schedule of rates from time-to-time adopted by resolution, for usage of a fire hydrant. All contractor usage from fire hydrants shall be metered and utilize backflow prevention device(s). 
(e)  Applicants who reserve water service capacity shall incur a monthly service charge per Equivalent Residential Connection for each unit or Equivalent Residential Connection which has not been transferred to a customer or tenant within 12 months from the date that infrastructure is accepted by the City or the date of final inspection pertaining to private systems. 
(f)  The City Manager, or designee, is granted authority to make adjustments on customers' water service accounts up to a maximum of $500.00 to correct mathematical, mechanical or meter-reading errors. 
(g)  The base charges that relate to a property for water services are in all events including, but not limited to landlord-tenant relationships, charges which directly benefit the property owner of the property and shall be charged to the property owner even in the event that the tenant of the property does not pay usage fees and charges. 
(h)  It is prohibited and unlawful for a person or entity to connect his, her, their or its utility services to another residence, structure or property in any way. Any person engaging in such activity shall, in addition to any penalties that may be imposed by law, shall be jointly and severally liable for the services so provided with the benefited property owner or service user along with the costs of enforcement and other costs incurred by the City in remedying the violation. 
(i)  Absent a binding and controlling development order provision to the contrary, it is prohibited and unlawful to use a potable water well within the City for the purposes of providing water service for domestic use. 
(j)  The fiscal, financial management and account management policies set forth in this Section relative to the provision of water services shall, to the maximum extent possible, be applicable to the provision of wastewater, reclaimed water services, and solid waste services unless a specific provision is contained in the requirement for such other services. 
(Ord. No. 03-23, § 12, 9-30-03; Ord. No. 07-08, § 2, 4-3-07)  
Sec. 49-63. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. No. 2008-16, adopted Aug. 19, 2008, repealed § 49-63, which pertained to conditions precedent to water services, and derived from Ord. No. 03-23, § 13, adopted Sept. 30, 2003.  
Sec. 49-64. - Water capacity fees. 
(a)  A water service capacity fee shall be charged to every applicant for water service whose property initially receives water service from the water system. Such fee shall constitute the applicant's estimate share of the total City costs for the acquisition and construction of water production systems and distribution facilities which are or may be required to furnish present and future water service. Each applicant shall pay water capacity fees. 
(b)  If a classification or subclassification changes for the purposes of computation of the charge or so as to increase the number of equivalent units over the number of such units originally reserved, then an additional charge resulting from the change in property use shall be due and payable at the time of the change in property use, regardless of whether any charge was ever imposed or paid at the time of initial connection to the system. The increased charge imposed by this subsection shall be included on and payable as part of the property owner's utility service bill. 
(c)  Water capacity fees shall be automatically adjusted for increased service connection fees charged to the City for wholesale, bulk or regional treatment service. The formula for increasing the water service or wastewater service capacity fees shall be based upon factors such as, but not limited to, current City capacity fees, increased capacity fee obligations by the City. Any applicant who has paid capacity fees, but has failed to connect to the system within twelve (12) months of the payment of the capacity fees shall pay to the City any increased capacity fees that would have been payable to the City at the expiration of each such period of twelve (12) months. 
(Ord. No. 03-23, § 14, 9-30-03)  
Sec. 49-65. - General provisions relating to wastewater service. 
(a)  All connections to the City's wastewater system shall be of a permanent character and shall conform with the plans and specifications as approved by the City Manager or designee. 
(b)  Wastewater service charges shall be established by resolution adopted from time-to-time by the City. The City may adopt differing schedules of charges for customer categories including residential, multi-family, other dwelling unit, commercial, industrial and any other category. 
(c)  In the event that a customer does not obtain water service from the City and remains delinquent on a wastewater service bill, the City may terminate such customer's wastewater service and the customer shall pay all past due charges and reconnection fees prior to having such services reconnected which past due amounts shall be a lien upon the property serviced. 
(d)  Homebuilders and contractors shall be charged a monthly service charge for wastewater service capacity until the account is transferred to a customer or tenant in accordance with the schedule of rates from time-to-time adopted by resolution. 
(e)  Applicants who reserve wastewater capacity shall incur a monthly service charge per Equivalent Residential Connection which has not been transferred to a customer or tenant within 12 months from the date that infrastructure is accepted by the City or the date of final inspection pertaining to private systems. 
(f)  The City Manager, or designee, may make adjustments on customers' wastewater service accounts up to a maximum of $500.00 to correct arithmetic, mechanical or meter reading errors. 
(g)  The base charges that relate to a property for wastewater services are in all events including, but not limited to landlord-tenant relationships, charges which directly benefit the property owner of the property and shall be charged to the property owner even in the event that the tenant of the property does not pay usage fees and charges. 
(h)  It is prohibited and unlawful for a person or entity to connect his, her, their or its utility services to another residence, structure or property in any way. Any person engaging in such activity shall, in addition to any penalties that may be imposed by law, shall be jointly and severally liable for the services so provided with the benefited property owner or service user along with the costs of enforcement and other costs incurred by the City in remedying the violation. 
(Ord. No. 03-23, § 15, 9-30-03; Ord. No. 07-08, § 3, 4-3-07)  
Sec. 49-66. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. No. 2008-16, adopted Aug. 19, 2008, repealed § 49-66, which pertained to conditions precedent to wastewater service, and derived from Ord. No. 03-23, § 16, adopted Sept. 30, 2003.  
Sec. 49-67. - Wastewater capacity fees. 
(a)  A wastewater service capacity fee shall be charged to every applicant for wastewater service whose property initially receives wastewater service from wastewater systems owned, operated, managed, controlled or otherwise used by the City. Such fees shall constitute applicant's estimated share of the total City costs for the acquisition and construction of wastewater treatment, disposal and collection facilities which are or may be required to furnish present or future sewage disposal service. Each applicant shall pay wastewater capacity fees. 
(b)  If a classification change for the purpose of computation of the charge or so as to increase the number of equivalent units over the number of such units originally reserved, then an additional charge resulting from the change in property use shall be due and payable at time of the change in property use, regardless of whether any charge was ever imposed or paid at the time of initial connection to the system. The increased charge imposed by this subsection shall be included on and payable as part of the customer's utility service bill. 
(c)  Wastewater service capacity fees shall be automatically adjusted for increased service capacity fees charged to the City for wholesale, bulk or regional treatment service. The formula for increasing the wastewater service capacity fees shall be based on factors such as, but not limited to, current City capacity fees, increased connection fees by the servicing entity, and connection fee obligations by the City. Any applicant who has paid capacity fees, but has failed to connect to the system within twelve (12) months of the payment of the capacity fees shall pay to the City any increased capacity fees that would have been payable to the City at the expiration of each such period of twelve (12) months. 
(Ord. No. 03-23, § 17, 9-30-03)  
Sec. 49-68. - Connection of buildings. 
Lawns and other irrigation systems, and swimming pools may be served by a separate private water supply system provided that no interconnection of any kind will be permitted between the private system and the public utility system, its water mains, utility's water service line, customer's water service line, building, potable water plumbing pipes, nor any pipe or line connected or extended from any of the aforesaid and only if reclaimed water service is not available to the lot. 
(Ord. No. 03-23, § 18, 9-30-03; Ord. No. 2008-16, § 4, 8-19-08)  
Sec. 49-69. - Building permits, certificates of occupancy and subdivision plats. 
(a)  No building permit shall be issued to any person until the City's building department is furnished with adequate proof that the completed building will be connected to the public utility's water and wastewater systems serving the property or a statement from the public utility stating why service cannot be rendered and is deemed just cause to except this requirement. 
(b)  It is unlawful for a contractor to permit occupation of a structure or for any person to occupy a structure prior to the City issuing a certificate of occupancy relating to the structure. 
(c)  Every proposed subdivision plat that is in a service area of a public utility shall not be approved until the subdivider of the property or property developer furnishes the City with evidence that adequate arrangements have been made to assure that all buildings constructed in the proposed subdivision will be connected to the public utility's water and wastewater systems serving the area, or supplies the City with an affidavit from the public utility stating why no service can be rendered and said statement is deemed just cause to except this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 03-23, § 19, 9-30-03)  
Sec. 49-70. - Connection responsibility and costs. 
All costs and arrangement for construction of the customer's wastewater, reclaimed water and water service lines from the City's service lines, in general at the property line to the building, are the responsibility of the customer to arrange for and pay for. The costs of the City's water and wastewater services lines and connection to the utility's water main lines are the responsibility of the City to construct and the costs thereof are to be borne by the customer according to a standard, uniform, and reasonable and proper basis, which basis shall be part of the City's adopted rate schedule. All wastewater, reclaimed water and water connections shall be made by a licensed plumber, subject to standards acceptable to the City, and shall be subject to the inspection and approval of a duly authorized representative of the City. The City may charge fees, as established by resolution, for the inspection of water, reclaimed water and wastewater lines and connections. 
(Ord. No. 03-23, § 20, 9-30-03)  
Sec. 49-71. - Permit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to transmit any subsurface waters from within the City across its boundaries to other cities for commercial purposes without first being issued a permit from the City. 
(b)  No persons, unless expressly authorized in writing by the Director or designee, shall tamper with, work on, connect to, or in any way alter or damage any part of the City's utility system, including the potable water, reclaimed water, sanitary wastewater and/or stormwater systems. Tampering or work shall include, but not be limited to, unauthorized operation of City owned valves, meter tampering, straightlines, unauthorized taps, line ruptures and/or illegal dumping. 
(Ord. No. 03-23, § 21, 9-30-03)  
Sec. 49-72. - Permit application; information required. 
Any person desiring a water transmission permit shall apply to the City and shall, at the time of the application, furnish the following information: 
(a)  A statement showing that all conditions and permits required by the State or its agencies, have been obtained or complied with. 
(b)  A full disclosure as to the use to be made of the subsurface waters which shall include the amount to be transmitted daily together with scientific engineering or geological data showing that said transmission will not adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the City. 
(c)  Any other information required by the City. 
(Ord. No. 03-23, § 22, 9-30-03)  
Sec. 49-73. - Free or preferential rates prohibited. 
(a)  The City will not render or cause to be rendered any free services of any nature by its water, reclaimed water and wastewater systems, or any part thereof, nor will any preferential rates be established for users of the same class, and in the event the City or any department, agency, instrumentality, officer or employee thereof shall avail itself of the facilities or services provided by the water, reclaimed water and wastewater systems, or any part thereof, the same rates, fees or charges applicable to other users receiving like services under similar circumstances shall be charged to the City, or any such department, agency, instrumentality, officer or employee. Such charges shall be paid as they accrue, and the City shall transfer from its general funds sufficient sums to pay such charges. The revenues so received shall be deemed to be revenues derived from the operation of the water, reclaimed water and wastewater systems, and shall be deposited and accounted for in the same manner as other revenues derived from such operation of the water, reclaimed water and wastewater systems. 
(b)  For the use and the service rendered by said utility works, rates and charges shall be collected from the owners of each and every lot, parcel of real estate or building that is connected with the City's wastewater system or otherwise discharges sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, water or other liquids, either directly or indirectly, into the wastewater system of the City, which rates and charges shall be payable as hereinafter provided and shall be in the amount determinable as follows: 
(Ord. No. 03-23, § 23, 9-30-03)  
Sec. 49-74. - Non-connection/immaterial/wastewater. 
The wastewater service availability charges established shall apply to all users, whether owner or tenant (this being determined, in the case of users of the City water system, by the applicant for water service, and otherwise by ownership of the property served), of the City water and sanitary wastewater systems, or either of them, where a City sewer is available for use, whether or not connection has been made to such sewer. 
(Ord. No. 03-23, § 24, 9-30-03)  
Sec. 49-75. - Computation of wastewater charges where water not furnished by the City. 
(a)  In the event that metered water shall be furnished by any plant or system other than the waterworks system of the City to any user chargeable with a wastewater service charge, the meter used shall be of a type approved for accuracy of measurement by the and subject to such periodic tests as the City shall consider necessary to ensure that accuracy is maintained, and bills for wastewater charges shall be computed on the basis of what the water bill would be if the same quantity of water should be furnished by the waterworks system of the City. 
(b)  In the event that unmetered water shall be furnished by any plant or system, including any privately owned plant, other than the waterworks system of the City to any user chargeable with a wastewater service charge, such user shall install, at his or her own expense, a meter acceptable to the Department for measuring the quantity of water so used, and bills for wastewater charges shall be computed on the basis of what the monthly water bill would be if the same quantity of water should be furnished by the waterworks system of the City. Pending the installation of such meter, the Department shall estimate the quantity of water used on such lot or parcel and render bills to such user for wastewater charges, computed on the basis of what the monthly water bill should be if such estimated quantity of water should be furnished by the waterworks system of the City. 
(Ord. No. 03-23, § 25, 9-30-03)  
Sec. 49-76. - Delinquency and disconnection of service for nonpayment. 
(a)  If any bill for current monthly charges remains due and unpaid 20 days from the utility bill date, a delinquent (late) fee shall be charged to the customer account, in accordance with the provisions of a fee resolution adopted by the City. 
(b)  If any bill for monthly wastewater, reclaimed water or water service remains due and unpaid on and after the date stated on the bill issued to the customer for the next billing cycle, the water service to such customer so in arrears as to wastewater or water service charges shall be disconnected upon the City providing notice of such intended disconnection to the customer and utility service shall not be reconnected until all past-due bills for water and wastewater services are paid, together with a reconnection charge. The City may, at its discretion, enter a back payment agreement with the customer, in accordance with procedures adopted by the City Manager, which agreement shall not extend for more than six months, resolving all debts owed by the customer to the City. 
(c)  If any bill for monthly wastewater service shall remain due and unpaid on and after the date stated on such bill, in any case in which the water entering the wastewater systems is furnished by any plant or system other than the waterworks system of the City, the wastewater service to such user in arrears as to wastewater charges shall be disconnected, and shall not be reconnected until all past-due bills for wastewater service are paid, together with a reconnection charge in the amount of the cost of the wastewater tap. 
(d)  All sums due to the City, including reconnection charges, and any attorney's fees incurred, shall be a lien upon the property receiving service unless prohibited by controlling law. Any such sums may be recovered by the City by referring the account to a third-party collection agency and/or by bringing an action at law. 
(Ord. No. 03-23, § 26, 9-30-03; Ord. No. 07-08, § 1, 4-3-07; Ord. No. 2010-05, § 2, 4-20-10)  
Sec. 49-77. - Deposit required. 
The City may require any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation, prior to the filing for record of any plat, to escrow with the City a cash deposit or bond to guarantee the installation and connection of water, reclaimed water and wastewater facilities to each parcel or lot of land to be platted. The amount or formula for computing the amount of deposit shall be established by adoption of a resolution. 
(Ord. No. 03-23, § 27, 9-30-03)  
Sec. 49-78. - Reclaimed water service. 
(a)  Reclaimed water charges shall be established by resolution adopted from time-to-time by the City. 
(b)  All developments constructed within the City of Palm Coast shall have a reclaimed water distribution system designed and installed therein for irrigating green areas including all residential, commercial, public and private landscape areas as required in the City's land development regulations and for such other purposes as may be permittable and desirable. 
(c)  For developments receiving central water and wastewater service from the City, there shall be a requirement in each development order or permit for evaluation of the incorporation and use of reclaimed water. This evaluation shall be in the form of application to the City as part of the wastewater treatment capacity review. The Director shall review the water reuse capacity of the project and determine if its incorporation into the reclaimed water system represents a beneficial use of the reclaimed water resource. The Director shall determine the requirement for use of reclaimed water based on: 
(1)  The multiplicative product of one hundred (100) gallons/person/day, the number of units per acre and two and one-half (2.5) persons/unit; or 
(2)  Engineering data supplied by the applicant and approved by the City. 
After consideration of the above evaluation, the director shall recommend whether the development will be required to connect to the reclaimed water distribution system and comply with this article. If so required, connection to the reclaimed water distribution system shall be a condition precedent to receipt of potable water and wastewater service for the subject development. The applicant shall construct, at its expense, all necessary onsite reuse facilities in the nature of pipes, storage lakes, retaining ponds, and spray or sprinkler facilities (low trajectory spray heads) for irrigation with reclaimed water. The City shall construct all necessary transmission lines, pumping stations, and appurtenant improvements for transmitting reclaimed water from the City's reclaimed water distribution system to the applicant's site. 
(d)  The fiscal and account management policies set forth in this article relative to the provision of water services shall be applicable to the provision of reclaimed water services unless specific provision is contained in the requirement for reclaimed water service provided in a development order or permit providing for the incorporation and use of reclaimed water as set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 03-23, § 28, 9-30-03)  
ARTICLE IV. - WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-10, §§ 1—20, adopted May 1, 2007, added provisions that were not specifically amendatory. At the editor's discretion, said provisions were included herein as §§ 49-101—49-120. 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 41. 
 
Sec. 49-101. - Purpose, intent, objectives and policy. 
(a)  This article sets forth uniform requirements for discharge into the wastewater collection and treatment system of the City of Palm Coast and enables the City to comply with all applicable State and Federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977, as amended, and the general pretreatment regulations set forth is Chapter 62-625, Florida Administrative Code (F.A.C.). To the extent that Federal or State laws, rules or regulations are stricter than the provisions of this article; the strictest regulatory provision shall apply. To the extent that the definitions set forth in this article less strict that the definitions of terms set forth in Federal or State laws, rules or regulations, the more strict definition shall apply. The provisions of this article shall be interpreted and applied in harmony with the provisions of applicable Federal or State laws, rules or regulations. Terms that are defined in applicable Federal or State laws, rules or regulations, but not defined in this article, shall have the meaning as set forth in the pertinent Federal or State laws, rules or regulations. 
(b)  The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system which will cause obstruction and blockages in the wastewater collection system resulting in sewer overflows and increased system maintenance; 
(4)  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the wastewater treatment system; 
(5)  To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the wastewater system. 
(6)  To protect publicly owned treatment works (POTW) personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and to protect the general public. 
(7)  To enable the City to comply with its Florida Department of Environmental Protection permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other Federal and State laws to which the POTW is subject. 
(c)  This article provides for regulations of the use of the wastewater system through enforcement of general requirements for all users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user monitoring, record keeping and reporting, assures that existing consumer capacity will not be preempted, and provides for the establishment of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the pretreatment program established herein. 
(d)  This article shall apply to all persons who, whether by contract, permit, agreement, or otherwise discharge effluent or waste into the wastewater collection and treatment facilities of the City who are in any way users of the City's wastewater collection and treatment facilities. Except as otherwise provided herein, the City Manager, or duly authorized representative, shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(e)  The objectives of this article together with the City's other ordinances relating to its utility systems is, in pertinent part, to define the range of appropriate enforcement actions based on the nature and severity of the violation and other relevant factors and to promote consistent and timely use of enforcement remedies on a strict liability basis with the phrase "strict liability" meaning, in this context, that every instance of noncompliance (regardless of fault, negligence, or intent on the part of the user is a violation of City of Palm Coast's Codes and ordinances relating to its utility systems and subjects the user to enforcement actions by the City. 
(Ord. No. 07-10, § 1, 5-1-07)  
Sec. 49-102. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Abnormally high strength compatible waste means wastes containing a CBOD5 above 350 mg/L or total suspended solids above 300 mg/L. 
Act or the Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq. 
Administrator means the authorized representative of the City of Palm Coast. 
Analysis means any analysis required in this article all of which shall be performed by a State certified laboratory using procedures established by the Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.), Part 136, and amendments thereto or with any of the test procedures approved by the Environmental Protection Agency. Sampling shall also be performed in accordance with techniques approved by the Environmental Protection Agency. 
Approval authority means the Florida Department of Environmental Protection. 
Authority means the City of Palm Coast. 
Authorized Representative of the User means: 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice president of the corporation in charge of the principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00, if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, the authorized representative shall be a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the discharge originates. 
Bacteria means a single celled organisms that are cultivated to eat organic substances. 
Building sewer means a sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the WWTF. 
Carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand (CBOD5) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure five days at 20 degrees centigrade expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter-mg/L). 
Cease and desist order means an administrative order directing a user to immediately halt illegal or unauthorized discharges. 
Chemical oxygen demand (COD) means the laboratory determination of the oxygen Equivalent expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/L) of that portion of the organic matter that is susceptible to oxidation by the standard dichromate reflux method. The COD shall be determined in accordance with procedures set forth in the latest edition of Standard Methods. 
City means the City of Palm Coast, Florida, a municipal corporation of the State of Florida, or where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for any duly authorized official or employee of the City. 
Compliance order means an administrative order directing a user to immediately halt illegal or unauthorized discharges. 
Control Authority means and refers to the approval authority or the Director, if the authority has an approved pretreatment program under the provisions of 40 CFR 403.11. 
Control manhole means a manhole installed by the user at their expense to facilitate observation, sampling and testing of the process wastewater. 
Customer Any person, firm or corporation, or government that is the actual user of the City/wastewater system. 
Director means the Director of Utility Operations for the City subject to the direction of the City Manager. 
Discharge means the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater collection system by any non-domestic source that is subject to the regulations of Chapter 403, Florida Statutes. 
Domestic waste means the wastes produced from non-commercial or non-industrial activities, and which result from normal human living processes, which are of substantially similar origin and strength to those typically produced in households. 
Emulsifiers means a liquid solvent or detergent designed to convert oil, grease, fats, blood, and animal by-products into a stable dispersion in water. 
Enforcement response plan means a plan, required by the FDEP, Rule 62-625.500d, F.A.C., that includes the enforcement procedures for users that violate this article. 
Enzymes means enzymes break down organic waste into liquids that can be absorbed by microorganisms. 
Florida Administrative Code (F.A.C.) means the codification of administrative rules to implement legislation approved by the legislature and the resultant Florida Statutes. 
Florida Department of Environmental Protection (FDEP) means the Department of Environmental Protection of the State of Florida or where appropriate, the duly authorized official of said agency. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) means the United States Environmental Protection agency or, where appropriate, the regional Water Management Division Director, or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
Existing source means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication of EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act. 
FOG means fat, oil and grease that are discharged into the wastewater collection system. 
Garbage grinder or disposal means an electrical device that shreds solid or semi-solid waste materials, generally food-related, into smaller portions for discharge into the City wastewater system. 
Generator means a user, by site or facility, who produces waste from the said user's process operation. The generator is responsible for disposal of the produced wastes in accordance with applicable Federal, State and local laws, rules, and regulations. 
Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
Grease interceptor means a device designed for high flow applications to interrupt the flow of wastewater in order to allow the separation of FOG and heavy solids. 
Grease trap means a small point of service device designed for low flow applications to interrupt the flow of wastewater in order to allow time for the separation of FOG and heavy solids. 
Hauler or transporter means the maintenance company who is hired or contracted to perform cleaning and disposal services for customers and users of the City. 
Indirect discharge or discharge means the introduction of pollutants into the WWTF from any non-domestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act. 
Informal notice means notifying a user, such as, by telephone, e-mail, fax or written letter, due to an emergency. 
Interference means a discharge, which inhibits or disrupts the WWF, its treatment processes of operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal, and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the City's permit for disposal in compliance with any of the following regulatory provisions or permits issued hereunder, or any more stringent State or local regulations; Section 40 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including RCRA; any State regulations contained in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act and Chapter 62, F.A.C., as amended. 
Maintenance company means the contractor hired by the user of the wastewater system to clean and maintain all pretreatment devices such as grease and oil traps/interceptors, and oil and water separators. 
May is permissive or discretionary. 
Non-residential customers means all customers other than those living in single family dwelling units, including commercial, industrial, government, institutional, campgrounds, nursing homes, motels, hospitals, multi-family dwellings, and similar accounts. 
New source means any source, from which there is a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which is commenced after the adoption of this article. 
Notice of violation (NOV) means a control authority document notifying a user that they have violated pretreatment standards and requirements. Generally used when the violation is relatively minor and the control authority will require that the violation to be corrected in a short period of time. 
Oil and water separator means a City-approved device designed and constructed to separate trap and retain oil and grease substances derived from petroleum-based hydrocarbons that are found in the discharge of commercial users, such as, gas stations, garages, or quick oil change locations, of the City wastewater system. 
Pass through means a discharge which exits the WWTF in quantities or concentrations which is a cause of a violation of any appropriate permit of the City. 
Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, government entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. The definition includes all Federal, State, and local governmental entities 
pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
Pollutant means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, pharmaceutical drugs and supplies, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water or onto land. 
Pollution means the person-made or person-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of land or water. 
Pretreatment or treatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into WWTF. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by a physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes or other means except as prohibited by Chapter 62-625, F.A.C. 
Pretreatment standards or standards means pretreatment standards shall mean prohibitive discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards and local limits. 
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharge means absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances. 
Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a categorical pretreatment standard imposed on a significant industrial user. 
Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a "treatment works," as defined by Section 212 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1292) which is owned by the City. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of wastewater or industrial of a liquid nature and any conveyances that convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
Septic tank water means any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
Sewage means human excrement and gray water. 
Sewerage system means any devices and systems used in the collection, transmission, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of domestic wastewater or industrial wastes. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater 
Shall is mandatory 
Slug load or slug means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards of this article. 
Stormwater means any flow occurring, during, or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting there from, including snowmelt. 
Total suspended solids means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
Upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with permitted pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
User means any person who contributes, causes, or permits contribution of wastewater into the City's Wastewater Collection and Treatment Facilities. 
Utility Director means the Director of Utilities for the City. 
Wastewater means the spent or used water from domestic dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions, together with any ground water, surface water, and stormwater that may be present as a result of infiltration or inflow. 
Wastewater collection system means the system of piping, manholes and pump stations used to collect and convey wastewater for treatment. 
Wastewater treatment facility means a treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. section 1292) which is owned by the City of Palm Coast. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
Waters of the State means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 07-10, § 2, 5-1-07)  
Sec. 49-103. - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
AO 	Administrative Order 
BOD 	Biochemical Oxygen Demand 
CFR 	Code of Federal Regulations 
CO 	Consent Order 
CBOD 	Carbonaceous Biochemical Oxygen Demand 
COD 	Chemical Oxygen Demand 
DIR 	Director of the Utility Department 
DOC 	Demonstration of Compliance 
EPA 	Environmental Protection Agency 
EC 	Environmental Coordinator 
ES 	Emergency Suspension 
FDEP 	Florida Department of Environmental Protection 
FOG 	Fats, Oils, and Grease 
L 	Liter 
LF 	Laboratory Fees 
mg 	Milligrams 
mg/L 	Milligrams per Liter 
NPDES 	National Pollution Discharge Elimination System 
NOV 	Notice of Violation 
NOSV 	Notice of Significant Violation 
OGMU 	Oil and Grease Management User 
POTW 	Publicly Owned Treatment Works 
PC 	Pretreatment Coordinator 
PS 	Pretreatment Specialist 
RCRA 	Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
SCH 	Show Cause Hearing 
SIC 	Standard Industrial Classification 
SWDA 	Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. 6901, et seq. 
TSS 	Total Suspended Solids 
USC 	United States Code 
USEPA 	United States Environmental Protection Agency 
WWTF 	Wastewater Treatment Facility 
 
(Ord. No. 07-10, § 3, 5-1-07)  
Sec. 49-104. - General discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  It is prohibited and unlawful for a user to introduce or cause to be introduced, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or performance of the WWTF. 
(b)  All prohibitions set forth in this article apply to all users of the WWTF whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(c)  It is prohibited and unlawful for a user to contribute the following to any WWTF: 
(1)  Any substance which create a fire or explosive hazard in the WWTF, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees F (60 degrees C) using test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. 261.21. 
(2)  Any substance having a pH less than 5.5 or more than 8.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the WWTF. 
(3)  Any solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the WWTF such as, but not limited to, grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshing, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble, dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, ground paper products, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining, or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes. 
(4)  Pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (CBOD, etc), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, causes interference with the WWTF. 
(5)  Substances having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the WWTF resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees F (40 degrees C). 
(6)  Substances containing petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
(7)  Substances that give off or result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the WWTF in a quantity that may cause worker health safety problems. 
(8)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the administrator in accordance with this article. 
(9)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair. 
(10)  Any substances which impart color that cannot be removed by the treatment process such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently impart color to the WWTF effluent, which could violate the City's FDEP permit. Color (in combination with turbidity) shall not cause the treatment plant effluent to reduce the depth of the compensation point for photosynthetic activity by more than ten percent from the seasonably established norm for aquatic life. 
(11)  Any substances containing radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable Federal or State laws, rules or regulations. 
(12)  Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, except as specifically authorized by the City. 
(13)  Sludge, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes. 
(14)  Medical wastes, including pharmaceuticals except as specifically authorized by the Administrator. 
(15)  Substances, alone or in conjunction with other sources, which cause the WWTF effluent to fail an FDEP permit required toxicity test. 
(16)  Detergents surface-active agents, or other substances which by their concentration or amount may cause excessive foaming in the WWTF. 
(17)  FOG of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than the limits set by this article. 
(18)  Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (CBOD, etc.) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which a user knows or has reason to know will cause interference to the WTWF. It is prohibited and unlawful for a slug load have a flow rate or contain concentrations or quantities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration, quantities, or flow during normal operation. 
(19)  Any substance which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance. 
(20)  Any substance which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources causes a discharge to exit the WWTF in quantities or concentrations which cause violation of any appropriate permit for the City. including, but not limited to, an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
(d)  When the City determines that a user is contributing to the WWTF any of substance in such amounts as to interfere with the operation of the WWTF, the City shall: 
(1)  Advise the user of the impact of the contribution on the WWTF: and 
(2)  Develop effluent limitations for such user to correct the interference with the WWTF. 
(Ord. No. 07-10, § 4, 5-1-07)  
Sec. 49-105. - Accidental discharges. 
(a)  Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article. The City may require any user to develop an accidental discharge/slug control plan. It is prohibited and unlawful for a user to fail to comply with direction from the City as to the timely development of an accidental discharge/slug control plan. Facilities and equipment to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's cost and expense and it is prohibited and unlawful for a user to fail to provide adequate facilities and equipment to prevent accidental discharges of prohibited materials. 
(b)  Immediately following an accidental discharge the user shall notify the Director and provide a detailed report describing the cause and type of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not be relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the WWTF, fish kills, or other damage to persons and property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law, rule or regulation. is prohibited and unlawful for a user to fail to provide such notification. 
(c)  Each use shall permanently post a notice on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place at the place of the user's regulated activities under the provisions of this article advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. All users and employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. It is prohibited and unlawful for a user or employer to fail to provide such notice. 
(d)  Failure to accurately report any noncompliance discharge shall result in enforcement action based on the nature and severity of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 07-10, § 5, 5-1-07)  
Sec. 49-106. - Dilution. 
It is prohibited and unlawful for a user to increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The City may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 07-10, § 6, 5-1-07)  
Sec. 49-107. - Pretreatment facilities. 
(a)  Users shall provide wastewater pretreatment as necessary to comply with the requirements of this article and shall achieve compliance with all pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions provided in this article within the time limitations specified by the EPA, the State or the City, whichever is more stringent. 
(b)  Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be approved by the City and shall be provided, installed, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. 
(c)  Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted by the user to the City for review in a form or format acceptable to the City before such facilities are constructed. 
(d)  The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the City under the provisions of this article. 
(e)  It is prohibited and unlawful for a user to fail to comply with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 07-10, § 7, 5-1-07)  
Sec. 49-108. - Oil and grease management. 
(a)  The discharge by a user to the POTW of certain liquids or wastes may be prohibited or limited by the City of the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Wastes containing oil and grease shall be directed to a grease interceptor or grease trap by the user. 
(c)  Food waste shall not be directed by the user to traps or interceptors. 
(d)  Wastes containing residual (trace amounts) petroleum based oil and grease shall be directed to an oil/water separator by the user. 
(e)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided by the user when, it is determined by the City, that they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. 
(f)  All interception units used by users shall be of type and capacity approved by the City and shall be installed by the user in a location that provides easy access at all times for cleaning and inspection. All underground equipment shall be tightly sealed to prevent inflow of rainwater. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned and repaired regularly, as needed for compliance with this article by the user at the expense of the user. 
(g)  It is prohibited and unlawful to connect or discharge sanitary facilities and other similar fixtures to the grease interceptor, grease trap or the oil/water separator. 
(h)  It is prohibited and unlawful to discharge liquid wastes to the grease interceptor, grease trap or the oil/water separator through the inlet pipe unless accomplished in accordance with City standards and the design and operating specifications of the device. 
(i)  It is prohibited and unlawful to locate a grease trap in or near any part of a structure where food handling is accomplished or in a place that has not been approved by the City prior to installation. 
(j)  Nonresidential establishments (users) that prepare, process or serve food or food products shall install an approved grease interceptor or grease trap. Nonresidential establishments that have been determined by the City to have the potential to discharge wastes containing residual petroleum based oil and grease, such as but not limited to commercial laundries, car washes and automotive related facilities, shall have an approved oil/water separator. Other users may be required by the City to install an approved grease interceptor or an oil/water separator as appropriate, for the proper handling of wastes containing oil and grease exceeding 100 mg/L by weight. 
(k)  Other types of food manufacturing or food preparation enterprises, including, but not limited to, commissaries, commercial kitchens and caterers shall install a grease interceptor, grease trap. Grease interceptors shall be sized on an individual case-by-case basis. A control manhole or inspection box for monitoring purposes shall be installed at the user's sole expense as approved by the City. 
(l)  Multifamily dwellings such as, triplexes, quadraplexes, townhouses, condominiums, apartment buildings, or apartment complexes which City determines to be contributing oil and grease in quantities sufficient to cause line stoppages within the collection system, lift station malfunctions, or necessitate increase maintenance on the collection system shall be directed to cease discharging oil and grease to the POTW and shall be required to install a grease interceptor. The capacity of the grease interceptor shall be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. For monitoring purposes, a control manhole or inspection box may be required by the City which shall be installed at the user's sole expense, as approved by the City. 
(m)  Users at automotive related enterprises, commercial laundries, laundromats and other users which contribute wastes containing petroleum (hydrocarbon) based oils and greases shall install an oil/water separator. Oil/water separators shall be sized on an individual case-by-case basis using established design guidelines for the proposed facility. A control manhole or inspection box shall be installed downstream by the user at the sole expense of the user. 
(n)  Grease interceptors and oil/water separators shall be installed solely at the user's expense. Proper operation, maintenance and repair shall be the responsibility of the user and all such work and costs shall be solely the user's expense. 
(o)  Grease interceptors and grease traps shall achieve an effluent grease concentration of less than 100 mg/l. 
(p)  The City may require that a non-residential user provide documentation on the design and expected performance of the oil and grease interceptor/trap or oil/water separator. Information which shall be submitted includes, but is not limited to, catalog cuts, performance data, and materials of construction, installation instructions, and operation and maintenance manual. 
(q)  It is prohibited and unlawful for a user to fail to comply with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 07-10, § 8, 5-1-07)  
Sec. 49-109. - Oil and grease interceptor design. 
(a)  Grease interceptors and oil/water separators shall be designed, constructed and installed in accordance with the applicable rules, regulations, and specifications noted in the City's Standards and Specifications for Water and Wastewater Construction, the Florida Building Code and the Plumbing and Drainage Institute PDIG101, and other applicable Federal, State and local laws, rules and regulations. 
(b)  The design of oil/water separators shall be based on peak flow and where applicable, capable of treating and removing emulsions. Oil/water separators shall be sized to allow efficient retention and removal of the petroleum based oils and grease from the users discharge to the POTW. 
(c)  Alternative oil and grease removal devices or technologies are subject to review and written approval by the City and shall be based on demonstrated (proven) removal efficiencies. 
(d)  Under the sink grease traps are prohibited for new installations. 
(e)  It is prohibited and unlawful for a user to fail to comply with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 07-10, § 9, 5-1-07)  
Sec. 49-110. - Oil and grease interceptor capacity. 
The capacity of the approved grease interceptor or oil/water separator shall be in accordance with the requirements, the applicable laws rules, and regulations, and specifications of the City. It is prohibited and unlawful for a user to fail to comply with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 07-10, § 10, 5-1-07)  
Sec. 49-111. - Oil and grease interceptor installation. 
(a)  On, or after, the effective date of this article, facilities likely to discharge oil and grease, which are newly proposed or constructed, or existing facilities which are expanded or renovated to include a food service facility where such facilities did not previously exist, shall install a City approved grease interceptor or oil/water separator. Grease interceptors or oil/water separators shall be installed prior to the opening of said facilities. 
(b)  On or after the effective date of this article, each existing food service or automotive related facilities shall install an approved grease interceptor or oil/water separator when any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  If the City, upon evaluating a facility, finds that the facility is out of compliance with the conditions of this article and is contributing oils and grease in quantities sufficient to cause line stoppages, or necessitate increased maintenance on the collection system. 
(2)  Remodeling of the food preparation or kitchen waste plumbing facilities, remodeling of automotive related enterprises and any other facility that may contribute oil and grease to the system that are subject to a permit that is issued by the City's Building Department. 
(c)  On or after the effective date of this article, existing food service or automotive related facilities with existing grease interceptors, grease traps or oil/water separators will be evaluated and shall be required to upgrade or replace the existing unit(s) in order to meet City Standards and Specifications and the requirements of this article. 
(d)  An adequate number of manholes, but at a minimum two, per interceptor unit shall be provided for by the user to ensure proper maintenance and inspection accessibility to the grease interceptor. 
(e)  It is prohibited and unlawful for a user to fail to comply with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 07-10, § 11, 5-1-07)  
Sec. 49-112. - Oil and grease compliance extensions. 
Any requests for extensions to the required installation dates by a user must be made in writing to the City at least 15 days in advance of the compliance date. The written request shall include the reasons for the user's failure or inability to comply with the compliance date set forth, the additional time needed to complete the remaining work, and the steps to be taken to avoid any future delays. 
(Ord. No. 07-10, § 12, 5-1-07)  
Sec. 49-113. - Oil and grease interceptor maintenance. 
(a)  The user shall provide for all cleaning and maintenance of the grease interceptor, grease trap or the oil/water separator. Cleaning shall include the complete removal of all contents, including floating materials, wastewater, and bottom sludge and solids. 
(b)  The user shall ensure that cleaning of the grease interceptors is performed by a licensed solid waste hauler who disposes the material at a dumpsite, which has been approved by the appropriate health department personnel in writing which shall also have authority to review the trucks used to perform the cleaning. 
(c)  Decanting, back-flushing or discharging of removed wastes back into the grease interceptor, grease trap or oil/water separator from which the waste was removed or into any other grease interceptor, grease trap, oil/water separator or any other device or container for the purpose of reducing the volume to be hauled and disposed is prohibited and unlawful. 
(d)  Grease interceptors, grease traps and oil/water separators shall be pumped or cleaned out completely by the user as often as necessary in order to prevent carry over of oil and grease into the collection system. Cleaning and maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, complete removal of materials from the tank walls, baffles, cross pipes, inlets and outlets. 
(e)  The user shall maintain the oil and grease interceptor in such condition for efficient operation. An oil and grease interceptor shall be considered to be out of compliance if the grease layer on top exceeds six inches and or if the solids layer on the bottom exceeds six inches, or if sampling and analysis indicates greater than 100 mg/L of oil and grease in the discharge. 
(f)  The user of any existing oil and grease trap shall be responsible for maintaining the unit in such condition for efficient operation. An oil and grease trap shall be considered to be out of compliance if the total volume of grease and solids measured occupies more than 20 percent of the working volume of the unit, or if sampling and analysis indicates greater than 100 mg/L of oil and grease in the discharge. 
(g)  Wastes removed from each oil and grease interceptor/trap or oil/water separator shall be disposed of by the user at a facility permitted to receive such wastes or at a location designated and permitted for such purposes, in accordance with the provisions of this article. It is prohibited and unlawful for the pumpage to be returned to any private or public portion of the collection system or the treatment plants, without prior written approval from the City. 
(h)  The use of chemical or biological additives as a grease degradation agent by a user is subject to the prior written approval of the City. Any user using this method of grease abatement shall maintain the trap or interceptor in such a manner that attainment of the grease wastewater limit, as measured from the traps outlet, is consistently achieved. 
(i)  It is prohibited and unlawful for a user to use petroleum based solvents for cleaning and degreasing. 
(j)  It is prohibited and unlawful for a user to flush the oil and grease interceptor/trap or oil/water separator with water having a temperature in excess of 104 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(k)  The user, at the user's sole expense, shall perform all maintenance of oil and grease management devices including, but not limited to, proper disposal of all removed product. 
(l)  Users of existing oil and grease interceptor, grease traps or oil/water separators found to be out of compliance upon issuance of this article will be provided by the City with a report listing the noncompliance issues and a time frame for correction. 
(m)  It is prohibited and unlawful for a user to fail to comply with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 07-10, § 13, 5-1-07)  
Sec. 49-114. - Hauled wastewater. 
(a)  It is prohibited and unlawful to discharge septic tank waste into the wastewater collection system or introduced into the WWTF Of the City. 
(b)  The discharge of hauled waste is subject to all other requirements of this article. 
(c)  Waste haulers shall discharge loads only at locations designated by the City. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the City. The City may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The City may require the waste handler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(d)  Waste haulers shall provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. 
(e)  It is prohibited and unlawful to fail to comply with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 07-10, § 14, 5-1-07)  
Sec. 49-115. - Records and reports. 
(a)  A manifest that confirms pumping, hauling, and disposal of waste shall be kept to track pumpage from grease interceptors, grease traps and oil/water separators. This manifest shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  Generator information: Facility name and address, contact person, telephone number, volume, pumped date and time of pumping, name and signature of generator verifying generator information; 
(2)  Transporter information: Company name and address, telephone number, volume pumped, date and time of pumping, driver name and signature of transporter verifying transporter information and service provided; and 
(3)  Destination information disposal site or facility: Company name/permit number(s), contact person(s), address, telephone number, location of disposal site/ facility, volume treated, date and time of delivery, driver name and signature, and vehicle number, name and signature of operator verifying disposal site and facility information. 
(b)  The user shall maintain a log of pumping activities for the previous 12 months. 
(c)  The user shall provide City personnel with immediate access to the log of pumping activities which log shall be posted in a conspicuous location. The log shall include, at a minimum, the date, time, volume pumped, hauler's name and license number and hauler's signature. 
(d)  The user shall maintain a file on site of the records and other documents pertaining to the facility's grease interceptor, grease trap or oil/water separator. The file contents shall include, at a minimum, the record (as built) drawings, record of inspections, log of pumping activities and receipts, log of maintenance activities, hauler information, disposal information, and monitoring data. The user shall keep the file available at all times for inspection and review by the City and must be kept for a running period of five years by the user. 
(e)  It is prohibited and unlawful to fail to comply with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 07-10, § 15, 5-1-07)  
Sec. 49-116. - Compliance monitoring. 
(a)  The user shall permit the City to enter and conduct facility inspections at its option and without notice. 
(b)  The City may conduct routine inspections with frequency based on the size of the interception unit and the loading rates. If a problem arises, such as, line stoppages, or increased maintenance on the collection system, in the POTW system or if a violation is noted during the routine inspection, the inspections may be conducted more frequently as determined by the City. 
(c)  The City may require the user to provide, operate and maintain, at the user's expense, appropriate monitoring facilities, such as a control manhole, that are safe and accessible at all times, for observation, inspection, sample collection, and flow measurement of the user's discharge to the POTW. The City may impose additional limitations and monitoring requirements for the discharge to the POTW in accordance with the provisions set forth in this article. Users shall comply with all directives of the City. 
(d)  It is prohibited and unlawful for a user to fail to comply with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 07-10, § 16, 5-1-07)  
Sec. 49-117. - Enforcement response plan. 
(a)  The City shall issue a Notice of Violation to a user for failure to comply with the provisions of this article by serving written notice upon the user stating the nature of violation and providing the user with 15 business days to provide to the City a detailed written report with the proposed corrective actions and completion date. The City may shorten the response time in exigent circumstances or when the City determines that the public health, safety or welfare is endangered. 
(b)  If a user violates or continues to violate the provisions set forth in this article or fails to initiate complete corrective action within the specified time period in response to a Notice of Violation, then the City may pursue the following options or such other actions to protect the public health safety or welfare: 
(1)  Pump the oil and grease interceptor/trap, or oil/water separator, and place the actual at cost fee of this service on the user's monthly sewer bill for services which may include pumping, cleaning, and disposal of the contents in the oil and grease interceptor/trap or the oil/water separator; 
(2)  Impose an administrative penalty, in accordance with the rules and procedures set forth in this article; 
(3)  Assess a reasonable fee for additional inspection, sample collection, and laboratory analyses; 
(4)  Terminate water and sewer service; or 
(5)  Any combination of the above or other enforcement actions. 
(c)  Should water and/or sewer service be terminated, the user shall pay all outstanding fees, penalties and other utility charges prior to reinstatement of water and sewer service. 
(d)  The City shall use, to the maximum extent practicable, the following enforcement guide in addressing enforcement issues that arise under the provisions of this article. 
Enforcement Guide 
Article Violation 	Nature of Violation 	Enforcement Response 	Personnel 
Section 49-104 	Unapproved Discharge 	Issue Notice of Violation 	Inspector 
Section 49-105 	Accidental Discharge 	Issue Notice of Violation 	Inspector 
Section 49-106 	Dilution of Discharge 	Issue Notice of Violation 	Inspector 
Section 49-107 	No Pretreatment Facilities 	Issue Notice of Violation 	Inspector 
Section 49-108 	Oil and Grease Management 	Issue Notice of Violation 	Inspector 
Section 49-109 	Oil and Grease Unit Design 	Issue Notice of Violation 	Inspector 
Section 49-110 	Oil and Grease Unit Capacity 	Issue Notice of Violation 	Inspector 
Section 49-111 	Oil and Grease Unit Installation 	Issue Notice of Violation 	Inspector 
Section 49-113 	Oil and Grease Unit Maintenance 	Issue Notice of Violation 	Inspector 
Section 49-114 	Hauled Wastewater 	Issue Notice of Violation 	Inspector 
Section 49-115 	Records and Reports 	Issue Notice of Violation 	Inspector 
 
Note: Notice of Violation will detail corrective action needed. 
_____
(e)  Appeals of all City staff decisions shall be to the Director of the City Utility Department, then to the City Manager and then to the City Council. Notices of appeals must be filed within ten days of the date of the decision from which the appeal arises. Decisions of the City Council may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction in accordance with the controlling rules of procedure. Appeals shall be de novo at each level except that appeals to the City Council shall be on the record of the matter determined at the prior level. The City Manager may promulgate administrative rules relating to the processes and procedures for hearings and appeals. The City may use its hearing officer process to hear matters at any level. 
(Ord. No. 07-10, § 17, 5-1-07)  
Sec. 49-118. - Fees. 
Fees as the City may deem necessary to carry out the requirements set forth in this article and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the City and may be established by adoption of resolutions by the City Council from time-to-time to include the fees for the filing of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 07-10, § 18, 5-1-07)  
Sec. 49-119. - Declaration of exclusion from Florida Administrative Procedures Act adoption of rules City Manager. 
(a)  Nothing contained in this article shall be construed or interpreted to include the City in the definition of agency contained in Section 120.52, Florida Statutes, or to otherwise subject the City to the application of the Florida Administrative Procedures Act, Chapter 120, Florida Statutes. This declaration of intent and exclusion shall apply to all proceedings taken as a result of or pursuant to this article. 
(b)  The City Manager shall have the power and authority to promulgate administrative rules and formulate incipient City policy in order to implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-10, § 19, 5-1-07)  
Sec. 49-120. - Penalties/other remedies. 
(a)  Violation of the provisions of this article or the rules promulgated by the City under the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or 60 days of confinement as set forth in Section 162.22, Florida Statutes, or to the maximum extent as may be permitted under the controlling provisions of Federal or State law. 
(b)  The City may seek additional remedies for violations of the provisions of this article and the rules promulgated by the City to include any and all remedies authorized by Federal or State law. 
(c)  Each day of violation of this article shall be a separate and distinct violation of this article which is fully subject to all of the remedies available under controlling law. 
(Ord. No. 07-10, § 20, 5-1-07)  
Chapter 50 - WATERWAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 15; environment, ch. 24; floods, ch. 26; solid waste, ch. 41; utilities, ch. 49; land development code, app. A. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL  
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VESSEL TRAFFIC 
 
Sec. 50-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Vessel shall be defined as it is defined in the F.S. ch. 327. 
Canals shall mean those waterways within the City which are not part of the intracoastal waterway. 
(Ord. No. 01-15, § 1, 6-19-01)  
Sec. 50-32. - Minimum wake zone created. 
(a)  All vessels operating anywhere in the Palm Coast canals shall operate at a slow speed and observe a minimum wake zone; except from the Palm Harbor Parkway Bridge to the intracoastal waterway where they shall operate at an idle speed and observe a no-wake zone. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to maintenance vessels in the case of an emergency; or to a law enforcement, firefighting, or rescue vessel owned and operated by a governmental entity; or to private vehicles where the operators are working under the direction of the United States Coast Guard Auxiliary, United States Power Squadron or any law enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 01-15, § 2, 6-19-01; Ord. No. 01-22, § 1, 8-21-01)  
Sec. 50-33. - Enforcement. 
Provisions of this article may be enforced by any person having the authority to enforce ordinances of the City. Nothing in this article shall prohibit the Sheriff of Flagler County from exercising the authority granted in F.S. § 30.07, to appoint individuals as deputies for the purpose of enforcing this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-15, § 3, 6-19-01) 


UNIFIED LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE CITY OF PALM COAST, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Adopted August 19, 2008 
____________ 
Published in 2009 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
PALM COAST, FLORIDA 
____________ 
Milissa Holland 
Mayor 
____________ 
Robert G. Cuff-District 1 
Heidi Shipley-District 2 
Nick Klufas-District 3 
Steven Nobile-District 4 
City Council Members 
____________ 
Jim Landon 
City Manager 
____________ 
William E. Reischmann, Jr. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Virginia A. Smith, MMC, CP 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes the unified land development ordinances of the City of Palm Coast, Florida. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were Ordinance No. 2008-16, adopted August 19, 2008, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. 
    The various sections within each chapter of the Code have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a period. The figure before the period refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1.02, and the first section of chapter 7 is 7.01. 
Indices 
    The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indices themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Zanne Ebersole, Editor, and Aline True, Quality Control Specialist, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Clare Hoeni, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Unified Land Development Code which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida  
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 2012-1  2-21-12 Omitted 3 2012-2  3-20-12 Omitted 3 2012-3  5- 1-12 Included 3 2012-5  7-17-12 Omitted 4 2012-6  9-18-12 Omitted 4 2012-7  9-18-12 Omitted 4 2012-8  9-18-12 Omitted 4 2013-8 11- 5-13 Omitted 4 2013-9 11-19-13 Included 4 2013-10 11-19-13 Omitted 4 2013-11 11-19-13 Omitted 4 2013-12 11-19-13 Omitted 4 2014-2  2- 4-14 Omitted 4 2014-3  2- 4-14 Omitted 4 2004-10  5- 4-04 Included 5 2014-11  5- 6-14 Omitted 6 2014-14  6-17-14 Omitted 6 2014-17  7-15-14 Omitted 6 2015-07  5- 5-15 Omitted 6 2015-08  7-21-15 Included 6 2015-9  8- 4-15 Included 6 2015-16 12- 1-15 Included 7 2016-1  2-16-16 Omitted 8 2016-2  2-16-16 Omitted 8 2016-3  3- 1-16 Omitted 8 2016-4  3-15-16 Included 8 2016-5  6- 7-16 Omitted 9 2016-6 11- 1-16 Included 9 2011-7  6- 7-11 Omitted 10 2013-1  2-19-13 Omitted 10 2013-14 12-17-13 Omitted 10 2013-15 12-17-13 Omitted 10 2013-16 12-17-13 Omitted 10 2014-6  3- 4-14 Omitted 10 2017-2  2- 7-17 Omitted 10 2017-5  5-16-17 Omitted 10 2017-6  6- 6-17 Omitted 10 2017-7  6- 6-17 Omitted 10 2017-10  8- 1-17 Omitted 10 2017-11  9- 5-17 Omitted 10 2017-12  9-19-17 Omitted 10 2017-16 10- 3-17 Omitted 10 2017-17 10- 3-17 Omitted 10 2017-19 10-17-17 Included 10 2017-20 11- 7-17 Omitted 11 2017-22 11-21-17 Omitted 11 2017-24 11-21-17 Omitted 11 2017-26 12- 5-17 Omitted 11 2018-02  2- 6-18 Included 11 2018-7  4- 3-18 Omitted 12 2018-8  4- 3-18 Omitted 12 2018-13  4-17-18 Included 12 2018-14  5-15-18 Included 12 2018-15  5-15-18 Omitted 12 2018-19  9-18-18 Omitted 13 2018-20  9-18-18 Omitted 13 2018-21 10- 2-18 Included 13 2018-23 10-16-18 Omitted 13 2018-24 11- 6-18 Included 13  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The source material used in the preparation of this Code was Ord. No. 2008-16, § 2(Exh. A), adopted August 19, 2008. 

Sec. 1.01. - Title. 
    This Code shall be entitled the "City of Palm Coast Unified Land Development Code," otherwise known as the "Land Development Code," and may from time-to-time be referred to herein as the "Code" or the "LDC." 
Sec. 1.02. - Authority. 
    This Land Development Code is adopted under authority of the City of Palm Coast by virtue of the constitution and laws of the State of Florida including particularly F.S. §§ 163.3201 and 163.3202, (the Local Government Comprehensive Planning and Land Development Regulation Act) and the general authority granted in Article VIII, Section 2, of the Constitution of the State of Florida and F.S. chs. 163 and 166. 
Sec. 1.03. - Purpose and Intent. 
    The City has developed this Unified LDC to implement its Comprehensive Plan and to streamline the development review process. This LDC sets forth regulations, requirements, and procedures governing the use and development of land for the purpose of protecting the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City and to enhance the appearance, function, and livability of the City, to the end of improving the overall quality of life within the community. 
    As required by F.S. ch. 163, this LDC contains specific and detailed provisions which regulate the subdivision of land; the use of land and water; areas subject to flooding; environmentally sensitive lands; signage; landscaping; stormwater management; and protection of potable water well fields. This LDC also requires that all development be reviewed for its impact on public facilities and services, and that adopted levels-of-service are maintained. 
    The provisions of this LDC establish the full range of land development regulations necessary to adequately regulate the use of real property and implement, in conjunction with and subordinate to the Comprehensive Plan, sound growth management within the City and oversee the transition of any land development authority from the Palm Coast Community Services Corporation to the City. 
Sec. 1.04. - Consistency with Comprehensive Plan. 
    The goals, objectives, and policies of the Comprehensive Plan shall take precedence in the event of inconsistency with this LDC and this LDC shall be interpreted and administered consistent with the overall goals, objectives, and policies of the Comprehensive Plan. 
    It is intended that this LDC implement the City's planning objectives and policies adopted as part of the Comprehensive Plan, as amended and periodically updated. The Comprehensive Plan shall govern where a land use regulation is not included or addressed in this LDC. 
Sec. 1.05. - General Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and administration of this LDC, all provisions shall be: 
1.  Considered as requirements; 
2.  Interpreted consistent with the intent of this LDC; and 
3.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State Statutes. 
Sec. 1.06. - Responsibility for Interpretation. 
    The provisions of this Code shall be administered by the Land Use Administrator. The Land Use Administrator shall refer to the Comprehensive Plan for guidance when any question arises concerning the application or interpretation of the regulations, performance standards, definitions, development criteria, or any other provisions of this LDC. The Land Use Administrator shall be limited to interpretations of standards, regulations, and requirements of this LDC. Interpretations regarding technical codes prepared by other agencies and adopted by reference within this LDC shall not be included in the Land Use Administrator's purview, but the Land Use Administrator may refer to the decisions of such agencies in making interpretations. 
Sec. 1.07. - Coordination with Other Governmental and Quasi-Governmental Agencies. 
    The City shall coordinate its permitting activities with the county, regional, state and federal, governmental and quasi-governmental agencies having jurisdiction over certain land development matters. 
Sec. 1.08. - Violations. 
    Any violation of the previous Land Development Code of the City shall continue to be prosecuted as a violation under this LDC and shall be subject to penalties and enforcement under the provisions of this LDC unless the use, development, construction, or other activity is consistent with the express terms of this LDC, in which case enforcement action shall cease, except to the extent of collecting penalties for violations that occurred before the effective date of this LDC. 
Sec. 1.09. - Severability. 
    Should any section or provision of this LDC be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this LDC as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
Sec. 1.10. - Nonconformities. 
    1.10.01.  Intent. It is the intent of this chapter to permit lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of use which were lawful before the effective date of a provision of this LDC, but which are later prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this LDC to continue until they are abandoned or removed, but not to encourage their continuation. Such lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of use are declared by this LDC to be incompatible with those permitted in the districts involved. It is further the intent of this LDC that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
    1.10.02.  Nonconforming lots. 
A.  Nonconforming in size. When a nonconforming lot can be used in conformity with all of the regulations applicable to the intended use, except that the lot is smaller than the required minimums set forth in Chapter 3, then the lot may be used as proposed, just as if it were conforming. 
B.  Nonconforming in setbacks. When development on a nonconforming lot cannot reasonably comply to setback requirements due to the lot size limitation, the Land Use Administrator may grant an administrative deviation of standards (see Chapter 2) from the applicable setback requirements if: 
1.  The property cannot reasonably be developed without such deviations. Compliance is not reasonably possible if a building that serves the minimal needs of the use proposed for the nonconforming lot cannot be constructed and located on the lot in conformity with such setback requirements. Mere financial hardship does not constitute grounds for finding that compliance is not reasonable. 
2.  The deviations are necessitated by the size or shape of the nonconforming lot. 
3.  The property can be developed as proposed without any significantly adverse impact on surrounding properties or the public health and safety. 
C.  Applicable to undeveloped lots only. This section applies only to undeveloped nonconforming lots (a lot of record with no substantial structures). 
D.  Combination of nonconforming lots. As of the effective date of this Code, if an undeveloped nonconforming lot adjoins and has continuous frontage with one or more other undeveloped lots under the same ownership, then neither the owner of the nonconforming lot nor his successors in interest may take advantage of the provisions of this subsection. Provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to a nonconforming lot if a majority of the developed lots located on either side of the street where such lot is located and within 500 feet of such lot are also nonconforming. The intent of this subsection is to require nonconforming lots to be combined with other lots to create conforming lots, but not to require such combination when that would be out of character with the rest of the neighborhood. 
    1.10.03.  Nonconforming uses. Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this LDC, a lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible, or does not conform to the design requirements and standards set forth under the terms of this LDC as enacted or amended, such use may be continued if it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
A.  Expansion of nonconforming uses. Nonconforming uses shall not be expanded or extended beyond the scope and area of its operation nor enlarged, increased, or extended to occupy a greater area of land that was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this LDC, unless such use is changed to a use permitted in the district in which the property is located. 
B.  Abandonment of nonconforming uses. If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of one year, the nonconforming use shall be deemed abandoned and shall not be reestablished on those premises, unless a time extension is granted by the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board prior to the end of the one-year period based upon the public interest and equity to the property owner. 
C.  Additional structures prohibited. Additional structures that do not conform to the requirements of this LDC shall not be erected in connection with a nonconforming use of land. 
    1.10.04.  Nonconforming structures. Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this LDC that could not be built under the terms of this LDC by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, design requirements or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued as a lawful nonconforming structure if it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
A.  No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity. 
B.  Should such structure be damaged by any means more than 50 percent of the reasonable estimated replacement cost of the structure (as determined by the Flagler County Property Appraiser), it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of the LDC. 
C.  An existing nonconforming structure shall be brought into compliance with the LDC to the maximum extent feasible whenever there is a change of use, alteration, or an addition to the existing nonconforming structure. Compliance with the LDC shall include, but not be limited to, parking, driveways, paved surfaces, stormwater retention, buffers, landscaping, and fencing/screening. 
D.  Any dwelling unit that is occupied, constructed, or permitted for construction on the effective date of this Ordinance, but which does not meet the minimum living area size, shall be deemed to be a conforming structure within the zoning district assigned to the parcel on which the dwelling unit is located notwithstanding the requirements of Chapter 3. 
    1.10.05.  Approved construction. Proposed structures for which building permits have been issued prior to their designation as nonconforming by the adoption or amendment of this LDC may be completed and used as originally intended, provided they are completed and in use one year after the date on which the permit was issued. 
    1.10.06.  Ordinary repairs and maintenance. Ordinary repair or replacement of walls, roofs, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing on any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure and on any structure containing a nonconforming use is allowable, provided the structure existing at the date it becomes nonconforming shall not be increased in size or weight. 
    1.10.07.  Nonconforming structures unsafe because of lack of maintenance. If a nonconforming structure, portion of a structure or any structure containing a nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs or maintenance, and is declared by the Land Use Administrator to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be restored, repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
    1.10.08.  Nonconforming structures unsafe for reasons other than maintenance. If a nonconforming structure, portion of a structure, or any structure containing a lawful nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful for reasons other than lack of repairs or maintenance, nothing in this LDC shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of such building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by the authorized official of the City charged with protecting the public safety, provided that provisions in Subsection 1.10.04 are met. 
    1.10.09.  Casual, temporary, or illegal uses. The casual, temporary, or illegal use of land or structures, or land and structures in combination, or the use of accessory structures, shall not be sufficient to establish the existence of a nonconforming use or to create rights in the continuance of such use. 
    1.10.10.  Uses under special exception provisions. Any use which has been granted a special exception development order in a zoning district under the terms of this LDC shall not be deemed a nonconforming use in such district, but shall without further action be deemed a conforming use in such district. 
Chapter 2 - REVIEW AUTHORITY, ENFORCEMENT, AND PROCEDURES 
PART I. - REVIEW AUTHORITY AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 2.01. - Purpose and Intent. 
    The purpose of this Part is to establish the administrative structure for the implementation and enforcement of the Land Development Code. 
Sec. 2.02. - Review Authorities. 
    The following review authorities are established to administer the provisions of this LDC under the authority prescribed by this LDC and Florida law. 
2.02.01.  City Council. In addition to any authority granted to the City Council by state law or the Code of Ordinances of the City of Palm Coast, the City Council shall have the following powers and duties with regard to this LDC: 
A.  To provide for the approval or denial of applications promoting orderly development consistent with the City's Comprehensive Plan and this LDC. 
B.  To provide for the approval or denial of subdivision plans and other development plans consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and this LDC. 
C.  To conduct public hearings as may be necessary in the discharge of its duties. 
D.  To amend this LDC, after review and recommendation of the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board. 
E.  To hear and decide appeals pertaining to decisions of the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board. 
F.  To set fees as necessary to implement the provisions of this LDC. 
G.  To assess enforcement penalties for failure to comply with this LDC. 
H.  To take such other action not delegated to decision-making and administrative bodies designated in this LDC, as the City Council may deem desirable and necessary to implement the provisions of this LDC and the Comprehensive Plan. 
2.02.02.  Planning and land development regulation board. Chapter 2, Article V, Division 5 of the City of Palm Coast Code of Ordinances establishes the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board. In addition to the membership and duties specified in the Code of Ordinances, the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board shall meet the following requirements: 
A.  Membership. 
1.  The members of the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board shall reside in the City. 
2.  At least one Planning and Land Development Regulation Board shall be appointed from each City Council district. 
3.  No Planning and Land Development Regulation Board member shall serve in office for more than two consecutive four-year terms. A member whose term expires may continue to serve until a replacement is appointed. 
4.  Membership shall be based on experience or interest in the field of planning and zoning and may include the following occupations, when feasible. In no event, however, shall the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board include more than two members from the same field: 
a.  An architect or a landscape architect; 
b.  An engineer; 
c.  A realtor or a developer; 
d.  An environmentalist; and 
e.  A lawyer. 
B.  Removal from office. 
1.  Planning and Land Development Regulation Board members shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council. 
2.  If a member of the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board is absent for three regularly scheduled meetings without being excused prior to said meeting by the chair or who misses a total of five meetings in any 12 consecutive months, said member shall forfeit his or her office and it shall be deemed vacant. 
3.  Any vacancy occurring during the unexpired term of office of any member shall be filled by the City Council for the remainder of the term. 
C.  Powers and duties. The Planning and Land Development Regulation Board shall have the following powers and duties: 
1.  Hear applications for Comprehensive Plan amendments, zoning map amendments, master planned developments, master plans, special exceptions, and variances. 
2.  The Planning and Land Development Regulation Board is hereby designated as the local planning agency as required by F.S. §§ 163.3161 and 163.3174. The Planning and Land Development Regulation Board shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, the elements of the Comprehensive Plan as required in F.S. § 163.3177, and any other appropriate elements, and shall make recommendations regarding the Comprehensive Plan to the City Council. It shall have the general responsibility for the conduct of the Comprehensive Planning Program, monitoring and overseeing the effectiveness and status of the Comprehensive Plan, and recommending to the City Council such changes in the Comprehensive Plan as may, from time-to-time, be required. It shall perform any other duties assigned by the City Council and may prepare and recommend to the City Council any other proposals to implement the Comprehensive Plan. 
3.  The Planning and Land Development Regulation Board is hereby also designated as the land development regulation board in accordance with the provisions of F.S. §§ 163.3161 and 163.3194. The Planning and Land Development Regulation Board shall develop and recommend to the City Council land development regulations that implement the Comprehensive Plan and amendments thereto for consistency with the Comprehensive Plan. Amendments to the Land Development Code that relate purely to technical matters shall be considered on the basis of the technical matters submitted only. 
2.02.03.  Land Use Administrator. 
A.  The Land Use Administrator shall review and act upon any and all applications for development orders and permits that are issued by any person or body other than the City Council or the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board in which cases the Land Use Administrator shall provide for reviews and recommendations as appropriate. 
B.  The Land Use Administrator is authorized to make necessary interpretations of this LDC and to interpret the permissible, prohibited, and special exception land uses listed in each zoning district upon a written request for an interpretation being submitted to the Land Use Administrator together with any prescribed fee. The request shall contain sufficient information to enable the Land Use Administrator to make the necessary interpretation. 
C.  The Land Use Administrator is authorized to interpret the zoning map and to act upon disputed questions of district boundary lines and similar questions upon an application for an interpretation being submitted to the Land Use Administrator together with any prescribed fee. The application shall contain sufficient information to enable the Land Use Administrator to make the necessary interpretation. 
PART II. - DEVELOPMENT ORDERS AND AGREEMENTS-APPLICATIONS AND PROCEDURES 

Sec. 2.03. - Purpose and Intent. 
    The purpose of this Part is to set forth the basic procedures and criteria to implement this LDC with regard to receiving, reviewing, and rendering decisions on applications for development orders, agreements, and amendments to the Official Zoning Map. These procedures shall be applied and interpreted in a manner recognizing both the legislative and quasi-judicial aspects of the local government decision-making process. The Land Use Administrator shall accomplish the administration of this LDC, but may delegate authority as deemed appropriate. The City will not establish procedures and administer policies inconsistent with the Comprehensive Plan, Code of Ordinances, and policies established by City Council. 
Sec. 2.04. - Applicability. 
    No person shall undertake the development or subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the City except pursuant to a valid development order issued in accordance with all legal requirements. All development shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. All development shall meet City requirements prior to the approval and issuance of any development order, unless specifically exempted as a condition of the development order. The requirements contained in this section, in addition to the specific requirements noted for each type of application within this Part, shall apply to all development orders. 
2.04.01.  Development order required. Development orders require different levels of approval depending on the intensity and type of project. Table 2-1 shows the level of approval required for each type of development activity. Before submitting a development order application for review and to determine which level an application falls into, the developer shall provide the Land Use Administrator with sufficient information to make a determination. 
Table 2-1-Development Order Approvals 
DEVELOPMENT 
LEVEL DEVELOPMENT 
TYPE/INTENSITY FINAL APPROVAL 
AUTHORITY MINOR 
Tier 1: 
Nonresidential projects up to 40,000 square feet of building and/or residential projects not to exceed 40 residential units Administrative Deviation of Standards Land Use Administrator 1 Nonstatutory Subdivisions Preliminary Plats Technical Site Plans for Tier 1 developments; Tier 2 developments with an approved Master Site Plan; and Tier 3 developments with an approved Master Site Plan Subdivision Master Plans for nonresidential and for residential up to 100 units MODERATE 
Tier 2: 
Nonresidential projects over 40,000 square feet of building up to 100,000 square feet of building and/or residential projects over 41 residential units not to exceed 100 units Special Exceptions Planning and Land 
Development Regulation 
Board Variances Master Site Plans for Tier 2 Developments Technical Site Plans for Tier 2 developments without a master plan Nonresidential Controlling Master Site Plans for Tier 2 developments Subdivision Master Plans for residential greater than 100 units MAJOR 
Tier 3: 
Nonresidential projects over 100,000 square feet of building and/or residential projects over 100 residential units Vested Rights Determinations City Council Zoning Map Amendments/Master Planned Developments Final Plats Development Agreements Master Site Plans for Tier 3 developments Technical Site Plans for Tier 3 developments without a master plan Nonresidential Controlling Master Site Plans for Tier 3 developments Developments of Regional Impact (threshold - 750 residential dwelling units)  
       1 The Land Use Administrator shall, on a regular basis, submit a report to the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board listing all minor level developments that have been approved during a specified period. 
2.04.02.  Exceptions. No development order shall be required when: 
A.  The application for development involves minor remodeling or new construction of a detached single-family dwelling or duplex residential building and it meets all the applicable LDC requirements and regulations. Such development may directly make application for a building permit. 
B.  The development or redevelopment activity is included as part of a larger plan of development or a phased development for which a development order has been previously issued pursuant to this LDC. 
C.  Altering an existing building or structure so long as no increase is made to its nonresidential gross floor area, its use, its height, or the amount of impervious surface on the site. 
D.  Changing the use of a property/building provided that: 
1.  The new use is allowed in the applicable zoning district, and 
2.  The new use does not increase the density or the intensity of the development on the real property. 
E.  Erecting a sign or replacing protected trees on a previously developed site and independent of any other development activity on the site. 
2.04.03.  Building permit required. It shall be unlawful to change the use of an existing structure, modify an approved site plan, commence the clearing of land, excavations for, or the construction of any building or other structure, including accessory structures, or to store building materials, or erect temporary field offices, or to commence the moving, alteration, or repair of any structure, including accessory structures, until the Land Use Administrator has issued a building permit authorizing such development. Review and approval of building permits shall be in accordance with Article 2, Chapter 15 of the City of Palm Coast Code of Ordinances. 
Sec. 2.05. - Development Orders and Agreements-General Requirements. 
    2.05.01.  General administrative principles. The following principles apply to the development application process: 
A.  Copies of documents, reports, publications, administrative rules, and other similar matters that are referred to in the provisions of this LDC shall be filed and retained in the office of the City Clerk. 
B.  When state or federal codes are referenced in this LDC, the most recent enactment or amendment of that regulation shall apply. 
C.  When calculations are made in the course of the implementation of this LDC, numbers shall be rounded to the nearest whole number unless otherwise specifically stated in this LDC. 
D.  Fees called for in this LDC for the various applications and processes shall be established in a resolution adopted by the City Council; provided, however, that the Land Use Administrator may establish the appropriate fee for actions and activities not specifically set forth in a fee resolution after considering the range of fees set forth in the City Council's resolution and shall present proposed amended fee resolutions to the City Council, as needed, from time-to-time. 
E.  The Land Use Administrator is charged with promulgating the forms and procedures necessary to administratively implement this LDC. 
F.  Whenever a reference is made in this LDC to "the City" or "City staff" such reference shall mean the Land Use Administrator unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary. 
G.  The City shall adhere to the controlling requirements of state law relative to the processing, hearing and rendering decisions with regard to legislative and quasi-judicial matters. The City shall approve development orders and deny development orders as appropriate and in recognition of the public's right and the rights of property owners to articulated decisions on land use matters. 
H.  Although a glossary of defined terms and various definitions of terms are set forth in Chapter 14, not all terms may be defined and, to that end, the City may refer to and rely upon definitions set forth in the Florida Statutes and the Florida Administrative Code in order to assist in the administration of this LDC. 
I.  The rendering of a decision shall mean the filing of a written development order or a written denial of a development order in the office of the City Clerk. 
J.  Upon a final decision made by the City Council after all internal appeals being timely filed and determined, applicants may seek timely appeals of actions in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
K.  A change of use shall require appropriate reviews and permitting if the proposed new use increases the density or intensity of the development on real property. A change of use occurs when an existing use or occupancy of land, or a building, is replaced by another use or occupancy. 
    2.05.02.  Neighborhood meeting requirements. 
A.  Meetings required. Developers are required to hold a neighborhood meeting for the following application types: 
1.  Single-family and multifamily residential developments of 40 units or more, unless waived by the Land Use Administrator. 
2.  Development of regional impact. 
3.  Master planned development. 
4.  Zoning map amendments. 
5.  Other projects as deemed necessary by the Land Use Administrator on a case-by-case basis based upon potential impacts to the City or abutting or proximate property owners. 
The meeting shall be held prior to an application being heard in the first step of the review/approval process. The Land Use Administrator may waive the requirement for a neighborhood meeting if the project is part of a multiphase project for which meetings have been held previously. 
B.  Notification required. Neighborhood meetings shall be noticed to property owners owning property located within 300 feet of the boundary lines of the property proposed for development. The notice shall state the date, time, and location of the neighborhood meeting. A copy of the notice shall be provided to the City. 
C.  Meeting criteria. The neighborhood meeting shall be held in the evening or on a weekend in a location of close proximity to the subject property that is capable of accommodating such meeting. The applicant shall conduct the meeting and provide necessary information and materials to attendees that address the proposed development. The applicant shall provide a sign-in sheet and take notes of public comments. A copy of the sign-in sheet and comments shall be provided to the City prior to the next step in the approval process. 
D.  Post-meeting. The applicant shall provide the following materials with the submitted application: 
1.  A copy of the meeting notification. 
2.  A list of who was notified of the meeting. 
3.  A copy of all materials distributed at the meeting. 
4.  A list of names and addresses of attendees as provided on sign-up sheets from the meeting. 
5.  A summary of the issues raised by the attendees. 
6.  A description of how the proposal addresses the issues that were raised at the meeting. 
E.  Additional meetings. The Land Use Administrator may require that additional neighborhood meetings be held if the application is substantially modified from that which was presented at the previous neighborhood meeting. 
    2.05.03.  Public hearing notice requirements. 
A.  All notices for vacating plats, variances, special exceptions, appeals (as applicable), and amendments to the Official Zoning Map or LDC, shall be published as required by state law and, where applicable, City regulations. If there is ever a conflict between the provisions of this LDC and state law relative to notices, the provisions of state law shall prevail and apply. 
B.  Prior to the hearings provided for under this chapter, the applicant shall send notices, prepared by City staff, to all applicable property owners as outlined in Table 2-2. The names and addresses of the property owners shall be obtained by the applicant from the Flagler County Property Appraiser's Office. The notice shall be sent via certified mail and shall provide information as to the nature of the requested application and the date, time, and location of the public hearing. No other documents shall be provided within the envelope. The Land Use Administrator shall promulgate rules relating to whether the applicant or the City will be responsible for mailing the notices to the required property owners by certified mail and the costs relating thereto. 
C.  Abutting property means any property that is immediately contiguous to property that may be subject to a hearing or that is immediately across any road or public right-of-way from the property subject to such hearings. 
D.  Signs, as required, shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the subject property no later than the timeframe specified in Table 2-2. 
E.  At least ten calendar days prior to the required hearing, if applicable, the applicant shall submit an affidavit to the City stating that the notification requirements have been met in accordance with this section. 
Table 2-2: Notification Requirements for Public Hearings 
(State law prevails over any provision in this Table) 
Planning and Land Development 
Regulation Board (PLDRB) City Council 
Ordinance 1 st 
reading City Council 
Ordinance 2 nd reading Judicial or DCA Appeal 
Administrative 
Decision N/A N/A N/A N/A Appeal PLDRB Decision N/A Applicant mails letters, if deemed applicable by the Land Use Administrator, at least 14 calendar days prior to hearing. N/A N/A Vacating Plat N/A In accordance with Florida Statutes N/A N/A Variance Applicant mails certified letters to abutting property owners at least 14 calendar days prior to hearing. N/A N/A N/A Special 
Exception Applicant mails certified letters to abutting property owners at least 14 calendar days prior to hearing. N/A N/A N/A LDC Amendment Display ad published at least 7 calendar days prior to hearing. Display ad published at least 5 calendar days prior to hearing/adoption N/A Zoning Map 
Amendment 
(owner initiated) Applicant posts signs at least 14 calendar days prior to hearing. Applicant posts signs at least 14 calendar days prior to hearing. Display ad published at least 10 calendar days prior to hearing/adoption. Petition shall be presented to the Circuit Court within 30 days of final action by City Council. Zoning Map 
Amendment (City initiated, less than 10 acres) Signs posted at least 14 calendar days prior to hearing. Signs posted at least 30 calendar days prior to hearing. N/A Petition shall be presented to the Circuit Court within 30 days of final action by City Council. Notification letters mailed at least 30 calendar days prior to hearing to each real property owner of parcels to be rezoned. Zoning Map 
Amendment (City initiated, 10 or more contiguous acres) Signs posted at least 14 calendar days prior to hearing. Signs posted at least 7 calendar days prior to hearing. Display ad published at least 5 calendar days prior to hearing/adoption. Petition shall be presented to the Circuit Court within 30 days of final action by City Council. Display ad published at least 7 calendar days prior to hearing. Development 
Agreement and 
Amendments 1 N/A In accordance with Florida Statutes In accordance with Florida Statutes In accordance with Florida Statutes Comprehensive Plan Amendments In accordance with Florida Statutes In accordance with Florida Statutes In accordance with Florida Statutes In accordance with Florida Statutes DRI In accordance with Florida Statutes In accordance with Florida Statutes In accordance with Florida Statutes In accordance with Florida Statutes  
       1 This is not applicable to development agreements related to the zoning of property. 
    2.05.04.  Review procedures. This section establishes the review process for development orders. More specific requirements for certain development orders are included in those particular sections within this Part. 
A.  Owner; owner representative. If an application relates to a specific real property, it shall be heard only if it is presented by the person(s) owning 51 percent or more of that land, or an authorized representative of the owner(s), or upon an administrative application by the City Council. 
B.  Right of entry for survey, examination, and inspection. An application submittal shall grant any person acting under the direction of the Land Use Administrator in the performance of functions and duties pursuant to this LDC to enter upon such land and make inspections, examinations, and surveys as necessary in its administration and enforcement. 
C.  Preapplication meeting. Prior to filing an application for development, an applicant desiring to develop or plat property within the City may schedule a preapplication meeting with the Land Use Administrator. The applicant shall submit a preapplication package that meets City requirements. Following the preapplication meeting, the applicant shall hold neighborhood meetings as required in this chapter prior to submitting an application for the next step in the approval process. 
D.  Completeness review. An application shall be submitted in accordance with City requirements. Compliance review will not commence until such time that the application is deemed complete by the Land Use Administrator. 
1.  The Land Use Administrator will make a determination of completeness within ten business days from receipt of the application. If the application is deemed incomplete, it shall be returned to the applicant and the same process followed until it is determined to be complete. 
2.  When the Land Use Administrator has determined that an application is complete, correspondence will be sent to the applicant and the date of that correspondence will serve as the first day of the compliance review period. 
E.  Revisions to development order applications. If an application is modified after submittal, the following requirements shall apply: 
1.  Major modification. A major modification of plans initiated by the applicant during the compliance review process that is not in response to City comments may be determined to constitute a new application submittal by the Land Use Administrator. 
2.  Application/document changes. Ownership and/or mortgage holder changes shall require a new signed application cover sheet with updated signatures and a new title opinion as well as additional information that may be required. Changes to the application may require additional review by the Land Use Administrator. 
F.  Applications withdrawn, abated, and abandoned. 
1.  Withdraw. Any application may be withdrawn, prior to any action required, at the discretion of the applicant upon written notice to the City. The withdrawal of an application shall not result in a refund of the application fee. 
2.  Abated applications. An application shall be abated when no activity occurs for six consecutive months. The Land Use Administrator shall issue a notice of abated application to the applicant. Any submittal after the issuance of a notice of abated application shall require the payment of an abated application fee and must comply with any amendments to this LDC or other applicable state regulations after the last review of the application. 
3.  Abandoned applications. An application shall be abandoned when no activity occurs for 12 consecutive months. The Land Use Administrator shall issue a notice of abandoned application to the applicant. Any submittal after the issuance of a notice of abandoned application shall constitute a new application. 
G.  Applications for minor development-Land use administrator approval. 
1.  Following a completeness determination for a minor development, the Land Use Administrator shall review the application in order to determine compliance with City requirements and, if applicable, state requirements. 
2.  If the application is not in compliance, a letter shall be sent to the applicant outlining all items that need to be addressed in order for the development to achieve compliance with this LDC. 
3.  Upon verification of compliance with all applicable requirements, the Land Use Administrator shall issue a development order approving or denying the application. 
H.  Application for moderate and major development-Planning and land development regulation board or city council approval. The review process for a moderate or major development shall include: 
1.  Following a completeness determination for a moderate or major development, the Land Use Administrator shall review the submittal in order to determine compliance with City requirements and, if applicable, state requirements. Copies of the application shall be forwarded to all applicable City staff for review and comment. At the discretion of the Land Use Administrator, or at the request of the applicant, a meeting may be scheduled with City staff to discuss issues that may be substantive in nature. If City staff finds that additional information is needed for the proper review of the application, the Land Use Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing, specifying the information needed. 
2.  If the application is not in compliance, a letter shall be sent to the applicant outlining all items that need to be addressed in order for the development to achieve compliance with this LDC. 
3.  After verification that the application for a moderate or major development has complied with all applicable requirements of this LDC, the application shall be placed upon the next practicable agenda of the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board in accordance with published schedules and deadlines. After 60 days of application submittal the applicant may request the application be on the next appropriate agenda. 
4.  The Land Use Administrator shall forward the application, along with its recommendations, to the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board for consideration. Based on the application, the requirements of this chapter, and the recommendations of City staff, the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a development order, or prepare recommendations for the consideration of the City Council if it involves a major development, as defined in Table 2-1. 
5.  If applicable, following review by the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board, the application shall be placed upon the next practicable agenda of the City Council. Based on the application, the requirements of this chapter and the recommendations of the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board, the City Council shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. 
I.  Conditions and safeguards. In granting any development order, the approving authority may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this LDC. The approving authority shall render a decision to either: 
1.  Approve the request as submitted; or 
2.  Approve the request with conditions; or 
3.  Deny the request. 
Violation of conditions and safeguards made a part of the approval shall be a violation of this LDC. 
J.  Development order denial. In the event an application for a development order is denied, the City shall issue a denial development order citing the applicable portions of an ordinance, rule, statute, or other legal authority for the denial of the request for a development order or permit. The Land Use Administrator may provide comments and recommendations relating to applications prior to taking action to deny a development order. 
K.  Due process. The timeframe for City review, process, and public hearings for all accepted application types shall be determined by the Land Use Administrator. The Land Use Administrator shall provide information depicting all application target timelines for City review and processing which demonstrates its adherence to these timeframes. Although these timeframes are targets and not requirements, all applications shall be duly processed. In no case shall the Land Use Administrator unduly or unreasonably deny comments, reports, decisions, or scheduling of public hearings for applications. After 60 days of application submittal the applicant may request the application to be on the next appropriate agenda, if applicable. 
L.  Independent review of applications. The City may engage necessary technical consultants for the review of an application or a specific technical aspect of an application. The costs of such review shall be paid by the applicant. 
    2.05.05.  Review findings. When reviewing a development order application, the approval authority shall determine whether sufficient factual data was presented in order to render a decision. The decision to issue a development order shall be based upon the following including, but not limited to: 
A.  The proposed development must not be in conflict with or contrary to the public interest; 
B.  The proposed development must be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and the provisions of this LDC; 
C.  The proposed development must not impose a significant financial liability or hardship for the City; 
D.  The proposed development must not create an unreasonable hazard, or nuisance, or constitute a threat to the general health, welfare, or safety of the City's inhabitants; and 
E.  The proposed development must comply with all other applicable local, state, and federal laws, statutes, ordinances, regulations, or codes. 
    2.05.06.  Effect of development orders. The issuance of a development order does not authorize the disturbance of any part of the subject property involved. A development order only authorizes the filing of an application for another development order or a building permit. 
A.  Other permits required. In addition to obtaining a development order from the City, the developer must also obtain all other applicable permits or exemptions, as may be required by law. In the event approval from the City is prerequisite to obtaining other required permits, the City shall issue a letter of intent which states that the proposed development is in compliance with this LDC, and that such approval is conditioned upon the developer obtaining all other required permits. The developer must provide proof to the City that all permits or exemptions have been granted prior to receiving a site development permit and, if applicable, a final plat. 
B.  Valid period. Development orders shall remain valid for a period of 12 months from the date of issuance. In the event the applicant provides documentation that federal and/or state permits are in the process of being obtained, the expiration date of the development order may be extended in accordance with Subsection 2.05.06.E. However, a final plat development order shall remain valid until the subdivision or any part thereof is abandoned in accordance with City and state law. 
C.  Commencement of construction pursuant to a valid building permit. If construction on a site has commenced during the valid period of a final site plan development order and pursuant to a valid building permit, construction may continue after the development order expires as long as the building permit remains valid. 
D.  Commencement of construction during valid period of a preliminary plat. If construction of the required improvements in a subdivision has commenced during the valid period of a preliminary plat development order, the improvements may be completed in accordance with the approved development order beyond its valid period provided the final plat development order has been issued and the subdivision has a valid certificate of concurrency. Construction of the required improvements in a subdivision shall be completed or shall be guaranteed for completion pursuant to City requirements. 
E.  Extension of a development order. Within three months before the expiration of any development order, the developer may request an extension not to exceed 12 months. All requests shall be submitted to the Land Use Administrator in writing and shall state the reason(s) for the extension. A maximum of three extensions may be granted provided the development has a valid certificate of concurrency. 
F.  Recording. All development orders, except denial development orders, and any extension, or minor modification thereto, shall be filed with the City Clerk and recorded at the expense of the applicant. 
    2.05.07.  Modifications to an approved development order. 
A.  The Land Use Administrator may approve minor technical modifications to an approved development order. In determining whether a proposed modification is minor, all of the following shall apply: 
1.  The proposed modification shall not increase the floor area ratio or impervious surface ratio by more than 15 percent, provided it meets the requirements of this LDC. 
2.  The proposed modification shall not adversely affect traffic circulation on or off-site. 
3.  The proposed modification shall not increase the density, intensity, or height of the approved development. 
4.  The proposed modification shall comply with all codes, rules, and regulations of the City and any other federal or state agency, and shall not require a variance. 
B.  Requests for modifications that do not meet the requirements in this subsection shall be reviewed by the applicable approval authority. 
Sec. 2.06. - Official Zoning Map Amendments. 
    2.06.01.  Purpose. This section is established to provide for zoning map amendments, as may be necessary or desirable from time-to-time, through a review by the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board and the City Council. 
    2.06.02.  Applicability. An application to amend the Official Zoning Map (rezoning) may be filed by the Land Use Administrator, the City Council, the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board, the property owner(s), or agent of the property owner(s) representing 51 percent or more of the property involved. 
    2.06.03.  Review findings. The Planning and Land Development Regulation Board and City Council shall consider the following criteria, in addition to the findings listed in Subsection 2.05.05, when reviewing a rezoning application: 
A.  Whether it is consistent with all adopted elements of the Comprehensive Plan and whether it furthers the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan. 
B.  Its impact upon the environment or natural resources. 
C.  Its impact on the economy of any affected area. 
D.  Its impact upon necessary governmental services such as schools, sewage disposal, potable water, drainage, fire and police protection, solid waste, or transportation systems. 
E.  Any changes in circumstances or conditions affecting the area. 
F.  Compatibility with proximate uses and development patterns, including impacts to the health, safety, and welfare of surrounding residents. 
G.  Whether it accomplishes a legitimate public purpose. 
    2.06.04.  Frequency of application. A property owner shall not initiate action for the same rezoning affecting the same parcel of land more often than once every 12 months following denial or approval. 
    2.06.05.  Recording amendments to the official zoning map. The Land Use Administrator shall update the Official Zoning Map as soon as possible after amendments are adopted. Amendments to the Official Zoning Map shall identify the official action by which such amendment was made, the date of such action, and the area involved. 
Sec. 2.07. - Special Exception. 
    2.07.01.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish procedures for the review of uses that would not normally be appropriate within a zoning district, but if subject to appropriate limitations, conditions, and safeguards, would promote the public health, safety, welfare, convenience, and comfort. 
    2.07.02.  Applicability. The special exception process can only be applied to those uses noted as special exception uses in Chapter 3 and in Chapter 4. 
    2.07.03.  Review findings. No application for a special exception use shall be approved unless the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board finds that the request meets the findings listed in Subsection 2.05.05 and the following: 
A.  Is consistent with the specific requirements for that particular use as set forth in this LDC; 
B.  Meets the concurrency requirements of this LDC; and 
C.  Is compatible with the surrounding neighborhoods and promotes the value of surrounding land, structures, or buildings. Compatibility shall be reviewed in light of the following components: 
1.  Architectural design; 
2.  Fencing and screening, landscaping; 
3.  Noise reduction, sign, and light control; 
4.  Storm drainage, sanitation collection; 
5.  Police and fire protection; 
6.  On and off-site traffic control; 
7.  Off-street parking and loading; and 
8.  Other matters relevant to assuring that the proposed development site fosters desirable conditions and compatibility with the existing environment. 
    2.07.04.  Effect of a special exception. 
A.  Effective date. In accordance with Subsection 2.05.01.I, the rendering of a decision shall mean the filing of a written development order or a written denial of a development order in the office of the City Clerk. 
B.  Special exceptions run with the land. Special exceptions are not personal in nature and shall run with the land. However, a special exception shall be approved only on the basis of the development plan submitted with the application, and shall be valid only for the location and area shown on the approved development plan which shall include a floor plan, if applicable. 
C.  Activating a special exception. Approval of the special exception shall give the applicant authority to submit an application for development permits and/or other appropriate approval. Where the special exception approval does not require development permits, the applicant shall provide written evidence to the City that the activity granted has been initiated within the time prescribed by the City, or that right or privilege shall expire. 
D.  Expiration or Abandonment of Special Exception Uses. If a special exception does not begin to serve the purpose for which it was granted within 12 months from the date of rendition it shall expire. Provided, however, that the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board may establish a shorter or longer period of time for a special exception to commence. In addition, the Land Use Administrator may extend the special exception for up to an additional 12-month period of time if the applicant can demonstrate good faith reliance. Good faith reliance may include, but is not limited to, the securing of any required permits from other governmental agencies/jurisdictions or the expenditure of substantial funds in reliance on the approved special exception. 
E.  Amendments. Minor amendments not altering the intent and purpose of the approved special exception may be approved by the Land Use Administrator after such departmental comment as he or she deems appropriate. Amendments to an approved special exception, which the director deems to be major, shall require the submittal of an application and compliance with the review procedures as set forth in this section and as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
Sec. 2.08. - Subdivision of Land. 
    2.08.01.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to determine when platting is required and to establish a review process consistent with F.S. ch. 177. It is not the intent of this LDC to prohibit the metes and bounds conveyance of real property, but it is the intent of this LDC to ensure compliance with the provisions of State Statutes. 
    2.08.02.  Applicability. 
A.  Platting required. It shall be a violation of this LDC for anyone who is the owner or agent of the owner of any land to transfer, sell, or offer to transfer or sell such land by reference to, exhibition of, or other use of a plat of a subdivision of such land without having a plat recorded in accordance with the requirements of this section and state requirements. Subdivisions are classified as: 
1.  Statutory. The division of a parcel of land, whether improved or unimproved, into three or more lots, parcels, tracts, tiers, blocks, sites, units, or any other division of land, and includes establishment of new streets and alleys, additions, and resubdivisions. 
2.  Nonstatutory. The following activities qualify as nonstatutory subdivisions: 
a.  The combination or reconfiguration of previously platted lots or portions of such lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots comply with City requirements. 
b.  The public acquisition by purchase, acceptance of deed of dedication, or exercise of the right of eminent domain of strips of land for the widening or opening of streets, or acquisition of property for public purposes or public utilities. 
c.  The division of land into no more than three lots, parcels, tracts, tiers, blocks, units, or any other division of land, said resulting lots to be 20 acres or more in size, provided that: 
(1)  Said division of land does not create a new street. 
(2)  Each resulting lot, tract, or parcel shall have access to a public street and no public improvement may be dedicated including, but not limited to, any dedication of rights-of-way, easement, or physical improvement of any kind intended for public use. 
(3)  Each lot, tract, or parcel shall meet or exceed the minimum requirements of the zoning district in which it is located adjacent to the public street. 
(4)  The owner of the subject property shall not be allowed to further subdivide under this section. 
d.  The division of a platted lot, parcel, or tract in single ownership into not more than two lots, where no street right-of-way dedication is involved and where the lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the LDC. 
e.  The original parcel to be considered must have been lawfully created. 
B.  Single sites not requiring platting. No platting shall be required for development within an individual lot, parcel, or tract, provided that such lot, parcel, or tract meets all of the following requirements: 
1.  Has a property identification number(s); 
2.  Was lawfully established by the governing authority at the time it was created; and 
3.  Complies with the minimum lot area requirements of this LDC, or is a legally existing nonconforming lot. 
    2.08.03.  Nonstatutory land subdivision review procedures. The application shall be processed administratively in accordance with review procedures and requirements for development orders established in Section 2.05. 
    2.08.04.  Statutory land subdivision review procedures. The subdivision of land that does not qualify as nonstatutory subdivision shall meet the requirements of this section after a Subdivision Master Plan approval has been granted as outlined in Section 2.10. 
A.  Preliminary plat. 
1.  Review procedures. 
a.  An application for preliminary plat approval may be submitted in conjunction with an application for a subdivision master plan development order. 
b.  The application shall be processed in accordance with Section 2.05. Once the application is deemed compliant, a development order shall be issued by the approving authority. 
B.  Final plat. 
1.  Review procedures. 
a.  Following the issuance of a preliminary plat development order, the applicant may submit a complete application for a final plat approval on a form provided by the City. 
b.  The application shall undergo a completeness and compliance review as outlined in Section 2.05 and F.S. ch. 177. 
    2.08.05.  Effect of plat approval. 
A.  Effect of preliminary plat approval. Upon issuance of the preliminary plat development order, the developer may elect to commence construction of the subdivision and apply for a final plat development order. If the developer elects to commence construction prior to or concurrently with final plat review, the developer shall attend a preconstruction meeting as outlined in Chapter 9, Part I, and provide the following documentation and materials: 
1.  All required permits from federal, state, county, and regional agencies. 
2.  Commitment letters from the providers for essential services (i.e. electric, telephone, cable, etc.) that adequate service will be available at the time of impact. 
3.  Performance guarantee (in the amount established by the City) for the installation of public improvements that have not been constructed. Such estimate shall include, but not be limited to, landfill costs. An itemization shall be provided showing improvements that have been installed and all outstanding required improvements. 
4.  A statement within the preliminary plat development order noting the developer's intent or a letter authorizing the commencement of construction pursuant to the approved construction plans. 
B.  Effect of final plat approval. 
1.  The execution of the plat by the Mayor shall be deemed to be the execution of a development order. 
2.  All recording fees, documents, and Mylar (original plat) shall be submitted to the Land Use Administrator. The Land Use Administrator shall then transmit the required fees and documents to the Clerk of the Circuit Court for recordation in accordance with F.S. ch. 177. Executed plats must also be filed with the City Clerk. 
    2.08.06.  Vacating plats. The owners of any land subdivided into lots may petition the City Council under the provisions of F.S. ch. 177.101, to remove (vacate and abandon) the existing plat, or portion of a plat, from the official records of the City of Palm Coast. The application shall undergo a completeness and compliance review as outlined in this chapter. Once the application is deemed compliant as determined by the Land Use Administrator, it shall be scheduled before the City Council for consideration. The execution of a resolution by the Mayor shall be deemed to be the execution of a development order. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, §§ 2, 3, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2.09. - Master Planned Developments. 
    2.09.01.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish review requirements for approval of master planned developments, which typically include both a zoning map amendment and a development agreement. This section also addresses the procedures for approving major amendments to approved master planned developments. 
    2.09.02.  Applicability. The requirements of this section apply to any proposed rezoning to the Master Planned Development District. Rezoning to the Master Planned Development District shall be a voluntary procedure to be pursued at the option of the applicant, pursuant to Section 2.10. The City may, at the request of the applicant, initiate such rezoning on privately owned property. The approval of the master planned development rezoning rests with the City Council pursuant to the requirements of Section 2.10. 
    2.09.03.  Review procedures. 
A.  Unified control. No application for a master planned development shall be considered until the applicant furnishes all necessary documents and information, as may be required, to provide the City with sufficient evidence that the applicant is in complete, unified, and otherwise unencumbered control of the entire area of the proposed master planned development, whether the applicant be an individual, partnership, corporation, other entity, group, or agency. The applicant shall provide to the City all necessary documents and information that may be required to assure the City that the development project may be lawfully completed according to the plans sought to be approved. 
B.  Master planned development site plan. Review and approval of a master planned development site plan shall be the same as for a moderate or major development site plan, whichever is applicable, pursuant to Section 2.05. 
C.  Master planned development agreement. Review and approval of the Master Planned Development Agreement shall be the same as for a Development Agreement pursuant to Section 2.14. 
D.  Bonds. The City Council may include in the Master Planned Development Agreement requirements for bonds (or appropriate alternatives) for improvements conditioned upon the satisfactory and timely completion of facilities in the development plan, for the benefit of purchasers from the applicant, when the development time limits and phasing schedule do not preclude the sale of individual units prior to the completion of such facilities. 
    2.09.04.  Review findings. The Planning and Land Development Regulation Board and City Council shall consider the following criteria, in addition to the findings listed in Subsection 2.05.05, when reviewing a master planned development application: 
A.  Consistency with all adopted elements of the Comprehensive Plan and whether it furthers the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan. 
B.  Consistency with the general intent of the LDC. 
C.  Degree of departure of the proposed development from surrounding areas in terms of character and density/intensity. 
D.  Compatibility within the development and relationship with surrounding neighborhoods. 
E.  Adequate provision for future public education and recreation facilities, transportation, water supply, sewage disposal, surface drainage, flood control, and soil conservation as shown in the development plan. 
F.  The feasibility and compatibility of development phases to stand as independent developments. 
G.  The availability and adequacy of primary streets and thoroughfares to support traffic to be generated within the proposed development. 
H.  The benefits within the proposed development and to the general public to justify the requested departure from standard development requirements inherent in a Master Planned Development District classification. 
I.  The conformity and compatibility of the development with any adopted development plan of the City of Palm Coast. 
J.  Impact upon the environment or natural resources. 
K.  Impact on the economy of any affected area. 
    2.09.05.  Effect of master planned development approval. Approval of a Master Planned Development Plan and Master Plan Development Agreement gives the applicant the authority to proceed with a site development plan and plat applications for review. 
A.  Duration and extension of development agreement. For the duration and extension requirements of a development agreement, refer to Section 2.14. 
B.  Amendment to a master planned development agreement. 
1.  A request for an amendment to an approved master planned development master plan and/or agreement shall be supported by a written statement demonstrating the reasons the revisions are necessary or desirable. The Land Use Administrator may require additional documentation as part of the amendment application. 
2.  Amendments to the an approved Master Planned Development site plan or agreement for the developed portions of the property may only be initiated by: 
a.  The property owner, for an amendment to the master planned development applicable to only a single lot or building site; or 
b.  Petition by the owners of more than 50 percent of the property in the Master Planned Development District for an amendment to a master planned development that involves multiple owners; or 
c.  City Council, where necessary to preserve the health, safety, and welfare of the property owners in the master planned development. 
3.  Minor (de minimis) changes, no more than five percent increase in density or intensity, which do not affect the intent or character of the development, may be approved by the Land Use Administrator. 
    2.09.06.  Variances in master planned development districts. Because the specific development standards of the Master Planned Development District are contained in the approved Master Planned Development Agreement for each planned development, and because the development plan normally takes into account those matters which might otherwise be the subject of variance review, modifications to approved development plans by variance shall be prohibited unless otherwise specifically provided for in the Master Planned Development Agreement. 
    2.09.07.  Status of previously approved PUD, PRD, VGC-1, VGC-2 and GCC plans. 
A.  Any active or completed Planned Unit Development (PUD), Planned Rural Development (PRD), Village Center (VGC-1, VGC-2), or Golf Course Community (GCC) project approved prior to the adoption of this Code shall continue to be governed by the approved development plan and any development agreements, terms and conditions to which the approval may be subject, as long as the project continues to be actively under development. Any time limitations to which the approved PUD, PRD, VGC-1, VGC-2, or GCC plan may be subject shall also continue to apply. Minor (de minimis) changes of no more than five percent increase in density or intensity, which do not affect the intent or character of the development, may be approved by the Land Use Administrator. 
B.  Whenever any application is made to substantially modify an approved PUD, PRD, VGC-1, VGC-2, or GCC plan, as determined by the Land Use Administrator, or to undertake a new development on part or all of the property, the application shall be made under the terms and procedures of the Master Planned Development zoning district and shall comply with the provisions of this section. Substantial modifications to an approved development plan or agreement include, but are not limited to change that affects the intent and character of the development, intensity, density, land use pattern, the location, or dimensions of major streets, or similar substantial changes. 
Sec. 2.10. - Master Plans. 
    2.10.01.  Purpose. The master plan review process is intended to provide a review of the basic development concepts without significant engineering design, prior to proceeding with final plat and technical site plan approval. 
    2.10.02.  Applicability. 
A.  Master site plan. A master site plan review is optional for all moderate and major site plans that include residential, nonresidential, and mixed use development occurring on various contiguous sites or outparcels to ensure that development takes place in a coordinated and efficient manner. 
B.  Subdivision master plan. A subdivision master plan is required prior to a preliminary plat application, unless waived by the Land Use Administrator. 
C.  Nonresidential controlling master site plan. A nonresidential controlling master site plan is optional for all site plans meeting the criteria set forth in Section 4.15. 
    2.10.03.  Review procedures. A master plan review shall be processed in accordance with Section 2.05 and Table 2-1. 
    2.10.04.  Review criteria. Master site plans shall be reviewed to ensure conformance with this Code. However, the following criteria shall be considered when reviewing master plans: 
A.  Logic of design. 
B.  Internal consistency. 
C.  Impact on neighboring sites. 
D.  Internal vehicular and pedestrian connectivity. 
E.  Consolidation of utilities and facilities, including stormwater, parking, signage, etc. 
F.  Public benefit derived from the project. 
    2.10.05.  Effect of master plan approval. 
A.  Approval of a master plan development order authorizes an applicant to continue with the preliminary plat or technical site plan review process. 
B.  The approved Nonresidential Controlling Master Site Plan Development Order shall act as the controlling document for the development specifying, but not limited to, location of primary buildings and outparcels, landscape buffers, master stormwater, drainage, access drives, parking, and pedestrian facilities. However, site plans and preliminary plats can allow up to a 25 percent accumulative design change from the master plan. No deviation from LDC requirements may be approved during the City staff review process. 
Sec. 2.11. - Technical Site Plan. 
    2.11.01.  Purpose. The site plan review process set forth in this section is intended to ensure that site development, including mixed use development on a single site, takes place in an orderly and efficient manner through a process that provides adequate review based on the size and complexity of the proposed development. 
    2.11.02.  Applicability. The purpose of final site plan review is to ensure compliance with all development regulations. Therefore, the level of detail shall be that of construction plans and technical specifications. The review is based not only on conformance to Code, but also conformance with an approved master plan, if applicable. 
    2.11.03.  Review procedures. Site plan review shall be processed in accordance with Section 2.05. 
    2.11.04.  Effect of site plan approval. Approval of the construction plans and technical specifications represents the final development order. Therefore, approval of a Site Plan Development Order authorizes an applicant to apply for a building permit. 
Sec. 2.12. - Variance. 
    2.12.01.  Purpose. This section is established to provide standards and procedures for the granting of variances from the provisions of this LDC through review by the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board when it finds that there are conditions peculiar to the property that creates undue construction or development hardships in complying with this LDC. 
    2.12.02.  Applicability. 
A.  Authorized variances. The variance procedures contained in this section shall apply to the development standards set forth in the following portions of this Code: 
1.  Chapter 1, Section 1.10-Nonconformities. 
2.  Chapter 3-Zoning, Uses, and Dimensional Standards. 
3.  Chapter 4-Conditions for Limited Specific Uses and Activities. 
4.  Chapter 5-Transportation, Connectivity, Access, and Parking. 
5.  Chapter 10-Environmental and Cultural Resource Protection. 
6.  Chapter 11-Tree Protection, Landscaping, Buffers, and Irrigation. 
7.  Chapter 12-Signs and Advertising. 
8.  Chapter 13-Architectural Design Regulations. 
B.  Prohibited variances. A variance shall not be granted under any of the following circumstances: 
1.  A variance that would permit an inconsistency with the Comprehensive Plan. 
2.  A variance to permit a use, expressly or by implication, prohibited in the zoning district. 
3.  A variance to permit a development density or intensity not generally allowable in the zoning district. 
4.  A variance in connection with any use or activity that has been approved as a special exception, if within the area covered by the special exception approval. 
5.  A variance based on the permitted or nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings. 
6.  A variance that would violate requirements or regulations of other departments or agencies. 
7.  A variance that would violate specific prohibitions (for example, hours of operation), or procedural requirements. 
8.  A variance based on purely economic considerations. 
    2.12.03.  Review findings. In addition to the findings listed in Subsection 2.05.05 for all development orders, variance applications shall be reviewed based on the following: 
A.  All variances. No application for a variance shall be approved unless the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board finds that the following standards are met, recognizing that the applicant bears the burden of proof. 
1.  Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, use, or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, uses, or buildings in the same zoning district; and 
2.  The special conditions and circumstances are not self-imposed and do not result from the actions of the applicant; and 
3.  Literal interpretation of the provision of this LDC would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same zoning district under the terms of this LDC and would work unnecessary and undue hardship on the applicant; and 
4.  The variance is the minimum relief necessary that will make possible the reasonable use of the land or building; and 
5.  The granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this LDC and that such variance will not be injurious to the area involved or otherwise detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare or injurious to other property in the area. 
B.  Alternative criteria for specific variances. There are alternative variance criteria for specific uses within this LDC that shall be adhered to. Such uses are as follows: 
1.  Marinas-Refer to Chapter 4. 
2.  Flood Damage Protection-Refer to Chapter 10. 
3.  Wellhead Protection-Refer to Chapter 10. 
    2.12.04.  Effect of variance approval. 
A.  Approval of a variance application shall give the applicant authority to submit an application for development plan review and/or other appropriate approval. The Planning and Land Development Regulation Board may, within the action for which the variance is required, prescribe a reasonable time limit for which the approved request shall begin, be completed, or both. Unless prescribed as a condition of approval, there is no time limit for a variance. 
B.  A variance shall be approved only on the basis of the development plan submitted with the application and shall be valid only for the area of variance shown on the approved development plan. No approved variance shall be construed to be a general modification of the requirements of this LDC in any area outside the area of variance shown on the approved development plan. 
Sec. 2.13. - Administrative Deviation of Development Standards. 
    2.13.01  Purpose. This section is established to provide a process for granting administrative deviation with the application of certain standards of this LDC. The process is specifically intended to promote high standards of site design, and to provide flexibility in the administration of standards in recognition of site specific conditions, and to establish conditions to ensure compatibility where standards are modified. 
    2.13.02.  Applicability. 
A.  The Land Use Administrator may approve an administrative deviation of standards to grant relief from any of the following requirements of this Code, up to a maximum reduction of five percent of the standard: 
1.  Distance between structures. 
2.  Parcel dimensions (not area). 
3.  Setbacks. 
B.  The Land Use Administrator may grant a deviation in order to protect a specimen or historic tree, in which case one parking space or two percent of the total parking requirements, whichever is greater, may be eliminated. 
C.  The Land Use Administrator may also grant an administrative deviation of standards to the site planning or development standards of this LDC in compliance with this section, based on the finding that the waiver is necessary to accomplish a reasonable accommodation of the needs of a disabled person, in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
    2.13.03.  Review procedures. Administrative deviations of development standards are classified as minor development orders and shall be reviewed as specified in Section 2.05. However, the Land Use Administrator may choose to refer the application to the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board for hearing and decision in the same manner as provided for Variances in Section 2.12. 
    2.13.04.  Review findings. The Land Use Administrator may approve an administrative deviation of standards only after first making all of the following findings, in addition to those listed in Subsection 2.05.05: 
A.  There are special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, so that the strict application of this Code deprives the property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and within the same zoning district; 
B.  The approval of the administrative deviation of standards includes conditions of approval as necessary to ensure that the adjustment granted does not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and within the same zoning district; and 
C.  The administrative deviation is consistent with any applicable specific plans in place for the subject property. 
Sec. 2.14. - Development Agreements. 
    2.14.01.  Purpose. This section is established to outline provisions relating to development agreements, which require approval by the City Council. 
A.  A development agreement may be entered into by an applicant and the City Council to provide for matters that relate to the unique conditions of the real property to be developed, the relationship between the public and private aspects of the development, or other terms and conditions that are not typical of a routine development order. Development authorized by a development agreement may be phased. The development agreement may provide that the entire development or any phase thereof shall be commenced or completed within a specific period of time. 
B.  Statutory development agreements may be entered into under the authority of the Development Agreement Act as codified in F.S. ch. 163 and processed in accordance with the requirements of state law. 
C.  Nonstatutory development agreements may be entered into under the authority of the home rule powers of the City of Palm Coast under Article VIII, Section 2 of the Constitution of the State of Florida and F.S. ch. 166. 
D.  A development agreement shall be required for the development of property designated a Master Planned Development District on the Official Zoning Map, but the agreements shall not be statutory. 
E.  A development agreement is transferable if the land and structure(s) continues to be used for the purposes for which it was issued. No person (including successors and assigns of the person who obtained the development agreement) may make use of the land except in accordance with the conditions and requirements of the development agreement. The provisions of the development agreement run with and burden the real property to which it relates until released or amended in accordance with formal action of the City of Palm Coast. All development agreements shall require mortgagees to subordinate any mortgages on the property. 
F.  Duration and extension. The negotiated Master Plan Development Agreement which results from a master planned development application process shall have a maximum duration of five years or be phased to ensure that development under a Master Plan Development Agreement proceeds in good faith and the development of the master planned development is not abandoned and is not suspended in a manner which is adverse to the public interest. Upon the five-year term being completed or a phase of the master planned development not being developed in accordance with the phasing schedule set forth in the Master Plan Development Agreement, the City Council may, after obtaining a recommendation from the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board, extend the term of the Master Plan Development Agreement or the master planned development phase. In the interim, no development may be continued or permitted relative to the master planned development and absent an extension approval by means of a development order within three months of the date of expiration, the property shall revert to the zoning district which was assigned to the master planned development property prior to the Master Planned Development District rezoning. A property owner may initiate a request for an extension prior to expiration. 
Sec. 2.15. - Vested Rights Determination. 
    2.15.01.  Purpose. This section is established to provide standards and procedures for the issuance of vested rights determinations by the City Council. No applicant claiming that the LDC as applied to a particular property constitutes or would constitute a permanent taking of private property or an abrogation of vested rights, may pursue such claim in court or before a quasi-judicial body unless the applicant has first exhausted the administrative remedies herein. The application shall set forth the facts upon which the claim is based and shall be accompanied by all contracts, letters, appraisals, reports, or other documents upon which the applicant's claim is based. 
    2.15.02.  Applicability. The owner, or owners of real property, may request a determination of vested rights by filing a complete application with the Land Use Administrator on a form provided by the City. 
A.  The application shall provide a sworn statement to be executed by all owners of the real property or an authorized agent that all information set forth on the application is true and correct. 
B.  The Land Use Administrator shall screen each application for a vested rights determination to determine whether the application is technically complete. If not technically complete, the application shall be promptly returned to the applicant. A technically incomplete application shall be returned to the applicant with written notification of the deficient items. If a response is not submitted to the City within a time specified by the City, the application shall be deemed abandoned. 
    2.15.03.  Review procedures. Vested rights determinations are classified as major development orders and shall be reviewed as specified in Section 2.05. In addition, the following procedural requirements apply. 
A.  The City Council shall hold a public hearing and determine whether or not it has been clearly and convincingly demonstrated that the real property subject to the application has vested status. The City Council may refer the matter to the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board for an advisory opinion and review, or to a special master or hearing officer for findings of fact relative to the matter, or may make both such referrals. 
B.  At the hearing or hearings to which the matter has been referred, the applicant shall present all of the evidence in support of the application. The technical rules of evidence in judicial proceedings shall not be applicable, but all testimony given shall be under oath. The applicant shall have the burden of proof. 
C.  After making a final determination of vested rights status, the City Council shall provide the applicant with a written order setting forth the determination of vested rights status. If the City Council determines that vested rights exist and that development may proceed, the applicant shall have the right to rely upon such written notification that the real property is vested, and the determination that the real property is vested shall be final and not subject to appeal, revocation, or modification. Thereupon, permits may be granted consistent with that decision. 
D.  The City Council's decision to deny vested rights status shall be final, subject to appeal in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, §§ 4, 5, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2.16. - Appeals. 
    2.16.01.  Appeal of administrative decision of the land use administrator. Any person aggrieved by an administrative decision rendered by the Land Use Administrator regarding the provisions of this LDC may appeal such decision to the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board. The appeal shall be initiated within 15 calendar days of the rendering of the administrative decision by filing an appeal with the Land Use Administrator. Failure to file an appeal within the timeframe specified and exhaust all administrative remedies provided for in this LDC shall constitute a waiver of all rights to appeal the determination by the Land Use Administrator. 
A.  Submittal. A request for a hearing before the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board for an appeal of any determination made by the Land Use Administrator with regard to the administration of the uses and development regulations of this LDC shall be made as follows: 
1.  A completed appeal form and related fee shall be filed with the Land Use Administrator. Such application shall state the grounds for review of the decision. Any additional grounds may not be stated at the appeal hearing. 
2.  The appeal form shall be accompanied by such other materials and drawings as needed by the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board to clearly understand the substance of the appeal. 
B.  Review procedures. The application shall be submitted to the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board, which shall review the application and either grant or deny the request in accordance with the following: 
1.  In exercising the powers granted, the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board may, in conformity with the provisions of this LDC, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirements, decision, or determinations of the Land Use Administrator. 
2.  Any petition for a hearing before the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board may be withdrawn prior to action thereon by the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board at the discretion of the applicant upon written notice to the City. The withdrawal of an application shall not result in a refund of the application fee. 
3.  When considering an appeal all of the following factors, at a minimum, shall be evaluated: 
a.  Whether the action requested in the appeal is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan; and 
b.  Whether the action requested in the appeal complies with all relevant and appropriate portions of this LDC; and 
c.  Whether there was an error of fact or law in the decision of the Land Use Administrator. 
4.  At the conclusion of the appeal hearing, the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board shall issue a final decision on the appeal. 
    2.16.02.  Appeal of planning and land development regulation board decision. 
A.  Public notice requirements. Notification shall be in accordance with Section 2.05, if applicable. 
B.  Submittal. Within 30 calendar days of the rendering of a decision by the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board, an appeal may be filed with the City Clerk by the owner, an abutting property owner, or the Land Use Administrator. An application together with a fee as established by resolution shall be required. 
C.  Review procedures. The application shall be forwarded to the City Council and, if applicable, after due public notice, for a public hearing to consider the application. The public hearing shall be a de novo hearing and shall be conducted in accordance with the following: 
1.  Hearing steps. 
a.  Preliminary matters. 
(1)  The Mayor shall read the case title. 
(2)  Disclosure by City Council members of ex parte communications, if any. 
(3)  Swearing in of appellant, City staff, and all witnesses collectively. The swearing in of witnesses may be left to the discretion of the Mayor with the concurrence of the appellant. 
b.  City staff's presentation. 
(1)  City staff's opening statement. 
(2)  Calling of witnesses and presentation of evidence by City staff. 
(3)  Cross-examination after each witness, if so elected. 
c.  Appellant's opening statement. 
(1)  Calling of witnesses and presentation of evidence by appellant. 
(2)  Cross-examination after each witness, if so elected. 
d.  Public input. Testimony and presentation of evidence by the public with alternating speakers in support of and in opposition to the appeal and cross-examination after each witness, if so elected. 
e.  Closing argument by appellant. 
f.  Closing argument by City staff. 
g.  Rebuttal argument by appellant, if so elected. 
h.  Discussion by City Council of the evidence presented as it applies to the requirements of the City of Palm Coast Code of Ordinances and applicable law. 
i.  After deliberation, a motion should be made which would presumably either: 
AFFIRM THE PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION BOARD'S ACTION: "I move that the City Council find that the following facts presented and reviewed here are competent substantial evidence to affirm the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board's action: (list factors)"; or 
REVERSE THE PLANNING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION BOARD'S ACTION: "I move that the City Council find that the following facts presented and reviewed here are competent substantial evidence to reverse the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board's action: (list factors)." 
2.  In the event the applicant is the appellant, the applicant, or City staff as determined by the Land Use Administrator, shall send a letter to the property owners abutting subject property advising them of the date and time of the meeting. 
3.  In the event that an abutting property owner is the appellant, this person will act as spokesperson or appoint a representative. In this case, a special letter will be sent to the applicant stating that an appeal has been filed and that they or their representative will be called upon to act as an opposition spokesperson. 
4.  In accordance with Subsection 2.05.01.I, the rendering of a decision shall mean the filing of a written development order or a written denial of a development order in the office of the City Clerk. 
5.  Unless the order specifically states it is an order without prejudice, it is rendered with prejudice. 
D.  Rehearing. 
1.  If it is alleged that the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board or City Council, as the case may be, has overlooked or misapprehended some facts or points of law, a rehearing of any decision of the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board or City Council may be granted by the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board or City Council either on the motion of any member voting on the prevailing side, or on the motion of any person aggrieved by its decision. That motion shall be in writing, shall be filed with the Land Use Administrator within ten working days after rendition of the decision, and shall state its grounds. 
2.  If the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board or City Council decide to grant a rehearing, the movant shall notify by certified mail or hand delivery upon the City Clerk and all abutting property owners previously notified of the hearing, together with a notice stating the date, time, and place it will be orally presented to the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board or City Council. 
3.  The Planning and Land Development Regulation Board or City Council shall not rehear applications based upon the same facts or issues, but rather on new evidence not heard before or new law. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, §§ 6-9, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 2.17. - Lot Binding, Unbinding, and Vacation of Easements. 
    2.17.01.  Short title/legislative findings and intent. This section shall be known and may be cited as the "Palm Coast Lot Binding and Unbinding and Vacation of Easements Ordinance." 
    2.17.02.  Binding of lots. A common owner of two or more adjoining subdivided lots or portions of subdivided lots may make application to the City for approval of the lots being bound for development purposes. No more than four lots may be bound together by the process set forth in this section. Lot binding, as set forth in this section, may be permitted solely be for purposes of compliance with the land development regulations of the City as set forth in the City's Land Development Code. 
    2.17.03.  Application process. 
A.  The owner of adjoining lots shall present a proposed lot binding agreement or an agreement that provides for the unbinding of lots which contains a full and complete legal description of all subdivision lots proposed to be bound together or unbound from one another to the City Manager or designee. 
B.  Each lot binding agreement shall provide, at a minimum, the following: 
1.  That the real property described shall be retained in and shall remain as a single, integral parcel, and shall not be sold or otherwise disposed of, or encumbered, in lesser constituent parcels. 
2.  That the agreement shall be binding upon all successors, heirs, executors, administrators or assigns of the owner and shall be a covenant running with the land. 
C.  Agreements unbinding lots shall be in a form approved by the City Manager after consultation with the City Attorney. 
    2.17.04.  Approval authority. The City Manager or designee, upon submittal of all appropriate information in accordance with the provisions of this section and upon making a finding that there are no easements that require vacation may approve the binding and unbinding of lots in accordance with this section; or if the City Manager or designee may determine that City easements required to be released, abandoned or vacated can be released abandoned or vacated in accordance with the provisions of Subsection 2.17.05. City Council shall approve the binding or unbinding of three or more lots. 
    2.17.05.  Effect of existence of easements. 
A.  If private or public easements require release, vacation or abandonment at the time that the proposed binding lot agreement is approved, the owner shall present all documents needed to accomplish the release, vacation and abandonment. Documentation that any private easements have been released or relocated shall be provided to the City Manager or designee. 
B.  The City Manager or designee is hereby delegated the authority to release, vacate and abandon any public easements along any common lot line if it is determined that the City no longer needs the public easement and that any then current users of the public easement have no objection to the action or if a conditional action can facilitate the use of any required public easement. Said public easements may only be released, in accordance with this section if it is found that the lot owner has made an application for a building permit to construct a structure upon the easement. 
C.  The City Manager or designee may require the granting of easements or the imposition of other conditions as may be necessary prior to the approval of the binding or unbinding of lots. 
    2.17.06.  Fees. The City Council may establish application fees from time-to-time relating to the provisions of this section by adoption of a resolution that may be part of a general City fee resolution relating to diverse actions and activities of the City. 
    2.17.07.  Recording of agreements. 
A.  Each approved lot binding or unbinding agreement together with the action releasing, vacating, abandoning, or granting any easement(s) shall be recorded in the Official Records of Flagler County (land records) at the expense of the owner. 
B.  After recordation, copies of the recorded lot binding or unbinding agreement and action relative to the easement(s) shall be provided by the owner to the City Manager or designee at the cost of the owner for recordation in the City's records. No such action shall take effect until recorded in the City's records. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, §§ 1-7, 5-4-04) 
Editor's note- Inasmuch as Ord. No. 2004-10 was inadvertently omitted during the original codification of the Land Development Code, and at the discretion of the editor, the provisions of said ordinance have been designated as Section 2.17. 
Chapter 3 - ZONING, USES, AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS 

Sec. 3.01. - In General. 
    3.01.01.  Establishment of zoning districts. The City of Palm Coast, Florida is hereby divided into the following zoning districts. Each zoning district allows a set of uses that are consistent with its purpose and also a set of land development regulations designed to achieve the purpose of the district. 
A.  AGR-Agriculture District 
B.  EST-1; EST-2-Rural and Suburban Estate Districts 
C.  SFR-1; SFR-2; SFR-3; SFR-4; SFR-5-Single-Family Residential Districts 
D.  DPX-Duplex Residential District 
E.  MFR-1; MFR-2-Multifamily Residential Districts 
F.  MHD-Mobile Home District 
G.  MPD-Master Planned Development District 
H.  COM-1; COM-2; COM-3-Commercial Districts 
I.  OFC-1; OFC-2-Office Districts 
J.  IND-1; IND-2-Industrial Districts 
K.  PSP-Public/Semipublic District 
L.  P&G-Parks and Greenways District 
M.  PRS-Preservation District 
    3.01.02.  Official zoning map. 
A.  Zoning district boundaries. The boundaries of the zoning districts are hereby established and shall be delineated on the Official Zoning Map for the City. The Map shall be kept on file in the offices of the City Clerk and shall be the official record of the zoning designation of properties within the City. 
B.  Establishment of the Master Planned Development (MPD) zoning district. This chapter establishes the Master Planned Development (MPD) zoning district to replace the following mixed use zoning districts: Village Center (VGC-1 and VGC-2), Golf Course Community (GCC), Planned Unit Development (PUD) and Planned Rural Development (PRD). These former mixed use zoning districts are now referenced in this Code as "former VGC-1," "former VGC-2," "former GCC," "former PUD," and "former PRD," and will remain on the Official Zoning Map; however, these districts are depicted by a hatch pattern that identifies them as "former" zoning districts. The map legend shall state that these hatched pattern zoning districts were designated prior to the adoption of the current Official Zoning Map, in effect as of November 16, 2008, and that after this date no parcels of land may be rezoned to any of the zoning districts designated as "former." 
    3.01.03.  Adoption, identification, and amendments. The following shall apply to adoption and amendments to the Official Zoning Map: 
A.  The City of Palm Coast Official Zoning Map shall be adopted by ordinance of the City Council after considering the recommendations of the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board. 
B.  If, in accordance with the provisions of this LDC and F.S. ch. 163, changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the City of Palm Coast Official Zoning Map, such changes shall be entered on the Official Zoning Map after enactment of the amending ordinance. 
C.  Change of any nature shall be made on the Official Zoning Map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with procedures set forth in this LDC or in F.S. ch. 163. Any unauthorized change shall be null and void and have no force or effect. 
D.  Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning Map that may from time-to-time be made or published, the Official Zoning Map shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings, and other structures in the City. 
E.  Unless a prior Official Zoning Map has been lost or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment, in the office of the City Clerk. 
    3.01.04.  Future land use map-Zoning district compatibility. All development in the City shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and the Future Land Use Map (FLUM). Each future land use category contains a set of zoning districts that may be permitted within its boundaries. No property shall be rezoned unless it is to a district that is compatible with the future land use designation of the site. The following table correlates individual zoning districts with the compatible future land use categories. 
Table 3-1: Future Land Use Map/Zoning District Compatibility 
FLUM Land 
Use Category Zoning Districts Permitted Residential SFR-1, SFR-2, SFR-3, SFR-4, SFR-5, EST-1, DPX, MFR-1, MFR-2, MHD, PSP, P&G, PRS, and MPD Institutional OFC-1, MPD, PSP, P&G, and PRS Mixed Use SFR-1, SFR-2, SFR-3, SFR-4, SFR-5, EST-1, DPX, MFR-1, MFR-2, MHD, COM-1, COM-2, COM-3, OFC-1, OFC-2, IND-1, PSP, P&G, PRS, and MPD Industrial OFC-1, COM-2, COM-3, IND-1, IND-2, MPD, PSP, P&G, and PRS Greenbelt EST-1, EST-2, AGR, P&G, PSP, PRS, and MPD Conservation PRS  
    3.01.05.  Rules for interpretation of district boundaries. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the City of Palm Coast Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply and shall be implemented by the Land Use Administrator: 
A.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
B.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines or parcel lines shall be construed as following such lot lines or parcel lines. 
C.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following City Limits shall be construed as following the City Limits. 
D.  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the rails of the main line. 
E.  Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow the mean high water line, and in the event of change in the shoreline shall be construed as moving with the line. 
F.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
G.  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated above shall be so construed. 
H.  Where physical features such as streets, railroad lines, rivers, streams and such, existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the City of Palm Coast Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not covered above, the Land Use Administrator shall make a written interpretation of the district boundaries. 
I.  The Land Use Administrator may require that a professional survey be submitted prior to making a boundary determination. 
    3.01.06.  Uses not permitted in the city. The following uses may be permitted by a super majority vote of the City Council subsequent to an affirmative or negative recommendation by the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board. This is due to their potential incompatibility with current development trends in the City, their potential deleterious effects upon the public health, safety, and welfare, and the potential likelihood that they will create nuisances and significant adverse impacts upon adjacent land uses. The list is not all-inclusive and other uses found by the Land Use Administrator to be similar in nature and character to the listed uses shall also require approval by the City Council in the aforementioned manner. 
Asphalt Manufacturing Plants 
Animal Feed Lots and Livestock Operations 
Bottle Clubs 
Deep Well Injection of Waste Products 
Dog Farms 
Hog and Poultry Farms 
Incinerator Plants 
Junkyards, Salvage Yards 
Motor Vehicle Race Tracks 
Paper and Pulp Mills 
    3.01.07.  Uses not listed in this chapter. The listing of permitted principal uses, special exception uses, accessory uses and limited uses in a zoning district is not meant to be all-inclusive, nor is the list of uses that are not permitted intended to be all inclusive. Uses not specifically listed shall be reviewed by the Land Use Administrator to determine if the proposed use is similar in nature and character to others listed in the zoning district. The North American Industry Classification System manual, as amended, shall serve as a general guideline in making this determination. Based on the determination, the proposed use shall be classified in the same manner as those similar uses listed in terms of it being permitted as a principal, special exception, accessory, or limited use. The Land Use Administrator may also determine that other uses are not permitted on the basis that they are not similar in nature or character to the other uses listed in the zoning district. Determinations may be appealed in accordance with the appeal procedures established in Chapter 2. 
( Ord. No. 2016-4 , § 2, 3-15-16) 
Sec. 3.02. - Residential Zoning Districts. 
    3.02.01.  Purpose of districts. 
A.  Agriculture Zoning District (AGR). The purpose of the Agriculture District is to provide areas for limited agricultural, farming, and silviculture uses. The development of detached single-family dwellings and accessory uses, including home occupations common to rural areas, is also permissible. 
B.  Suburban and Rural Estate Zoning Districts (EST-1 and EST-2). The purpose of the Estate Districts is to provide areas for detached single-family dwellings and accessory uses on estate-sized lots to create very low-density neighborhoods in suburban and rural areas. 
C.  Single-Family Residential Zoning Districts (SFR-1, SFR-2, SFR-3, SFR-4, and SFR-5). The purpose of the Single-Family Residential Districts is to provide areas for detached single-family dwellings and accessory uses in low to medium density residential neighborhoods. 
D.  Duplex (DPX). The purpose of the Duplex District is to provide areas for two-family residential structures, combined with single-family and attached homes, in medium-density residential neighborhoods. 
E.  Multifamily Residential Zoning Districts (MFR-1 and MFR-2). The purpose of the Multifamily Residential Districts is to provide areas for attached housing, and medium to high-density apartments or condominiums. These districts also provide opportunities for assisted living or nursing homes and townhouse development. 
F.  Mobile Home Zoning District (MHD). The purpose of the Mobile Home District is to provide areas for detached mobile or manufactured home dwellings in low to medium density manufactured/mobile home parks or master planned residential subdivisions. 
    3.02.02.  Residential Districts-Allowable Uses. The following table contains a list of uses allowed in each district, and specifies if they are permitted by right (P) or if they require special exception approval (S) in accordance with Chapter 2. Uses permitted only as accessory to a principal use are noted with an (A). All uses marked with an (L) have additional limitations specific to that use listed in Chapter 4. 
Table 3-2. Residential Zoning Districts-Use Table 
USES SFR-1 SFR-2 SFR-3 SFR 4 & 5 EST-1 EST-2 AGR DPX MFR 1 & 2 MHD MPD RESIDENTIAL Adult Family Care Home P P P P P P P - - - P Assisted Living Facilities - - - - - - - - P - P Boarding and Rooming Houses - - - - - - - - S - P Cluster Development (L) P P P P P P - P - - P Community Residential Homes (1-6 persons) (L) P P P P P P P P P P P Community Residential Homes (7-14 persons) (L) - - - - - - - - P - P Duplex (L) - - - - - - - P - - P Family Child Day Care Home, Small P P P P P P P - - - P Family Child Day Care Home, Large - - - - S S P - S - P Farm Worker/Labor Housing - - - - - S P - - - - Mobile Home Parks (L) - - - - - - - - - P - Mobile / Manufactured Home Subdivision (L) - - - - - - - - - P - Multifamily Dwellings (L) - - - - - - - - P - P Neotraditional Development (L) P P P P - - - - P - P Nursing Homes - - - - - - - - P - P Single-Family Detached Dwelling Units P P P P P P P P - - P Townhouses (L) - - - - - - - P P - P NONRESIDENTIAL Adult Day Care Centers - - - - - - - - S - P Agriculture, Silviculture, and Other (L)   Agricultural Uses, bona fide uses (except feedlots) - - - - - S P - - - -   Animal Husbandry - - - - - S S - - - -   Aviaries - - - - - A A - - - -   Crop Production - - - - - P P - - - -   Equestrian Activities and Uses - - - - - P P - - - P   Farm Animals (other than horses) - - - - - S P - - - -   Forestry (Logging/Timber Tract Operations, plant nurseries) - - - - - - P - - - -   Horses - - - - P P P - - - P   Silviculture - - - - - - P P P P   Sod Farms - - - - - - P - - - - Bed and Breakfast Inns - - - - - - - - S - S Cemeteries (L) - - - - - S P - - - P Child Day Care Centers - - - - - - - - S - P Home Occupations Class 1 (L) A A A A A A A A A A A Home Occupations Class 2 (L) A A A A A A A A A A A Home Occupations Class 3 (L) - - - - SA SA A - - - A Kennels and Pet Boarding - - - - - - P - - - P Marina (Noncommercial) (L) A A A A A A A A A A A Marina (Commercial) (L) S S S S S S S S S S P Mining and Soil Extraction (L) - - - - - - S - - - - Public Parks and Recreational Facilities P P P P P P P P P P P Pump Stations and Well Sites P P P P P P P P P P P RV Parks and Camps (L) - - - - - - S - - - - Schools, Elementary and Secondary (public and private, including charter schools) (L) P P P P P P - P P P P Veterinary Clinics and Services - - - - - S P - - - P Wholesale/Retail Fertilizer Sales - - - - - - P - - - - Wireless Communication Facilities (L) L L L L L L L L L L L  
    3.02.03.  Residential Districts-Dimensional Standards. Section 3.03 and Section 3.04 establishes additional standards for selected residential districts. The following table contains the dimensional standards for the various uses allowed in each residential district: 
Table 3-3: Residential Zoning Districts-Dimensional Standards 
Standard SFR-1 SFR-2 SFR-3 SFR-4 SFR-5 EST-1 EST-2 AGR MHD DPX MFR-1 MFR-2 Minimum Lot Size 6,000 sq. ft. 7,500 sq. ft. 10,000 sq. ft. 12,000 sq. ft. 20,000 sq. ft. 1.0 acre 1 2.5 acres 1 5 acres 2 4,000 sq. ft 9,000 sq. ft. 3 2,500 sq. ft. 3 2,500 sq. ft. 3 Development Site Size N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1 acre N/A 3 acres 4 4 acres 4 Minimum Lot Width 5 50' 60' 80' 80' 100' 100' 150' 200' 40' 30'/80 6 25'/100' 6 25'/100' 6 Maximum Density (units per acre) 7 7.0 5.0 4.0 3.0 2.0 1.0 0.4 0.2 8.0 8.0 8.0 12.0 Minimum Living Area (square feet) 1,200 1,200 1,200 1,200 1,200 1,200 1,200 1,200 600 800 12 650 650 Minimum Front Setback 8 20' 20' 25' 25' 25' 25' 25' 50' 10' 25' 25' 25' Minimum Rear Setback 8 10' 6.5' 10' 15' 20' 25' 25' 50' 10' 10' 20' 20' Minimum Rear Street Setback 8 15' 15' 15' 15' 15' 20' 25' 25' 10' 15' 25' 25' Minimum Interior Side Setback 8 5' 9 7.5' 7.5' 7.5' 10' 10' 15' 25' 5' 7.5' 9 10' 9 10' 9 Minimum Street Side Setback 8 15' 15' 20' 20' 20' 20' 25' 25' 10' 20' 20' 20' Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio (ISR) 10 0.75 0.75 0.70 0.70 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.25 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.70 Maximum Building Height 11 35' 35' 35' 35' 35' 35' 35' 35' 35' 35' 50' 60'  
    Table 3-3 Footnotes: 
1  Residential lots in the EST-1 and EST-2 Districts shall have a contiguous upland area of at least 12,000 square feet. Residential lots utilizing well or septic systems shall have a contiguous upland area of at least one acre. 
2  Residential lots in the AGR District shall have a contiguous upland area of at least 20,000 square feet. Residential lots utilizing well or septic systems shall have a contiguous upland area of at least one acre. 
3  Minimum lot size 4,000 sq. ft. per lot for a legally divided duplex lot. Minimum lot size is shown for a townhouse lot in the MFR Districts. 
4  Minimum size for a manufactured/mobile home park in the MHD District and for multifamily development sites in the MFR-1 and MFR-2 Districts. 
5  Fifteen percent wider width required for corner lots. See Chapter 9 for subdivision design standards. In no event shall lot frontage on a street or access easement be less than 20 feet. 
6  Twenty-five-foot minimum lot width for townhouse lots; 100-foot minimum lot width for multifamily development sites. Thirty-foot minimum lot width per lot for a legally divided duplex lot. Eighty-foot minimum lot width for a detached single-family dwelling on a lot in the DPX District. 
7  See Section 3.05 regarding density calculation methodology. 
8  See Section 3.05 for setback determinations and setback requirements for multistory developments adjacent to residential zoning districts and wireless communication facilities and equipment compounds. 
9  The minimum interior side yard setback for townhouses shall be zero feet. Detached single-family dwellings in the existing subdivisions that were zoned for detached single-family dwellings in the former TWN District shall be zero feet on one side and a minimum distance of 15 feet between each dwelling unit. 
10  See Section 3.05 for ISR calculation methodology. 
11  See Subsection 3.04.04 for height restrictions within the Palm Coast Parkway Overlay Zone. 
12  The minimum living area requirement noted is per unit for a duplex. A single-family dwelling on a duplex lot must meet a minimum requirement of 1,200 square feet for living area. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, § 10, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2015-9 , § 3, 8-4-15; Ord. No. 2018-02 , § 3, 2-6-18) 
Sec. 3.03. - Nonresidential and Mixed Use Zoning Districts. 
    3.03.01.  Purpose of districts. 
A.  Neighborhood, General, and High Intensity Commercial Zoning Districts (COM-1, COM-2, and COM-3) 
1.  The purpose of the COM-1 (Neighborhood Commercial) District is to provide areas for limited commercial and office uses developed at a neighborhood scale to meet the day-to-day retail and service needs of nearby residents. 
2.  The purpose of the COM-2 (General Commercial) District is to provide areas for general commercial and office uses to meet the community-wide demand for retail, services, business, and employment opportunities. 
3.  The purpose of the COM-3 (High Intensity Commercial) District is to provide areas for the most intensive commercial uses including, but not limited to, those that focus on automobile sales and service, outdoor storage, and heavy traffic. 
B.  Limited and General Office Zoning Districts (OFC-1 and OFC-2). 
1.  The purpose of the OFC-1 (Limited Office) District is to provide areas for limited office development. This district is primarily intended to provide office support to larger institutional uses, such as medical offices surrounding hospitals. This district also allows for limited service and retail uses to meet the needs of office workers. 
2.  The purpose of the OFC-2 (General Office) District is to provide areas for various types of office uses, such as office parks, corporations, and other business and employment centers. This district also permits limited service and retail uses to meet the needs of office workers. 
C.  Master Planned Development Zoning District (MPD). The purpose of the Master Planned Development District is to provide areas where a variety of uses are mixed together in master planned developments and communities. This district utilizes cohesive architectural themes and emphasizes accessibility for pedestrians and bicyclists. Regulations for this district are intended to promote flexibility and creative land use planning and design concepts. The Master Planned Development District replaces the Village Center (VGC-1 and VGC-2), Golf Course Community (GCC), Planned Unit Development (PUD), and Planned Rural Development (PRD) zoning districts. Projects developed or approved within these former districts are bound to their respective Development Agreements and the uses that were formerly allowed in those districts; however, substantial revisions to a Development Agreement, as described in Subsection 2.09.07, will require an application under the terms and procedures of the Master Planned Development District and/or a rezoning. Subsection 3.03.04 establishes the development standards for the Master Planned Development District. 
D.  Light and Heavy Industrial Zoning Districts (IND-1 and IND-2). 
1.  The purpose of the IND-1 (Light and Warehousing Industrial) District is to provide areas for restricted industrial and warehouse uses of low to moderate intensities with minimal potential for off-site impacts. This district utilizes performance standards to ensure that impacts are controlled. 
2.  The purpose of the IND-2 (Heavy Industrial) District is to permit a wide range of intensive industrial uses, which include, but are not limited to, those that are major users of water, produce greater amounts of hazardous and regulated waste, storage of significant amounts of chemicals, produce air emissions, or substantially impact the landscape through mining and soil extraction. This district utilizes performance standards to ensure that impacts are controlled to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
E.  Public/Semipublic Zoning District (PSP). The purpose of the Public/Semipublic District is to provide areas for government owned facilities, religious institutions, civic buildings, community club facilities, educational/vocational facilities, nonprofit organization facilities, and essential public services including, but not limited to, transit facilities, water and sewer utility plants and related facilities, and electrical power substations. 
F.  Parks and Greenways Zoning District (P&G). The purpose of the Parks and Greenways District is to provide areas for various parks including active recreational facilities as well as passive open spaces that provide for recreational opportunities. This district also includes areas for historical sites, outdoor museums, golf courses, driving ranges, and associated facilities. 
G.  Preservation (PRS). The purpose of the Preservation District is to provide for the protection of valuable and unique natural resource areas. This district allows minimal development for the purpose of providing public accessibility and basic facilities only. 
    3.03.02.  Nonresidential and Mixed Use Districts-Allowable Uses. The following table contains a list of uses allowed in each district, and specifies if they are permitted by right (P) or if they require special exception approval (S) in accordance with Chapter 2. Uses permitted only as accessory to a principal use are noted with an (A). All uses marked with an (L) have additional limitations specific to that use listed in Chapter 4. 
Table 3-4. Nonresidential and Mixed Use Zoning Districts-Use Table 
Specific UseType COM-1 COM-2 COM-3 OFC-1 OFC-2 IND-1 IND-2 PSP P & G PRS MPD 1 Civic, Nonprofit and Institutional  Civic Uses: town hall, libraries, museums P P P P P S - P - - P  Civic Uses: police, fire, postal service P P P P P P S P - -  Civic Clubs and Fraternal Organizations (L) P P P P P - - P - - P  Hospice Services S P P S P - - P - - P  Hospitals - P P - P - - P - - P  Houses of Worship/Religious Institutions (L) P P P P P - - P - - P  Nonprofit Organizations, (e.g., Humane Societies) (L) P P P P P - - P - - P Eating, Drinking and Entertainment  Adult-Oriented Businesses (L) - - - - - - P - - - -  Drinking Establishments (without outdoor 
entertainment) (L) - P P - - - - - - - P  Drinking Establishments (with outdoor 
entertainment) (L) - S P - - - - - - - P  Beer, Wine, and Liquor Stores (L) P P P P P - - - - - P  Cafeterias, Coffee and Donut Shops, Snack Bars, Sandwich Shops, Delicatessens, Bakeries P P P P P S - P - - P  Microwbreweries (L) - S P - - P - - - - P  Performing Arts Facilities (e.g. dinner theaters) S P P - - - - P - - P  Pizza Delivery Establishments and Takeout Places P P P P P S - - - - P  Restaurants, Fast Food (L) - P P - - - - - - - P  Restaurants, Sit-Down P P P P P - - - - - P Educational Facilities  Elementary/Secondary Schools (public and private) (L) P P P P P - - P - - P  Colleges/Universities S S P S P - - P - - P Industrial Uses (L)  Manufacturing, Heavy (L) - - - - - S P - - - -  Manufacturing, Light (L) - - - - - P P - - - P  Material Recovery Facilities (e.g. recycling centers) - - - - - P P - - - -  Mining and Soil Extraction (L) - - - - - - S - - - - Laboratories  Medical and Diagnostic Laboratories S P P P P P - - - - P  Dental Labs P P P P P - - - - - P Multiuse Building (L) P P S P P - - - - - P Office, Medical and Professional  Banks and Credit Unions P P P P P - - - - - P  Building Contractors - S P S P P - - - - P  Mail Order Facilities P P P P P P - - - - P  Medical and Professional Offices P P P P P - - - - - P  Outpatient Care Facilities P P P P P - - - - - P  Pharmacies 2 - P P P P - - - - - -  Scientific and Technical (e.g. architects, engineers, design, programming, and consulting) P P P P P S - - - - P  Temporary Employment Agencies and Management Services P P P P P - - - - - P  Veterinarians (without kennels/post-operative care only) P P P P P - - - - - P Recreation and Tourism  Bed and Breakfast Inns P P P - - - - - - - P  Electronic Game Promotion Establishments - S P - - - - - - - P  Golf Courses, Driving Ranges, and Country Clubs - - - - - - - - P - P  Hotels - P P P P - - - - - P  Marinas (Commercial) (L) P P P P P P P P S - P  Motels - P P - - - - - - - P  Public Parks and Recreation Facilities P S S S S S S P - P P  Recreation, Indoor P P P - - - - - - - P  Recreation, Outdoor - S P - - - - P P S P  RV Parks and Camps (L) - - - - - - - - P - -  Shooting and Target Ranges (indoor) - - S - - P - - - - -  Stadiums and Athletic/Sports Arenas - - P - - - - P - - P Residential  Assisted Living Facilities, Nursing Homes P P P P P - - P - - P  Caretaker's Dwellings - S S - S S S S S S P  Community Residential Homes (7 to 14 residents) - - - - - - - - - - P  On-site dwelling units for agents or employees of principal use. - - - - S - - S S S P  Dormitories S S S - - - - S - - P Retail Sales and Services  Art Dealers - P P P P - - - - - P  Automotive Parts (e.g. accessories and tires) - S P - - P - - - - P  Building Material Stores (paint, hardware) P P P - - P - - - - P  Clothing and Accessory Stores (e.g. shoes and luggage) P P P S P - - - - - P  Retail (L) P P P - - - - - - - P  Florists P P P P P - - - - - P  Food and Beverage Stores (supermarkets and specialty foods) P P P P P - - - - - P  Furniture and Home Furnishings Stores P P P - P P - - - - P  Home Improvement Centers - P P - - P - - - - P  Large-Scale Retail Centers (L) - P P - - - - - - - P  Lawn and Garden Equipment and Supplies Stores P P P - - P - - - - P  Model Home Centers (L) P P P P P - - - - - P  Pet (domestic) Stores P P P - - - - - - - P  Plant Nurseries P P P - - - - - - - P  Photo Finishing P P P P P - - - - - P  Sporting Goods, Hobby, Book and Music Stores P P P P P - - - - - P  Used Merchandise Stores S P P - - - - - - - P Service, Business  Printing and Publishing S P P S P P S - - - P  All other business services P P P P P P P - - - P Service, Personal  Adult Day Care Centers P P P P P - - - - - P  Bail Bonding - S P - - - - - - - P  Child Day Care Centers P P P P P - - - - - P  Funeral Homes S P P S P - - - - - P  Tarot Card, Psychic, and Palm Readings - S P - - - - - - - P  Tattooing, Body Piercing, and other Body Art - S P - - - - - - - P  All other personal service uses P P P P P P - - - - P Service, Major  Heavy Construction and Land Excavation Contractors - - - - - P P - - - -  Kennels and Animal Boarding - S P - - P - - - - P  Landscaping Services P P P - - P S - - - -  Machine Shops and Tool and Die - - - - - P P - - - -  Repair Services for Commercial and Industrial Machinery and Equipment - S P - - P P - - - -  Truck Stops - - S - - P P - - - - Training Facilities  Automobile Driver Schools P P P P P - - P - - -  Technical/Trade Schools P P P P P P S P - - P  Trucks and Heavy Equipment Driving Schools - - P - - P P P - - - Utilities and Public Works  Dredge Spoil Disposal - - - - - - - S - - -  Landfills (for nonhazardous, organic debris or construction debris only) - - - - - - - S - - -  L P Gas Dealer and Bulk Storage - S P - - P S - - - -  Municipal Pump Stations and Well Sites P P P P P P P P P S P  Park and Ride Facilities - - - - - - - S - - P  Power Generation and Distribution (electric and gas) Facilities - S S S S P P P - - -  Public Works Facilities - - - - - P P P - - -  Passenger Transit or Rail Stations P P P P P S P P - - P  Solid Waste Transfer Stations - - - - - - S S - - -  Wastewater Treatment Facilities - - - - - - - S - - -  Water Supply Plants - - - - - - - S - - P  Wireless Communication Facilities (L) L L L L L L L L L L L Vehicle Sales, Rental, Service, and Repair  Automotive, Recreational Vehicle, and Boat Dealers - S P - - P - - - - P  Car Washes - S P - - - - - - - P  Commercial & Industrial Machinery & Equipment Rental and Leasing - S P - - P P - - - P  Convenience Stores with Fueling Facilities (L) P 3 P P - - - - - - - P  Motor Vehicle Towing Services - - S - - P P - - - P  Motorcycle Dealers - P P - - P - - - - P  Service Stations P P P - - P - - - - P  Taxi and Limousine Services P P P - - - - - - - P  Vehicle Rental/Leasing - S P - - P - - - - P  Vehicle Repair - S P - - P - - - - P Warehousing  Miniwarehouses, Office Warehouses and Self-Storage - S P - - P - - - - P  Warehouse/Distribution Facilities (>50,000 sq ft) - - S - - S P - - - -  Warehouse/Distribution Facilities (<50,000 sq ft) - S P - - P S - - - P  
  
    Footnotes for Table 3-4: 
1  Only if use is specifically mentioned within the MPD Development Agreement. 
2  A medical marijuana treatment center dispensing facility may not be located within 500 feet of the real property that comprises a public or private elementary school, middle school, or secondary school. F.S. § 381.986. 
3  If subject property is within 500 feet of any residential property, a special exception for the use is required in accordance with Section 2.07-Special Exceptions. 
    3.03.03.  Nonresidential and Mixed Use Districts-Dimensional Standards. The following table contains the dimensional standards for the various uses allowed in each nonresidential and mixed use district. The following subsections contain additional standards for the various nonresidential mixed use districts. 
Table 3-5. Nonresidential and Mixed Use Zoning Districts-Dimensional Standards 
Zoning District Standard COM-1 COM-2 COM-3 OFC-1 OFC-2 PSP IND-1 IND-2 P&G PRS MPD Minimum Lot Size 20,000 sq. ft. 20,000 sq. ft. 30,000 sq. ft. 15,000 sq. ft. 20,000 sq. ft. 20,000 sq. ft. 20,000 sq. ft. 1 acre NA NA N/A Minimum Lot Width 1 100' 100' 100' 100' 100' 100' 100' 150' NA NA N/A Maximum Impervious Surface Ratio (ISR) 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.65 0.20 0.05 NA 2 Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) 0.30 3 0.40 0.50 0.40 0.40 0.30 0.35 0.45 0.10 NA NA Maximum Building Height 4 50' 100' 75' 75' 100' 100' 65' 65' 35' 35' 100' Interior Side and Rear Setbacks 5 10' 10' 6 10' 6 10' 10' 10' 10' 15' 5' 5' N/A Minimum Building Setbacks from Streets:  Arterial/Collector Road 7 25' 25' 25' 25' 25' 25' 25' 35' 35' 35' N/A  Local Road 20' 20' 20' 20' 20' 20' 25' 35' 10' 10' N/A  
    Footnotes for Table 3-5: 
1  In no event shall the lot frontage on a street or access easement be less than 20 feet. 
2  See Subsection 3.03.04 for open space requirements. 
3  The gross floor area of a neighborhood shopping center shall not exceed 50,000 square feet. 
4  See Subsection 3.04.04 for height restrictions within the Palm Coast Parkway Overlay Zone. Additional height is permitted for appurtenances in the IND-2 District, as required by federal and state regulatory agencies. See Chapter 13 for additional restrictions on building height that may be applicable. 
5  See Section 3.05 for setback determinations and setback requirements for multistory developments adjacent to residential zoning districts and wireless communication facilities and equipment compounds. Fifteen percent wider width required for corner lots. See Chapter 9 for subdivision design standards. In no event shall lot frontage on a street or access easement be less than 20 feet. Minimum setback requirement is 25 feet when abutting the SFR, DPX, EST, AGR, PRS, and P&G Districts. 
6  A zero-foot interior side setback is permitted for a large-scale retail center with an approved master plan. 
7  Building abutting any specific arterial or collector road listed in Table 11-5 of Chapter 11 require a 35-foot setback to accommodate the landscape buffer. 
    3.03.04.  Master Planned Development (MPD) Zoning District Development Standards. Requesting a rezoning to the Master Planned Development District is a voluntary process commenced by an applicant proposing a master plan for a unique, individually planned development which would not otherwise be permitted in any of the zoning districts established by this chapter. An application for rezoning to a Master Planned Development District shall show that the planned development will produce a functional, enduring, and desirable environment, with no significant adverse impacts to adjacent properties. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the Master Planned Development District is to provide opportunities for innovative planning and design. Although greater flexibility is given within this district, procedures are established in this subsection to ensure that master planned developments are consistent with sound and generally accepted land development practices and that added benefit is accrued to the community. Approval of a Master Planned Development Agreement will be based on the finding that the submittal results in one or more of the following: 
1.  A recognizable and material benefit to the ultimate users of the project and to the community, where such benefit would otherwise be unfeasible or unlikely to be achieved without application of the master planned development zoning approval; and/or 
2.  Long-term protection and preservation of natural resources and natural features of a significant quantity and/or quality, where such benefit would otherwise be unfeasible or unlikely to be achieved without application of the master planned development zoning approval. 
B.  Intent. The intent of the Master Planned Development District is to: 
1.  Encourage efficient land development through the use of innovative land use planning. 
2.  Encourage a more compatible and harmonious development of contiguous lands. 
3.  Permit the combining and coordinating of architectural styles, building forms, and building relationships within a development. 
4.  Provide for the planning, review, and approval of one or a combination of residential, commercial, industrial, recreational, and public land uses and structures that results in an organized development. 
5.  Minimize infrastructure costs through a more efficient arrangement of structures, utilities, on-site circulation, ingress, and egress than is permitted under conventional zoning and subdivision regulations. 
6.  Preserve to the greatest extent feasible environmental assets and natural amenities such as scenic and functional open space areas. 
7.  Establish specific limitations and requirements in excess of those included in other zoning districts, based on the unique characteristics of the individual site, where necessary for the protection of the public health, safety, or welfare, or for the protection or preservation of lands either internal or external to the planned development. 
C.  General requirements. 
1.  Comprehensive plan consistency. The master planned development shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. A Master Planned Development District is allowed within all Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map categories. 
2.  Other ordinances. All building and housing codes of the City are applicable to the Master Planned Development District; however, requirements for dimensional standards, parking, open space, and other land use regulations established in the master planned development plan may differ from those specific to the zoning district in which the development is located to achieve a higher level of quality. Special exceptions and variances are, therefore, not applicable to master planned development plans. 
D.  Permitted uses, densities, and intensities. All principal and accessory uses permitted within the Master Planned Development District, as provided for in Tables 3-2 and 3-4 are subject to approval by the City Council based on consistency with the Comprehensive Plan and compatibility with the surrounding areas. The maximum gross residential density or nonresidential intensity permitted within any proposed master planned development shall not exceed the density or intensity permitted within the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map category where the particular master planned development is proposed. 
E.  Development standards. All development standards including, but not limited to, lot sizes, setbacks, lot coverage, building height, lighting, architecture, landscaping, recreation, and open space shall be specified in the Master Planned Development agreement. 
F.  Compatibility standards. In order to ensure compatibility of the master planned development the following shall apply whenever the proposed development abuts a single-family detached residentially zoned development: 
1.  Residential lot arrangement at the master planned development property line(s), including width, depth, and area shall be consistent with the average width, depth, and area of the abutting existing neighborhood with a variation of no more than 25 percent less than the average; 
2.  Residential and nonresidential building height adjacent to residential zoning districts shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 13. 
3.  Nonresidential delivery and loading areas, dumpsters, and mechanical equipment shall be located away from property lines abutting residential areas. 
4.  Development shall be generally consistent with the Architectural Design Regulations contained in Chapter 13. 
G.  Perimeter buffer requirement. Whenever a master planned development abuts existing developments with lower density or intensity land uses, the City Council may impose perimeter buffer requirements in excess of the minimum requirements established in Chapter 11 in order to protect the privacy of existing adjoining uses including, but not limited to: 
1.  Structures, buildings, and streets located at the perimeter of the development shall be permanently screened in a manner that sufficiently protects the privacy and amenities of the adjacent existing uses. 
2.  Increased setbacks from the perimeter line may be imposed to protect privacy of adjacent existing uses. 
H.  Vehicular and pedestrian access and parking. The master planned development shall be designed in a way that integrates pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicular traffic circulation systems into the surrounding community. The development shall provide for safe and convenient access to public uses, common areas, and other community services, facilities, and activities located both within the proposed development and beyond its boundaries. 
1.  All uses within the master planned development shall have access to a public street either directly or indirectly via a private approach road, pedestrian way, court, or other area dedicated by a common easement guaranteeing access. Permitted uses are not necessarily required to front on a dedicated road. The City shall be allowed access on privately owned roadways, easements, and common open space to ensure the police and fire protection of the area, to meet emergency needs, to conduct City services and services of exclusive franchises, and to generally ensure the health and safety of the residents of the master planned development. 
2.  Vehicular access from individual lots or dwelling units onto arterial or collector streets within or adjacent to the development is discouraged. 
3.  Adequate parking and loading shall be provided in general conformance with regulations established in Chapter 5. However, the minimum number of parking spaces required may be modified, based on evidence that other standards would be more reasonable. A decision to reduce the number of parking spaces shall be based on technical information provided by a qualified consultant that verifies the reduction will not impair the functioning of the development or adjacent developments. 
I.  Open space requirement. A master planned development shall give priority to preservation and interconnection of wildlife corridors and wildlife preservation areas, including below grade crossings, if necessary. Open space should, to the maximum extent possible, preserve the most important environmental features on the site in their natural state or restrict these areas for passive outdoor recreational purposes only. 
Master planned developments within a Development of Regional Impact are exempt from the open space requirements of this section, provided that the master planned development must comply and be consistent with the development of regional impact development order. 
1.  Minimum required open space. A master planned development shall be required to provide open space totaling 40 percent of its gross area. For a development with residential uses, at least 25 percent of the total required open space shall be common areas accessible to the public. Additional open space shall be, where possible, located and designed to achieve the following: 
a.  Provide areas for informal recreation and pathways; 
b.  Connect to adjacent open space, parks, bike paths, or pedestrian paths; 
c.  Provide natural greenbelts along roadways; and 
d.  Buffer adjacent land uses where appropriate. 
2.  Open space requirement flexibility. As an alternative to meeting the open space percentage noted above, an applicant may propose alternative solutions such as, but not limited to, green building principles, land donation, or other mechanisms that would justify the lower percentage. 
3.  Permitted uses of open space. For the purpose of this section, open space does not equate to pervious areas. Therefore, the following uses as permitted within the required open space area: 
a.  Pervious areas including, but not limited to, conservation of natural, archeological, and historical resources; and woodlands, wetlands, ponds, lakes, wildlife corridors, landscape, and similar environmental or conservation-oriented areas. 
b.  Walking or bicycling trails or paths paved with pervious or semipervious materials. 
c.  Passive recreation areas such as playgrounds which meet the following standards: 
(1)  Such areas do not exceed ten percent of the required open space; and 
(2)  Such areas are located outside any conservation areas that include wetlands that qualify as moderate and optimal in Chapter 10. 
d.  Easements for drainage and underground utility lines. 
e.  Stormwater retention and detention ponds. 
f.  Golf courses. 
4.  Prohibited uses of open space. 
a.  Roads and parking lots. 
b.  Buildings, structures, and other impervious surfaces, except as necessary for residential walkways connecting to public sidewalks. 
5.  Common open space and improvements. All common open space, as well as public and recreation facilities shall be specifically included in the development plan and Master Planned Development Agreement. 
a.  Common improvements associated with residential uses, including private or public parks, pools, recreation centers, or other facilities shall be constructed in conjunction with residential dwellings. Such facilities shall be completed at a rate equal to that which is capable of serving the number of completed residential units in the master planned development. Therefore, no more than 40 percent of the units for which the improvements are intended shall receive building permits until the improvements are completed. 
b.  Public improvements must be backed by performance bonds issued to the City in a form and quantity acceptable to the Land Use Administrator. The Land Use Administrator must approve the bond prior to the issuance of the first residential permit. 
c.  Improvements may be completed in phases as long as the capacity of the improvement is capable of serving the associated phase of development. 
6.  Conveyance and preservation of open space. Open space shall be preserved in perpetuity based upon the type of space and the user, as follows: 
a.  Common open space, proposed for use of the master planned development owners and residents, shall be conveyed to a homeowners association or to a nonprofit organization whose principal purpose is the conservation of open space, to a corporation or trust owned or to be owned by the owners of the lots or dwelling units within the residential cluster development, or to owners of shares within a cooperative development. If such a corporation or trust is used, ownership shall pass with the conveyances of the lots or dwelling units. The conveyance shall be recommended to the City Council by the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board and shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney. 
b.  Open space associated with natural features including, but not limited to, wetlands and other environmentally sensitive areas shall be preserved in perpetuity via a conservation easement on a form approved by the City that shall be recorded with the Flagler County Clerk. 
7.  Maintenance of common areas, stormwater conveyance system, and open space. Homeowners or Property Owners Association Bylaws shall be required for a master planned development project and shall identify the party(ies) or person(s) responsible for maintaining the common areas, stormwater conveyance system, and open space, including multiuse trails open to the public. 
J.  Existing golf course communities. Existing golf courses communities located within the former Golf Course Community (GCC) District seeking to add residential units must comply with the standards established for the Master Planned Development District. In addition, the development shall utilize the following guidelines in order to minimize adverse impacts on any abutting single-family residentially zoned areas. 
1.  Existing direct golf course views from the rear yards of all existing, platted lots located within any residentially zoned districts directly abutting the site shall be maintained. Peripheral (i.e. side) views from these existing rear yards may be impacted by new development and new development may be visible from existing development. 
2.  Existing golf course views from existing platted lots located within any residentially zoned area located across a right-of-way or a water body from the site shall be maintained to the maximum extent practical. 
3.  Multifamily uses shall be surrounded by fairways, clubhouse, and/or other golf course facilities to buffer single-family areas within the same development. The multifamily uses shall not be located within 150 feet from any existing, platted lots located within a residentially zoned area. 
K.  Master planned development review and approval process. The application for a master planned development and the rezoning, along with the required Master Planned Development Agreement, shall be submitted and approved in conformance with Chapter 2. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, §§ 11, 12, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2012-3, § 2(Exh. 1), 5-1-12; Ord. No. 2015-08 , § 2, 7-21-15; Ord. No. 2015-9 , §§ 2, 4, 8-4-15; Ord. No. 2017-19 , § 3, 10-17-17; Ord. No. 2018-02 , § 4, 2-6-18) 
Sec. 3.04. - Overlay Zones. 
    3.04.01.  Purpose and intent. The intent of this section is to establish certain overlay zones within which special development restrictions are imposed. The land uses permitted within the underlying zoning districts remain undisturbed by the creation of the overlay zone. 
    3.04.02.  Wetland overlay zone. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the wetland overlay zone is to designate areas within the City containing significant wetland areas. 
B.  Delineation of wetland overlay zone boundaries. The wetland overlay zone boundaries delineate areas in which aerial maps, the Future Land Use Map, or other sources of conceptual wetland mapping information indicate that the subject parcel or lot appears to meet at least one of the following conditions: 
1.  More than 50 percent of the land area within the parcel or lot contains wetlands as defined and protected under Chapter 10. 
2.  The parcel or lot contains wetlands that are part of a protected environmental or resource corridor or an integrated, non-isolated wetland system. 
3.  The location of the wetlands on the parcel or lot is situated in such a manner that the property's future development may be substantially restricted. 
C.  Restrictions to future development within a wetland overlay zone. Although the wetland overlay zone designation is an indication that a property's future development may be restricted due to the presence of wetlands, the designation itself does not entail any specific development regulations. Upon determination of the jurisdictional wetlands boundary by the St. Johns River Water Management District or other government designated entities and the application of Chapter 10, the parcel or lot is permitted to develop in accordance with the prescribed standards of its zoning district. 
D.  Preserved wetland areas. Preserved wetland areas may be used on a parcel or lot to meet setback requirements, to provide credit toward meeting landscape requirements, and to provide pervious area. Twenty-five percent of preserved wetland areas may count in the gross acreage used to calculate residential density in accordance with Section 3.05. 
E.  Wetlands impacts. The wetland overlay zone designation neither precludes impacts to wetlands nor does it provide justification for wetland impacts. Chapter 10 contains the City's regulations regarding wetland impacts. 
    3.04.03.  Gateway Overlay Zone. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the gateway overlay zone is to establish provisions that enable development of a unique hub located within the City's State Road 100 Community Redevelopment Area. This shall be accomplished by implementation of land development criteria promoting redevelopment that provides consistent landscape and architectural standards compatible with the approved Town Center Development of Regional Impact. At the same time, the City recognizes that there are existing uses, both nonresidential and residential, within the gateway overlay zone that need to remain as viable properties during the interim period before redevelopment can occur. The gateway overlay zone is intended to: 
1.  Ensure the roadways develop into a cohesive, scenic gateway; 
2.  Provide uniform design standards to establish high quality development; 
3.  Prevent disjointed, disorganized development caused by unplanned and uncoordinated uses, buildings, and structures; and 
4.  Maintain and enhance property values. 
B.  Description of district. The boundary of the gateway overlay zone is delineated on the Official Zoning Map and is generally described as being bounded on the west by Bulldog Drive, on the north by the northerly property lines of the Midway Park First Addition Subdivision and southeasterly to the northern lot lines of Whispering Pines Subdivision; on the east by the east lot lines of Whispering Pines Subdivision; and on the south by the northerly right-of-way line of State Road 100. 
C.  Site planning guidelines. Site design shall specifically address the creation of an attractive, safe, and functional urban environment. The requirements contained in Chapter 13 relating to general architectural design shall apply to lands within this overlay zone as well as the following guidelines, which are unique to this zone. 
1.  Building design, layout, and orientation. 
a.  Buildings shall be organized to create or strengthen view corridors to significant natural or man-made features. 
b.  Building siting and orientation shall create a healthier pedestrian environment designed within the existing urban framework and linked to outdoor spaces including parks, plazas, and walkways. 
c.  When two or more buildings are proposed on a single lot of record, the primary building shall be oriented to face the public right-of-way. 
d.  Buildings shall be oriented to maximize pedestrian access and views of significant natural or man-made features, even if there is a primary façade on the public right-of-way. 
e.  Building orientation and massing should relate to nearby buildings and to the urban context, with off-street parking areas located to the sides and rear of the site. 
f.  In order to provide a unified design with the main structure and enhance the visual impact of outparcels on a site, all exterior façades of the outparcel buildings shall be considered primary façades and shall employ architectural and landscape design treatments similar to or compatible with the primary building and anchor tenant. 
g.  Secondary building entrances shall be considered when parking is located to the rear of the building to provide direct service and customer access to the store from parking areas as well as improve circulation between the parking lots and the street. Architectural embellishments, awnings, landscaping, and directional signage shall be used to mark the secondary entrance, and the design and building materials of the rear of the building shall be consistent with the front facade. 
h.  Corporate building design that is typically read as signage or branding is discouraged. 
2.  Vehicular and pedestrian access and parking. 
a.  Vehicular connection between the buildings, including the main structures and outparcels, is required to provide for safe and convenient vehicular movement within the site. 
b.  Interconnection of pedestrian walkways with the main structure and adjacent outparcels is required. Pedestrian walkways that are incorporated into parking areas or roadways shall be distinguished as such through the use of different materials. 
c.  The site plan shall be integrated with adjacent parcels to provide a logical, safe, and harmonious system of roadways and interconnecting bike paths and sidewalks. 
d.  Parking areas shall be designed to avoid the appearance of a large expanse of pavement, and shall be conducive to safe pedestrian access and circulation. 
e.  Joint or shared parking and cross-access are encouraged to create physical and visual linkages and to create more developable areas for commercial, institutional, and amenity uses. 
3.  Maintenance and service areas. 
a.  All maintenance and service areas shall be located in the rear of the buildings or, if a rear location is not possible, such areas shall be screened from public view. 
b.  Efficient access shall be provided to service drops and maintenance or trash collection areas. 
D.  Building design. 
1.  Building height shall not exceed 45 feet. 
2.  Buildings shall have architectural features and patterns that provide visual interest from the perspective of pedestrians and motorists. Buildings shall include substantial variation in mass, such as articulation of vertical and horizontal planes, particularly in primary building facades. 
3.  Building facades shall be designed to avoid visual monotony. Landscaping may be employed to enhance the architectural features, but shall not be used in lieu of the following: 
a.  Facades shall not exceed 30 horizontal feet and ten vertical feet without incorporation of two of the following elements: 
(1)  A change in plane, such as an offset, reveal, or projecting rib. Such plane projections or recesses may include, but are not limited to, columns, planters, arches, and voids and shall be a minimum of 12 inches in depth, applied to at least 20 percent of the building length; 
(2)  Control and expansion joints constitute a blank wall, unless used in a decorative pattern with varied materials or textures and spaced a maximum of ten feet on center. Relief and reveal depth shall be a minimum of three-quarters of an inch; 
(3)  Architectural details, such as raised bands and cornices; 
(4)  Awnings; or 
(5)  Change in color and/or texture (banding alone does not constitute a change in color or texture). 
b.  Facades that extend for more than 100 feet in length shall incorporate, in addition to two of the above requirements, at least one of the following elements: 
(1)  A change in plane, such as an offset, reveal, or projection rib a minimum of 12 inches in depth, with a maximum spacing of 100 feet between features; 
(2)  Prominent public entrance defined by substantive architectural features; or 
(3)  Change in building material, such as split face block. 
4.  Facade treatments for primary and secondary facades shall include the following: 
a.  Primary facades shall have at least two of the following elements for at least 60 percent of the width of the facade: 
(1)  Public entrances; 
(2)  Arcades or other roof treatment such as shutters or secondary roofs to provide pedestrian shade and facade interest; 
(3)  Windows; 
(4)  Awnings, associated with windows or doors; or 
(5)  Foundation plantings adjacent to the building with a minimum width of five feet. 
b.  Secondary facades shall incorporate two of the following design elements for primary facades: 
(1)  The first floor of all buildings, including structured parking, shall be designed to encourage pedestrian-scale activity; 
(2)  Overhangs/awnings shall be no less than five feet deep to protect pedestrians from inclement weather; 
(3)  The highest point of a first floor awning on a multistory building shall not be higher than the midpoint between the top of the first story window and the second story windowsill; 
(4)  Accessory structures including, but not limited to, carwash buildings and gas station/convenience store canopies, shall have the same architectural detail, design elements, and roof design as the primary structure; or 
(5)  All additions, alterations, and accessory buildings shall be compatible with the principal structure in design and materials. 
5.  Fenestration details such as windows, awnings, covered arcades, sills, shutters, relieves, trims, pilasters, accent tiles, quoins, reveals, cornices, arches, and decorative vents shall be provided along a minimum of 60 percent of the façade length of the front elevation. If a side or rear elevation is contiguous to a public street or residential use, 40 percent of the elevation must have fenestration details. 
6.  Entrances. 
a.  Primary customer entrances shall face a public street. Buildings larger than 30,000 square feet located on corner lots shall provide customer entrances on both streets, or a corner entrance. Additional entrances are encouraged facing parking lots, plazas, lake fronts, and adjacent buildings. When a property is adjacent to multiple public streets, the street that carries the greatest volume of traffic is the preferred orientation for the main entrance. 
b.  A primary and a secondary entry feature design element listed below shall be provided at each customer entrance: 
(1)  Primary. 
• Canopies, porte-cochere, or porticos. 
• Wall recess or projection a minimum of 12 inches in depth. 
• Covered arcades, a minimum of eight feet clear in width. 
• Peaked roof forms. 
• Arches, columns, or pilasters. 
• Landscape planters a minimum width of five feet. 
(2)  Secondary. 
• Overhangs, cornices, and eaves. 
• Decorative moldings or trims around windows and doors. 
• Covered public outdoor patio or plaza incorporated with entry area which is not part of a tenant space. 
• Special pavers, bricks, decorative concrete, or similar marked pavement treatment. 
• Architectural details, such as tile work or moldings. 
• Landscape planters a minimum width of five feet. 
7.  Roofs. 
a.  Buildings shall have a recognizable top consisting of but not limited to: cornice treatments, roof overhangs with brackets, steeped parapets, and richly textured materials. Color bands, typically used for advertising, are prohibited. 
b.  A primary roof is the portion of the roof that covers the main area of the building. A secondary roof is the portion of the roof covering smaller extensions of the structure. A primary and a secondary roof design element, selected from those listed below, shall be incorporated into the design: 
(1)  Primary. 
• Articulated parapet-The highest point of the parapet shall not at any point exceed 15 percent of the height of the supporting wall. 
• Pitched roof with minimum 12 inches overhanging eaves. 
• Three or more roof plane breaks or slopes per facade elevation. 
• Any combination of the above. 
(2)  Secondary. 
• Decorative roof details, such as dormers, cupolas, rafter tails, balconies, terraces, or exposed beams. 
• Three-dimensional cornices with decorative moldings. 
• Pediments, porticos, architectural features at entryways, or decorative towers. 
E.  Pedestrian amenities. 
1.  Where development abuts a collector or arterial road, walkways a minimum of five feet in width shall be provided from each adjacent perimeter public sidewalk to all customer entrances. Where development abuts a local road, walkways a minimum of four feet in width shall be provided from each adjacent perimeter public sidewalk to all customer entrances. All such walkways shall include the following: 
a.  One native canopy tree for each 30 linear feet with a maximum spacing of 50 feet between trees; trees may be massed to enhance views, create public spaces or otherwise improve the overall appearance of the project; and 
b.  A bench every 200 feet between the public right-of-way and the front customer entrance. 
2.  Walkways traversing vehicular use areas shall be accented with special pavers, bricks, decorative concrete, stamped concrete, or similar decorative pavement treatment consistent with the Town Center Development of Regional Impact theme. 
3.  Bicycle parking/storage shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 5. 
F.  Service, utility, display, and storage areas. In addition to the service, utility, display, and storage requirements of Chapter 13, developments within this district shall also meet the following requirements: 
1.  All utilities shall be located underground; 
2.  Outdoor storage of materials is prohibited; 
3.  Outdoor display of merchandise is permissible if the merchandise is related to the business occurring on the property, does not affect pedestrian and vehicular circulation, and can be stored either inside the building or in an area screened from public view when the business is not open; and 
4.  Vending machines located outside of buildings or structures are prohibited. 
G.  Site lighting. 
1.  Site lighting shall be provided along all streets, sidewalks, parking lots, steps/ramps, plazas, and other areas of high pedestrian use. 
2.  Light fixtures shall be spaced in a manner to provide soft and uniform illumination for a given area or corridor. 
3.  Light fixtures shall be consistent with Town Center Development of Regional Impact theme, style, materials, scale, proportion, color, and location. 
4.  Building lighting shall consist of light fixtures mounted on or near the building. 
5.  Areas to be lit shall have a system of hierarchy or priority to establish which elements or areas will have the most emphasis in regard to lighting intensity and color. High design areas such as building facades, entries, and walkways shall receive the highest priority. 
6.  Landscape lighting shall be of low-level illumination with tones and colors that enhance the look of the plant material. Fixtures and light source shall be concealed. 
7.  Light pole maximum heights: parking lots and access drives-30 feet; pedestrian walkways, terraces, plazas-20 feet. 
8.  Illumination shall be limited to the site and shall not cause glare or visual disturbance to adjacent properties. 
9.  Flood lighting, beacon, or search lights, except as limited by state of Florida or federal law, or drop lens fixtures are prohibited. 
10.  Animated lighting is prohibited. 
11.  See Chapter 9 for further site lighting criteria. 
H.  Landscape standards. The requirements contained in Chapter 11 shall apply to lands within the gateway overlay zone. Quercus virginiana (live oak) shall be used as the street tree where properties abut State Road 100. 
I.  Signage. The provisions of Chapter 12 shall regulate all signs in the gateway overlay zone; however, off-site signs are prohibited. 
    3.04.04.  Palm Coast Parkway Overlay Zone. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the Palm Coast Parkway overlay zone is to impose additional standards for new construction of nonresidential and multifamily development within its boundaries. The Palm Coast Parkway overlay zone is intended to: 
1.  Provide for additional access management controls to ensure that Palm Coast Parkway develops into an attractive functional roadway corridor meeting the needs of vehicles and pedestrians; and 
2.  Prevent disjointed, disorganized development caused by unplanned and uncoordinated building layout and design. 
B.  Description of district. The boundary of the Palm Coast Parkway Overlay Zone is delineated on the Official Zoning Map and is generally described as the corridor along Palm Coast Parkway between U.S. Highway 1 east to the Hammock Dunes Toll Bridge. 
C.  Site plan submittal requirements. Development within the overlay zone shall be subject to review and approval as outlined in Chapter 2. 
D.  Site planning guidelines. Site design shall specifically address the creation of an attractive, safe, and functional urban corridor. The requirements contained in Chapter 13 relating to general architectural design shall apply to lands within this overlay zone. 
1.  Building design, layout, and orientation. 
2.  Vehicular and pedestrian access and parking. 
3.  Mechanical equipment, utilities, and storage areas. 
E.  Building height. The maximum height permitted within the Palm Coast Parkway overlay zone is 50 feet, inclusive of all appurtenances, except for wireless telecommunication facilities. 
F.  Landscape standards. The requirements contained in Chapter 11 shall apply to lands within this overlay zone. Quercus virginiana (live oak) shall be used as the street tree. 
G.  Signage. The provisions of Chapter 12 shall regulate all signs in the Palm Coast Parkway overlay zone; however, off-site signs are prohibited. 
    3.04.05.  Airport Area Economic Development Incentive. 
A.  Purpose. The Palm Coast/Flagler County Airport Area Master Plan proposes specific areas for targeted economic development called Economic Development Areas (EDA). The Airport Area Economic Development Incentive specifies allowable uses and development standards for each EDA. These uses and standards are intended to encourage the development of targeted businesses and other industries at specific locations. The Airport Area Economic Development Incentive can be applied to three distinct areas, which are expected to develop with different intensities and development patterns: EDA-1, EDA-2, and EDA-3 (see Exhibit A to Ord. No. 2009-17). 
In order to encourage the desired development to occur within the EDAs specific location-based incentives have been developed. Property-owners (agents) that seek development approval through the Master Planned Development (MPD) rezone process may apply for the location-based development incentives. In addition to the location-based incentives, MPD projects located within the EDAs may also apply for performance-based bonuses. This section (1) introduces the EDA areas and the associated location-based incentives, (2) outlines the processes to access the location-based incentives and (3) introduces performance-based development bonuses that may be available to qualifying development. 
Portions of EDA Areas 1, 2, 3 are currently outside City boundaries. Airport Opportunity Areas A and C are currently outside the City boundaries. 
B.  Economic development areas. 
EDA #1 is located adjacent to the southeast side of the airport between the airport's boundary and Seminole Woods Boulevard. EDA #1 is intended to provide for industrial and office development that is compatible with the continuing operation and expansion of the Flagler County Airport. 
EDA #2 is located on the north side of Seminole Woods Boulevard. EDA #2 is intended to provide for compact mixed-use development. This area shall be developed as a neighborhood center characterized by employment and retail opportunities. Development shall emphasize pedestrian connectivity to the surrounding residential areas and established neighborhoods. 
EDA #3 is located between I-95 and Old Kings Highway. EDA #3 is intended to attract larger corporate office development and foster the development of a campus-like corporate park. Potential users include corporate offices, hotels, higher-density residential, and support uses that benefit from the close proximity to, and with high visibility from, Interstate 95. 
C.  Opportunity Areas A and C. 
Opportunity Area A is located on SR 100 north of the airport and across from Palm Coast's State Road 100 Community Redevelopment Area and the Gateway Overlay Zone. This area is located within Flagler County, is approximately 30 acres, and has commercial zoning. This site was identified as Opportunity Area A in the 2009 Palm Coast/Flagler County Airport Master. 
Opportunity Area C is located on SR 100 north of the airport and across from Palm Coast's State Road 100 Community Redevelopment Area and the Gateway Overlay Zone. This area is approximately 81 acres, located within Flagler County and has PUD zoning. This site was identified as Opportunity Area C in the 2009 Palm Coast/Flagler County Airport Master Plan. 
D.  Applicability. The development incentives and development standards contained in this section shall apply to all new development and redevelopment of sites within the EDAs and Opportunity Areas A and C. The incentives and standards are intended to encourage targeted industry development within the EDAs to promote superior site and building design, and improve the functional arrangement of buildings and site components, such as parking, utilities, loading, and service areas and promote a shared vision and compatible built environment as it relates to the SR 100 corridor, which includes the City of Palm Coast's Community Revitalization Area (CRA), Gateway Overlay Zone and Towncenter Master Planned Development (MPD) related-development on the northern side of SR 100. 
E.  Approval process. Owners of property within the EDAs have the option of developing under two scenarios as follows: 
1.  Current zoning based (entitlement) development. Applicants have the option of developing their properties subject to the zoning classification of the property. Properties developed based on their current zoning are not eligible for any incentives. 
2.  Rezone to Master Planned Development (MPD). Rezone the property to MPD which will qualify the property for incentives as follows: 
a.  Location-based incentives detailed in Subsection E. 
b.  Performance-based incentives that are outlined in Subsection F. 
F.  Location-based development incentives. In order to encourage economic development and job creation at the Economic Development Areas and implement the economic development objectives of the Palm Coast/Flagler County Airport Area Master Plan, the following location-based incentives may be utilized by development reviewed through the MPD process. Note that incentives may restrict building height and/or open space in certain areas. The existing zoning development thresholds are shown to illustrate the Overlay areas' incentives. 
Economic Development Area 1 
Regulations Current Zoning Thresholds Incentives* City of Palm Coast Flagler County PSP COM-2 IND-1 IND-PUD Open Space 30% 30% 30% (1) 30% Height 100' 2 100' 2 65' 2 (1) 2 100' 2 FAR .30 .40 .35 (1) .50  
(1) To be determined during the development agreement approval process. 
(2) Must comply with the Airport Approach Hazard Overlay and FAR 77 requirements. 
* Location-based incentives available only through development participating in MPD process. 
Economic Development Area 2 
Regulations Flagler County

Current Zoning ThresholdsIncentives* AC NRC PUD PUD Mixed Use and Non-Residential Residential Open Space 75% (1) (1) 40% area wide 40% area wide Height No Max. 2 (1) 2 (1) 2 75' 2 45' 2 Res. Density 1 unit/20 acres 1 unit/acre 1 unit/acre 12 units/acre 10 units/acre FAR N/A (1) (1) .50 N/A ISR .25 (1) (1) .60 N/A  
(1) To be determined during the development agreement approval process. 
(2) Must comply with the Airport Approach Hazard Overlay and FAR 77 requirements. 
* Location based incentives available only through development participating in MPD process. 
Economic Development Area 3 
Regulations Flagler County

Current Zoning 

ThresholdsIncentives* AC Open Space 75% 40% per site Height No Max. 100' 1 Res. Density 1 unit/20 acres Min. 8 to Max. 12 units/acre FAR N/A .55 ISR .25 .60  
(1) To be determined during the development agreement approval process. 
* Location based incentives available only through development participating in MPD process. 
G.  Performance based development bonuses. Performance-based development bonuses may be available for projects that are located within one of the EDAs and that are also utilizing the MPD approval process. These additional bonuses are meant to complement any financial or other incentives that may have been offered by the City to attract targeted developments to the economic development areas and do not exclude the use of additional incentives. These additional incentives shall be based on specific project design and/or satisfaction of other performance criteria as stipulated by the City through the use of a development agreement. Approval of the bonus, including terms and conditions shall be negotiated by the applicant with the City, on a case-by-case basis. Any potential incentives, developed during the negotiations with City, shall be detailed in an associated development agreement. Final approval of the development agreement and the potential use of incentives that may be utilized by the applicant will be at the discretion of the City Council. 
1.  Non-residential intensity (floor area ratio-FAR) bonus. 
a.  Developments that incorporate the use of green building practices (as identified by the United States Green Building Council and/or the Florida Green Building Coalition including but not limited to, green roofs, energy efficient windows, solar energy, reused or recycled materials, renewable materials, use of grey water, etc.) in the design and materials of a building, and can demonstrate a significant energy and water consumption reduction may receive a maximum increase of 0.25 FAR. 
b.  The use of shared parking helps reduce the amount of paved surface in the case of surface parking, or building mass in the case of structure parking. Therefore, mixed-use projects within the EDA overlay using the shared parking standards would be eligible for an increase of 0.25 FAR. 
2.  Open space requirement reduction bonus. 
a.  Stormwater management facilities are considered "open space" for the purpose of meeting the open space requirement. Combining such facilities with neighboring properties may decrease the need for buffers around ponds. Therefore, the use of shared or off-site stormwater management facilities for multiple developments may allow for a reduction in the open space requirement of the master plan development by up to five percent. 
b.  Developments within the EDA overlay may reduce the open space requirement by a maximum of five percent if the development incorporates the use of a permeable or semi-permeable surface for parking spaces. The amount of permeable/semi-permeable surface shall be no less than the proposed reduction in open space. In no case shall stormwater requirements be reduced. Stormwater management facilities shall meet all applicable City and St. Johns River Water Management District rules and regulations. 
3.  Parking space requirement reduction bonus. The City encourages development design and use concepts that provide transportation alternatives that may reduce the dependence on and the use of automobiles. The use of Transportation Demand Management (TDM) practices in the design and construction of development projects may qualify a project for a reduction in minimum parking space requirements by a maximum of ten percent. TDM practices and facilities include but are not limited to: 
• Inclusion of employee drop-off and pick-up areas in the development; 
• Inclusion of cab (taxi) stand areas in the development; 
• Inclusion of on-site, employee service facilities such as, daycare facilities, cafeterias, etc., in the development; 
• Inclusion in project design and development of improved connections to planned or existing bike or pedestrian paths to the facility; 
• Provision of bicycle storage facilities (racks/lockers) and changing facilities for employees (locker rooms and showers); and 
• Inclusion in project design and development of facilities to accommodate planned or existing mass transit (buses). This may include, but is not limited to, bus turnouts, bus shelters, bus lanes, and park and ride lots. 
4.  Setback requirement reduction bonus. The minimum required setbacks may be reduced by a maximum of five feet for the front setback and two feet for the rear and side setbacks if additional landscaping (must exceed 20 percent of the required plant material and provide a variety of species) is provided within the required buffer yards. Setback reductions are not available for parcels local on the following roadways: Seminole Woods Boulevard, Belle Terre Boulevard, and Old King's Road. 
5.  Green development LEED certification (fee refund). The Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) Green Building Rating System, developed by the U.S. Green Building Council (USGBC), provides a suite of standards for environmentally sustainable construction. The Florida Green Building Coalition (FGBC) also offers Green Building certification. If a completed project receives a LEED certification from the USGBC, the developer may request a refund up to 60 percent of the associated Rezoning Application Fee and Technical Site Plan Application Review Fee. The applicant shall provide the City acceptable documentation of the project receiving LEED certification from the USGBC. If a completed project receives a Green Building certification from the FGBC, or an equivalent certification (such as the National Association of Home Builders National Green Building Standards), the developer may request a refund up to 40 percent of the associated Rezoning Fees and Site Development Review Fees. The applicant shall provide the City acceptable documentation of the project receiving LEED certification and Green Building certification from the USGBC and the FGBC respectively, or documentation of an equivalent certification. The development agreement associated with the MPD project seeking this refund must contain language stating that the developer will be seeking said refunds upon completion of the project and after issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
Specifically for Opportunity Areas A and C, state and federal wetland permitting standards shall be considered as acceptable documentation to verify compliance with the City's ULDC and Comprehensive Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2009-17, § 3(Exh. A), 7-21-09; Ord. No. 2015-9 , § 2, 8-4-15; Ord. No. 2018-14 , § 3(Exh. A), 5-15-18) 
Sec. 3.05. - Interpretations. 
    3.05.01.  Lot width and frontage. Lot frontage shall be measured along the front property line, while lot width shall be measured along the front setback line. 
    3.05.02.  Building setbacks. Building setbacks shall be measured from the property line or, if applicable, from the edge of a private street or the boundary line of an access easement located on the subject property to the wall of the building. The required building setbacks determine the building envelope. In no event shall a structure encroach within an easement, inclusive of eaves, unless specifically approved by the Land Use Administrator. 
A.  Determining building setbacks. Front, side, and rear yard setbacks shall be determined based on the following. In cases of uncertainty, the Land Use Administrator shall determine the setbacks based on the following guidelines: 
1.  The front yard setback shall be considered that portion, typically along the lot's narrowest part, which abuts the street or roadway where access is provided. Consideration shall be given to a structure's orientation in making a front yard setback determination (i.e. the front of a building faces the front of the lot). 
2.  The rear yard setback typically runs parallel to the front yard setback and does not connect to the front yard setback. 
3.  The side yard setbacks connect the front and rear setbacks and are perpendicular to them on square or rectangular lots. 
4.  Front setback on flag lots shall be measured at lot width and the lot frontage shall be determined on a case-by-case basis with consideration to surrounding property and dwelling unit orientation. 



B.  Permitted improvements within the required building setbacks. The following improvements are permitted within the required setbacks (outside of the building envelope): 
1.  Man-made landscape features not exceeding three feet in height, including related minor structures described in Section 11.03 of Chapter 11. 
2.  Parking areas and associated driveways, provided they are not located within side yard setback areas for attached and detached single-family residential units, except when it provides access to a garage. 
3.  Private sidewalks and walkways provided they do not exceed six feet in width for detached single-family residential units and duplex units. 
4.  Concrete pads 50 square feet or less. 
5.  Signs. 
6.  Minor utility installations including, but not limited to, fire hydrants, electrical and telephone boxes, and backflow prevention mechanisms. Some of these features may require screening in accordance with Chapter 11. 
7.  Aboveground mechanical equipment such as air conditioning units, permanently installed generators, and pool pumps; provided, however, that this equipment shall be prohibited in a front setback area, and shall be screened in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 11. 
8.  Cantilevered patios, porches, and decks as well as sills, cornices, chimneys, flues, eaves, or other roof overhangs may extend a maximum of 30 inches into a setback area, but are prohibited within easements. 
9.  Sheds per Section 4.01 in Chapter 4. 
C.  Additional setbacks for multistory buildings. Additional setbacks for multistory buildings adjacent to a single-family residential zoning district shall be required for compatibility purposes. Any multistory building adjacent to a single-family zoning district shall provide an additional setback minimum of ten feet for each story above the first story. 
D.  Waterline setbacks. Stormwater retention facilities, canals, or other water features may be located on the lot or parcel. In these circumstances, the Land Use Administrator may determine that it is applicable to measure the setback from the bulkhead, water line, or mean high water line rather than the lot or parcel line. 
E.  Reduction for public purpose. When an existing setback on a developed lot or parcel is reduced due to the conveyance of land to a federal, state, or local government for a public purpose, the minimum setback requirement of the zoning district shall be reduced by the amount conveyed, up to a maximum of 50 percent of the setback requirement. 
F.  Wireless communication facilities and equipment compounds. Wireless communication facilities and equipment compounds shall have the same setback requirements as the zoning district in which they are located but no less than ten feet; shall have a minimum distance of 150 feet from all off-site residential zoned property, residential dwelling unit and the rights-of-way of Palm Coast Parkway, Belle Terre Parkway, Belle Terre Boulevard, and Old Kings Road. 
    3.05.03.  Calculating densities and intensities. 
A.  Residential densities. 
1.  The determination of the maximum number of residential dwelling units or lots permitted on a residentially zoned parcel shall be calculated based upon the gross upland acreage in the predevelopment condition (i.e. prior to the property being subdivided into lots). 
2.  Twenty-five percent of wetland and/or imperiled upland habitat areas preserved from the predevelopment condition may be counted as "net upland acreage" in determining the maximum number of units as discussed in Paragraph A above. To be counted as preserved area, a wetland and/or imperiled upland habitat must be placed in a conservation easement, a separate conservation tract, or otherwise perpetually protected in the post development condition. 
3.  Application of the density/intensity calculations provides only a theoretical maximum dwelling unit or lot yield. It does not guarantee that the development will be approved to attain the maximum lot yield. Application of other development standards may substantially decrease the lot yield. 
B.  Nonresidential intensities; impervious surface ratios; floor area ratio. 
1.  In calculating impervious surface ratios or floor area ratios an applicant may get credit for an off-site drainage facility site. The amount to be credited shall be proportional to the size of the site in relation to all the sites served by the same facility. 
2.  Lots served by a master stormwater management system, where drainage facilities under common ownership are located off-site, may count a portion of the off-site drainage lot, tract, or parcel in calculating impervious surface ratios or floor area ratios. The portion of the off-site drainage property that is counted shall be in direct proportion to the size of the subject lot as compared to all of the lots being served. 
C.  Densities and intensities in mixed use districts. In zoning districts that allow mixed uses, the same land area shall not be counted for the purpose of both residential density and nonresidential intensity. The calculation methodology used shall be as defined by administrative rule. 
    3.05.04.  Recreation level of service. All residential projects of 25 units or more shall provide recreational land to meet the level of service standard adopted in the Recreation and Open Space Element of the City's Comprehensive Plan, except for nursing homes and assisted living facilities or other residential care facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, § 13, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2015-9 , § 5, 8-4-15) 
Chapter 4 - CONDITIONS FOR LIMITED SPECIFIC USES AND ACTIVITIES 

Sec. 4.01. - Accessory Structures. 
    This section provides specific development standards for swimming pools, fences, walls, sheds, residential garages, generators, clotheslines, seawalls, and docks. 
    4.01.01.  General provisions for accessory structures. 
A.  Location. Accessory structures, other than fences or as otherwise specified in this Code, shall not be located in public drainage or utility easements or within the required building setbacks. In addition, all accessory structures, other than fences, walls, arbors, trellises, pergolas, and detached garages or as otherwise specified in this Code, shall be located behind the front and side street building facades of the principal structure. However, on corner lots, swimming pools and their enclosures, may be located in front of the side street building facade but shall meet the front yard setback requirements in lieu of the side street setback. Screening accessory structures with a fence or foundation plants (may be required in Chapter 11) when facing a right-of-way, golf course, canal, or other similar highly visible area. 
B.  Construction and occupancy. Permits for accessory structures shall not be issued until a permit has been issued for the principal structure. Seawalls are not considered accessory structures and building permits for these facilities may be issued in advance of the principal structure in accordance with City regulations. 
C.  Architecture. Refer to Chapter 13 for design standards. 
    4.01.02.  Fences and walls. 
A.  General requirements. 
1.  Setbacks, orientation, and placement. 
a.  Fences shall be installed with the finished side facing the exterior of the property. 
b.  No fence or wall shall interfere with drainage on a site. 
c.  Fences and walls may be located within an easement as long as they do not interfere with utilities; provided, however, such structures are subject to removal and replacement at the property owner's expense by the requesting utility agency. 
d.  Fences and walls in front of the front building facade of residential dwellings shall only be permitted in the AGR, EST-1, and EST-2 Districts. 
e.  Refer to Chapter 11 for applicable buffer and screening requirements for fences and walls. 
f.  Decorative walls and solid fences are permissible surrounding the perimeter of a development that is at least five acres in size. 
g.  Gates are considered parts of fences and walls and are regulated accordingly. Gates shall not open or swing onto neighboring properties. 
2.  Height. 
a.  The maximum height shall be measured from finished grade to the top of the fence or wall. The finished grade shall not be altered to increase fence height and where a berm is constructed, the height of the berm over the finished grade shall be included in determining fence height. Decorative wall columns and occasional architectural embellishments to fences may extend up to 12 inches above the maximum height permitted. 
b.  The maximum height of any fence or wall located in interior side or rear yards behind the nearest front building facade shall be six feet, unless otherwise specified in this Code or as approved by the Land Use Administrator for health, safety, or environmental protection purposes. 
c.  A fence or wall on a residential lot located to the rear of the principal structure and within 20 feet of a saltwater waterway is limited to a height of four feet, except in the following situations: 
(1)  An open fence is allowed to a height of six feet. 
(2)  A fence or wall enclosing a pool deck that is setback at least 7.5 feet from the side property lines and at least 15 feet from the saltwater waterway is allowed to a height of six feet. 
d.  Within the EST Districts, the maximum height of any fence or wall in front of the front building facade or located in a street side yard shall be a maximum of four feet. 
e.  Fences immediately surrounding civic or public recreational sports playing fields located on lots over one acre in size may be constructed to a maximum height of 12 feet and hooded backstops for diamond sports may be increased to a maximum height of 28 feet, with approval of the Land Use Administrator. 
3.  Design and Materials. 
a.  Fences shall be constructed utilizing rot-resistant material for any part of the fence coming in contact with the ground. All fences shall be constructed of customary fencing materials and finishes. Wood and vinyl fences shall meet the color standards of Section 13.02.06.B.1. or be finished in a wood stain or simulated wood finish in a non-prohibited color as outlined in Section 13.02.06.B.3. Fences constructed of treated lumber may remain unfinished. 
b.  Chainlink, aluminum (except for decorative aluminum fences), or similar fences shall be prohibited in yards fronting along arterial and collector roadways. 
c.  Chainlink, aluminum, or similar metal fences shall be black or bronze in color, except that aluminum fences may also be white in color. Chainlink fences shall not have slats, fabric or similar types of screening materials attached to them. 
d.  Walls shall be made of the following materials: 
(1)  Brick, Norwegian brick, jumbo brick or stone. 
(2)  Split-faced block or finished masonry walls where block seams are not visible. Finished masonry walls shall also include a tile, brick, or decorative trim at or near the top of the wall. 
(3)  Wrought iron or aluminum fence in combination with brick, jumbo brick, or finished masonry columns. 
(4)  Pre-cast concrete having a simulated wood stone or brick pattern. 
(5)  Other materials as approved by the Land Use Administrator. 
e.  Walls shall have columns spaced as follows: 
(1)  Twenty-foot maximum spacing on walls 100 linear feet, or less. 
(2)  Thirty-foot maximum spacing on walls 101-200 linear feet. 
(3)  Forty-foot maximum spacing on walls over 200 linear feet 
f.  No barbed wire, razor wire, or electrically charged fence shall be erected, unless otherwise specified in this section. Broken glass, steel spikes, or other sharp objects intended to restrict access along the top edge of a fence or wall are prohibited. 
g.  Chicken wire, field fences, and other similar fence types are prohibited, except in the utilization of bona-fide agricultural purposes in the AGR and EST-2 Districts. 
B.  Nonresidential districts. 
1.  Setbacks may be required between fences or walls to property lines in order to provide landscape buffers in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 11. 
2.  Within the IND, COM, and PSP Districts, the following shall apply: 
a.  Fences and walls may exceed maximum permitted height by up to two feet if they are part of an approved or required landscape buffer meeting the requirements of Chapter 11. 
b.  Fences or walls needed to provide extra security or safety may exceed maximum permitted height by up to two feet, with an additional 18 inches of barbed wire or other material upon approval by the Land Use Administrator. 
C.  Special provisions for subdivision entrance features. 
1.  Fences and walls used as decorative features at subdivision entrances may exceed maximum permitted heights by up to four feet upon approval by the Land Use Administrator. This measurement shall exclude decorative wall columns, which may extend a maximum of 12 inches beyond the top of the wall or 18 inches above the height of a wall framing an identification sign. Light fixtures may extend up to 42 inches above the height of the wall. 
2.  Entrance walls and landscaping shall be located within a designated easement, tract, or common area. 
3.  Wall jogs and spanned footer intervals shall be used, where possible, to avoid existing trees. Buffer width requirements may be waived to the extent necessary to protect the specimen trees. 
4.  The main entrance wall shall be landscaped in accordance with Chapter 11. 
D.  Special provisions for fences and walls in the AGR Districts. Fences used to contain farm animals or to separate crops relative to bona fide agricultural uses are exempt from this section. 
    4.01.03.  Garages, attached and detached. 
A.  General requirements. 
1.  Enclosed garages shall be constructed in association with the construction of all detached single-family residential units, duplexes, and townhouses. 
2.  Garages shall not be converted into any other use, unless another garage is constructed in compliance with this Code. 
3.  Garage units for multifamily projects shall be provided for a minimum of one-third of the proposed multifamily units. 
4.  Garages shall not exceed the height of the first story of the principal dwelling unit. 
5.  Carports shall be prohibited in all residential districts except for developments in the MHD District. 
B.  Attached garages. 
1.  Shall have a maximum depth of 30 feet. 
2.  Shall not exceed 50 percent of the total living area of the principal dwelling unit. 
C.  Detached garages. 
1.  Detached garages are permitted in all zoning districts; however, in the MHD District special exception approval is required. 
2.  Detached garages shall have a maximum building footprint of 500 square feet. 
D.  Garages in neotraditional developments. For garage requirements in a neotraditional development, refer to Section 4.08. 
    4.01.04.  Generators, permanently installed. The following standards shall apply to all permanently installed generators: 
A.  Generators are prohibited in the required front and street side yard and prohibited in front of the front building line of the principal structure. 
B.  Generators may be operated for testing purposes one time per week, excluding Sundays, for a period not exceeding 30 minutes between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
C.  A maximum of one generator is allowed per single-family, duplex, or townhouse residential dwelling unit and one generator is allowed per multiple family building. 
D.  Generators shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from the rear property line in all zoning districts. 
E.  Generators shall be set back a minimum of three feet from the side interior property line(s) in all zoning districts, but shall not be located within an easement. 
    4.01.05.  Residential docking facilities along saltwater and freshwater canals (and intracoastal waterway, as applicable). 
A.  Prohibitions. 
1.  Under no circumstances shall a vessel docked or moored off a residential docking facility be used as a live aboard watercraft. 
2.  Accessory structures and concrete decks are prohibited along a seawall or in the rear easements and setbacks of property along waterbodies. 
B.  General standards. 
1.  Drainage rights-of-way. 
a.  Any groundcovers disturbed in the drainage rights-of-way during construction or maintenance activities shall be promptly replaced and properly maintained by the abutting property owner to prevent erosion. 
b.  Drainage rights-of-way shall not be filled in such a way as to reduce the cross-sectional area used for flow of stormwater. 
2.  Dredging and spoil management in saltwater canals. Dredging activities shall be conducted by a qualified contractor and consistent with the applicable best management practices concerning dredging operations and performed only after approval by the Land Use Administrator. Dredging activities shall be accomplished in conformance with existing permits. 
3.  Safety. 
a.  All structures and associated facilities shall be properly constructed and secured to prevent potential hazards from floating into the waterbody. 
b.  To eliminate potential waterbody contamination, all structures shall be constructed with materials that do not result in contamination. 
c.  The City shall require removal of derelict vessels and lifts consistent with City standards. 
4.  Roofs. 
a.  Roofs over docks and lifts shall be a maximum height of 13 feet above seawall cap for saltwater canals and above the deck for freshwater canals. 
b.  Roofs shall be constructed with the same material and of the same color as the principal structure adjacent to the waterbody. 
c.  All roofs shall be "Hip" style roofs. 
d.  All roofs shall be constructed with a minimum 41/2:12 pitch. 
e.  For roofed structures on freshwater canals, the size of a roof shall not be greater than 12 feet by 14 feet and the roof overhang shall not exceed two feet. 
f.  The maximum length of roofs located over a dock slip, dock lift, or water on saltwater canals shall be 26 feet of dock roof for the first 60 feet of property frontage, plus four feet of roof length for every five feet of property frontage thereafter, not to exceed 46 feet. Roof length for property with a frontage less than 60 feet shall be determined by the Land Use Administrator on a case-by-case basis based on generally accepted planning practices. 
C.  Saltwater canal single-family residential docking facilities. 
1.  Placement of docking facilities. The location of docks, lifts, and boathouses within the navigable waters of the City shall be determined on an individual basis, with visual impact, navigational use, and aesthetic quality of prime concern. 
2.  Single pilings. Single pilings or "dolphins" are prohibited, except for installation alongside a seawall or bulkhead. 
3.  Setbacks and size. 
a.  The minimum setbacks from a projection of the side property line to the structure shall be a minimum of ten feet. Other setbacks may be considered by the Land Use Administrator based upon lot size, location, easements, existing structures, and navigation. 
b.  The length of all docks, inclusive of all components, shall not exceed 65 percent of the property frontage along the canal. The size of the vessel and location of adjacent docks shall be considered to ensure that the vessel does not interfere in any manner with the navigation of ingress and egress. Setbacks may be increased or decreased for lots less than 60 feet in width or lots that have a storm drainage easement. 
c.  Vessels shall be docked/moored parallel to the property line/seawall. Docks/moorings perpendicular to the property line/seawall are prohibited. 
d.  Other than cantilevered safety walks, all dock walkways shall be no less than three feet or greater than six feet. The maximum width for docks, including boatlifts, shall be determined based on the width of the waterbody as described in Table 4-2. Dock width shall be measured at right angles from the boundary of the waterbody at the proposed structure location. 
Table 4-2. Maximum Dock Widths for Saltwater Canals 
Waterbody Width Maximum Dock Width Less than 100 feet 12 feet 100 feet or greater 16 feet  
4.  Floating docks. 
a.  Floating docks shall not exceed a length of 20 feet as measured parallel to the canal frontage. 
b.  Floating docks may be used in conjunction with permanent docking structures but must meet the criteria established herein. 
5.  Boatlifts within canal areas. 
a.  All boatlifts, inclusive of all components, shall be mounted or installed within the 12 feet or 16 feet dimension allowed for structures in the waterbody. 
b.  Boatlifts on waterfront lots with dimensions less than 60 feet of water frontage or lots with unusual conditions are not allowed unless granted an administrative waiver by the Land Use Administrator. The location of easements, culvert pipes, and navigability are unusual conditions that may be considered. 
6.  Cantilever safety walk extensions. Cantilever safety walk extensions may be approved by the Land Use Administrator based upon the following criteria: 
a.  The length of a cantilever safety walk extension shall be the minimum necessary to access the watercraft. 
b.  Cantilever safety walk extensions shall not extend more then 12 inches beyond a 12-foot boat slip or lift and pilings. 
D.  Freshwater canal residential docking facilities. 
1.  Docks and decks over the waterbody shall meet the Florida Department of Environmental Protection minimum clearance requirements. 
2.  Structures shall not project into the waterbody more than eight feet from the shoreline at normal water level. 
3.  No permanent source of electrical power, water, telephone, gas, or other items requiring piping or cable shall be extended onto the drainage rights-of-way. 
4.  Floating docks are not permitted. 
5.  Roofed structures shall not contain enclosed sides including, but not limited to, solid material, screening, or clear plastic. 
    4.01.06.  Seawalls and revetments. 
A.  Permit required. A building permit shall be obtained prior to commencement of new construction and reconstruction or repair of seawalls and revetments. Seawalls and revetments shall be constructed in accordance with the following requirements. 
B.  Prevent soil erosion, runoff and debris. 
1.  Prior to construction of a seawall or revetment on undeveloped property, the following actions shall be taken to prevent soil erosion and protect the waterbody from runoff and debris: 
a.  Only the minimum area necessary for access and construction of the seawall or revetment and backfill shall be cleared. 
b.  A minimum 15-foot wide buffer of natural vegetation shall be preserved along each side lot line starting at a point ten feet from the waterfront. 
c.  Access to the waterfront shall be limited to an area no wider than 15 feet located in the interior of the lot. 
d.  A 30-foot wide buffer shall be preserved along all property lines abutting a street right-of-way except for the area cleared for the access point. Tree protecting barricades shall be erected around the perimeter of the buffer areas that are to remain. 
2.  Prior to construction, reconstruction, or repair of a seawall or revetment, a floating turbidity barrier shall be installed to prevent siltration into the canal until the slopes are stabilized. The ends of returns and the backside of the seawall or revetment shall be sodded or stabilized with other appropriate vegetation a minimum of five feet from the edge of the structure, or stabilized with erosion control devices, to prevent siltration on adjacent properties or into the canal. 
3.  Prior to the reconstruction or repair of existing seawalls and revetments, backfill shall be deposited behind the seawall in order to establish a swale not less than five feet from the seawall to collect any eroded material before it reaches the canal. 
a.  Construction and vegetative debris on the site shall be continually removed throughout the construction activities and when construction is complete. 
b.  When construction is complete, all cleared areas shall be sodded with native or water-conserving turf grasses. It shall be the responsibility of the lot owner to insure sodded areas are watered until established. 
C.  Violations. It is prohibited and unlawful: 
1.  To allow material to be deposited or to erode into any waterbody and fail to remove it. 
2.  For a contractor to fail to backfill bulkheads within 30 days after construction or repair of the bulkhead. 
D.  Exceptions to violations. The following are exceptions to the violations listed above: 
1.  Temporary waterbodies created to hold runoff water during construction. 
2.  Special exceptions granted by the City on applications where sufficient reason and safeguards are shown to protect the public interest. 
E.  Vertical seawalls. The following establishes criteria for construction, repair, and replacement of vertical seawalls in all saltwater canals in the City. 
1.  Vertical seawalls shall have reinforced concrete cap, with top of cap to be set at elevation two and one-half feet, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD 1988), above mean sea level (1929 NAVD) or match abutting existing caps. Cap height exposed face shall be 12 inches. 
2.  Vertical seawalls shall be located at and along the property line common with the waterbody or approved otherwise by other agencies. 
3.  The materials for all vertical seawalls shall be reinforced concrete or vinyl. 
4.  Vertical seawalls shall be grey in color. No painted surfaces are permitted. 
F.  Landscape. Any groundcover disturbed in the drainage rights-of-way during construction or maintenance activities shall be promptly replaced and properly maintained by the abutting property owner to stabilize the soil and prevent erosion. 
G.  Safety. All structures and associated facilities shall be properly constructed and secured to prevent potential hazards from floating into the waterbody. 
    4.01.07.  Sheds. 
A.  Permitted locations and size. 
1.  Only one shed, not to exceed 200 square feet, shall be allowed per lot. 
2.  The shed shall not be located in front of the building line of the principal structure. 
3.  Sheds shall be set back at least ten feet from the rear property line and shall meet the interior side setback requirements of the district. However, sheds that do not exceed 100 square feet in size may be located up to five feet from the abutting interior side or rear property line. 
4.  In no event shall a shed or any part thereof, be permitted within an easement. 
B.  Height. The maximum building height for any shed shall be 12 feet. 
    4.01.08.  Swimming pools. 
A.  General. 
1.  Lights used to illuminate any swimming pool shall be arranged and shaded to reflect light away from adjoining properties. 
2.  All swimming pools, hot tubs, and spas shall be enclosed by a permanent full screen enclosure or with a permanent wall or fence of a least four feet in height. Any solid roof covering for a swimming pool, hot tub, or spa shall adhere to the setbacks of the principal structure. 
B.  Setback requirements. 
1.  Setbacks for pools with decks shall be measured from the outer edge of the pool deck. 
2.  Setbacks for pools without decks, including above-ground pools, shall be measured from the outer walls of the pool. 
    4.01.09.  Clotheslines. 
A.  All clotheslines must be located behind the dwelling and shielded as much as practical from view of any street. 
B.  Outdoor revolving umbrella style or 'T' posts are acceptable. 
C.  Attaching clotheslines to trees is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, §§ 14-25, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2015-08 , § 3, 7-21-15; Ord. No. 2015-16 , § 2, 12-1-15) 
Sec. 4.02. - Adult Entertainment and Sexually-Oriented Businesses. 
    4.02.01.  Applicability. This section applies to businesses that provide entertainment or offer sexually-oriented material or activities as their primary or dominant theme and whose intended market is persons 18 years of age or older. Businesses that market sexually-oriented material include, but are not limited to, the following: 
A.  Adult book and video stores. 
B.  Adult motels. 
C.  Adult performance establishments. 
D.  Adult theaters. 
    4.02.02.  Compliance with City and State Law. Adult entertainment and sexually-oriented businesses shall comply with Chapter 16, Article III in the City of Palm Coast Code of Ordinances and F.S. ch. 847. 
    4.02.03.  Adult entertainment and sexually-oriented facility design standards. Each adult entertainment establishment and sexually-oriented business licensed to operate in the City shall comply with the following standards in addition to the architectural standards set forth in Chapter 13 and all other applicable provisions of the Land Development Code: 
A.  Building design. 
1.  The building shall not exceed 3,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
2.  The maximum building height shall be 35 feet. 
3.  There shall be separate entrances for employees and customers, which shall be labeled as such. Both entries shall occur at the rear or back of the building rather than in front whenever practicable, as determined by the Land Use Administrator, based upon generally accepted land use principles and the configuration of the particular parcel. 
4.  Off street parking shall comply with requirements in Chapter 5. 
B.  Signage. Signs shall be subject to the requirements of Chapter 12. 
C.  Existing buildings. Each adult entertainment establishment and sexually-oriented business desiring to locate in an existing building shall comply with all design standards requirements as set forth in this section. 
Sec. 4.03. - Agricultural Uses. 
    4.03.01.  Bona fide agricultural uses. 
A.  License required. All bona fide agricultural uses shall obtain a license from the Department of Agriculture if required by law. 
B.  Odor; dust. All agricultural uses shall be operated so no odor or dust producing substance or use, except in connection with cultivation of permitted uses, is conducted within 100 feet of the property line adjacent to a parcel or lot located within the SFR or MFR Districts. 
    4.03.02.  Equestrian uses. 
A.  Number of horses. A maximum of one mature animal and offspring less than one year of age shall be permitted per acre of property. 
B.  Riding facilities. 
1.  No structure housing the animals shall be located any closer than 50 feet of the property line adjacent to any residentially zoned parcel. This perimeter setback shall be increased to 100 feet for riding arena facilities with outdoor lighting and seating. 
2.  Riding trails may be permitted within any required buffer. 
    4.03.03.  Mining and soil extraction. 
A.  General requirements. 
1.  Appropriate measures must be utilized to prevent fugitive dust from the excavation and haul truck traffic. All roads shall be maintained and free of sand and other related construction debris. 
2.  If applicable, St. Johns River Water Management District permits are required for dewatering or surface water discharge activities. 
3.  Perimeter buffering shall be utilized to limit visibility and noise of operation from adjacent land uses as appropriate, which may include fencing, earthen berms, existing vegetation, installed vegetation, or a combination thereof. 
4.  The City may set hours of operation to minimize adverse impacts to adjacent land uses so as not to produce a public nuisance. Excavation and haul traffic may only occur during daylight hours. 
5.  Appropriate fencing or security measures shall be provided to safeguard the site from unauthorized entry. 
6.  Reclamation of excavation sites shall resemble a natural system to the greatest extent feasible in accordance with federal and state requirements. 
B.  Soil extraction. For purposes of this section, soil extraction shall mean public or private commercial activities specifically undertaken for the primary purpose of excavating clean fill (i.e. clay, sand) from upland sites to be removed for the purpose of being utilized for an offsite project. This excludes installation of utilities, stormwater facilities, wetlands, and excavating, grading, filling, and moving of earth in conjunction with the installation of infrastructure to serve a subdivision or activities undertaken in conjunction with improvements approved as part of a development order. Soil extraction facilities shall demonstrate compliance with the following minimum setbacks measured from the edge of the excavation pit or area: 
1.  One hundred feet from the project perimeter and increased to 200 feet abutting any property zoned SFR, MFR, or MHD. 
2.  Minimum excavation setback of 25 feet, with an average setback width of 50 feet, from optimal wetlands; an average setback width of 25 feet, but no less than 15 feet from moderate and minimal wetlands; and a setback of 75 feet from a named wetland system, creek, river, saltwater canal, freshwater canal, or other open drainage feature or other surface water of the City. 
C.  Mining. For purposes of this section, mining operations shall include facilities that require a permit from the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Mining and Reclamation. Mining operations shall demonstrate compliance with the following requirements: 
1.  Setback requirements. Mining facilities shall include the following minimum setbacks measured from the edge of the excavation area: 
a.  Two hundred fifty feet from the project perimeter and increased to 500 feet abutting any property zoned SFR, MFR, or MHD. 
b.  Minimum excavation setback of 25 feet, with an average setback width of 50 feet, from optimal wetlands; an average setback width of 25 feet, but no less than 15 feet from moderate and minimal wetlands; and a setback of 75 feet from a named wetland system, creek, river, saltwater canal, freshwater canal, or other open drainage feature or other surface water of the City. 
2.  Blasting. No blasting shall be conducted within the City unless it can be demonstrated that said activity is being undertaken in a manner that in no way adversely affects the health, safety, and welfare of the residents and businesses within the City. 
    4.03.04.  Aviaries. An aviary shall comply with all applicable state regulations. The following general requirements apply: 
A.  Minimum setback from any residentially zoned property shall be 100 feet from the property line. Otherwise, the structure shall be located no closer than 50 feet from any property line. 
B.  Reasonable precautions shall be taken to prevent an environment suitable for pathogens that cause public health hazards such as psittacosis, cryptococcosis, and histoplasmosis. Occurrence of any of the aforementioned illnesses to the property owner or an occupant of the property shall be reported by the property owner to the Flagler County Health Department. 
Sec. 4.04. - Alcoholic Beverage Sales. 
    Refer to Chapter 7, Article I and Article II in the City of Palm Coast Code of Ordinances. 
Sec. 4.05. - Cemeteries. 
    Within the zoning districts permitting cemeteries, the following regulations shall apply: 
A.  No graves or burial lots/sites shall be located closer than 40 feet from all rights-of-way and no closer than ten feet from all other boundary lines of the subject property. 
B.  Adequate means of ingress and egress for vehicles shall be provided within the site in order to provide an easy flow of traffic while funeral processions are entering or leaving the site. 
Sec. 4.06. - Community Residential Homes. 
    Community residential homes shall meet the requirements of F.S. ch. 419. 
Sec. 4.07. - Convenience Stores with Fueling Stations. 
    4.07.01.  Special exception required. In the COM-1 District, a special exception for the use is required in accordance with the procedure as outlined in Chapter 2 if subject property is within 500 feet of any residential property. 
    4.07.02.  Fueling positions limitations. 
A.  Within the COM-1 District, fueling stations are limited to a maximum of eight fueling positions. 
B.  Within the COM-2 District, fueling stations are limited to a maximum of 24 fueling positions. 
    4.07.03.  Design and installation requirements. 
A.  All pump islands and canopies shall be set back a minimum distance of 20 feet from all perimeter property lines, but increased to 50 feet from property lines abutting areas zoned SFR, EST, MFR, and MHD. 
B.  On-site circulation shall be designed to: 
1.  Minimize conflicts between pedestrians and vehicles and between parked and moving vehicles; 
2.  Facilitate movement by tanker trucks and the safe unloading of fuels; and 
3.  When stacking lanes are required for car washes or drive-through facilities, stacking lanes shall be separated from parking areas and drives by using painted lines, pervious islands, landscaped islands, and/or decorative pavement. 
C.  All fuel dispensers shall be set back a minimum of 24 feet from any other fuel dispenser located on parallel pump islands, as well as located a minimum of 20 feet from any other fuel dispensers located along the same line of vehicular flow. Such distance shall be measured from center of fuel dispenser to center of fuel dispenser. 
D.  At least one-half of the required parking spaces shall be directly adjacent to the principal building. 
E.  All gasoline tanks shall be installed underground. Upon the discontinuance of any gasoline pump island, the fuel storage tanks shall be removed. 
F.  The maximum canopy clearance shall be 15 feet. 
G.  The Land Use Administrator may allow a maximum of 50 percent of the fueling position spaces to count toward the number of required parking spaces. 
H.  Lighting standards. 
1.  Exterior lighting shall be the minimum necessary to provide security and safety as determined by the Land Use Administrator. No more than 2.0 foot-candles of light are permitted at any property line. 
2.  Direct lighting sources shall be shielded or recessed. Light fixtures under a canopy shall be flush mounted. Lights shall not be mounted on the top or sides of the canopy. Drop type fixtures are prohibited. 
3.  The sides of the canopies shall not be illuminated, unless the illumination is part of a permitted sign. 
    4.07.04.  Accessory restaurant. 
A.  A restaurant accessory to a convenience store shall be allowed as long as it does not exceed 30 percent of the gross floor area of the convenience store. 
B.  Parking for the restaurant shall be subject to the shared parking facilities requirements contained in Chapter 5. 
C.  An accessory restaurant with drive-through shall be subject to the drive-through facilities requirements contained in Section 4.09. 
Sec. 4.08. - Development Options. 
    4.08.01.  Cluster residential developments. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The purpose of clustering or grouping residential buildings and associated permitted accessory structures is to encourage the most efficient and cost effective use of land and public facilities. In order for the cluster development option to be approved, the site plan must be shown to: 
1.  Provide a significant amount of the site for protected open space; 
2.  Protect environmentally sensitive areas of a development site and permanently preserve open space, historical, cultural, or other significant buildings, and/or land and natural features; 
3.  Encourage creative and flexible site design that is sensitive to the land's natural features and adapts to the natural topography; 
4.  Decrease or minimize nonpoint pollution impacts by reducing the amount of impervious surfaces in site development; 
5.  Promote cost savings in infrastructure installation and maintenance by such techniques as reducing the distance over which utilities, such as water and sewer lines, need to be extended or by reducing the width or length of streets, and by utilizing the site's natural drainage patterns; and 
6.  Provide opportunities for social interaction and walking and bicycling in contiguous open space areas. 
B.  Applicability and general provisions. 
1.  A residential cluster development is optional and shall be permitted as of right in any residential zoning district, except in the Agriculture, Multifamily, and Mobile Home Districts. 
2.  All principal and accessory uses authorized in the applicable residential zoning district(s) shall be allowed in a cluster development. 
C.  Specific provisions. The following provisions shall apply to any residential cluster development, regardless of the general requirements of the applicable residential zoning district: 
1.  Dimensional requirements. 
a.  Minimum size. Minimum gross size of a cluster development shall be five acres. 
b.  Width. The minimum lot width shall conform to the requirements for the SFR-1 District. 
c.  Setbacks. The minimum setbacks shall conform to the requirements of the SFR-1 District. 
d.  Height. The height of buildings shall be a maximum 35 feet. 
e.  Impervious surface ratio. The maximum impervious surface ratio is 0.75. 
2.  Perimeter buffer. A minimum 20-foot buffer shall be located between the cluster development and any existing residential zoning district with the exception of an adjacent residential zoning district having the same density and height. 
3.  Open space. 
a.  At a minimum, 40 percent of gross acreage of the site shall be conveyed as common open space. However, when calculating the open space, the land area devoted to public or private vehicular streets shall not be included. 
b.  Open space areas shall be designated as "cluster open space" and shall indicate whether public or private on the plat. 
c.  The appropriateness of accessory structures will be reviewed by the Land Use Administrator and considered in terms of their enhancement of the cluster open space. 
d.  Accessibility to open space. The usability of cluster open space intended for recreation or public use shall be determined by whether it is contiguous and by the size, shape, topographic, and location requirements of the particular purpose proposed for the open space. Cluster open space shall be easily accessible to trail users including, but not limited to, elderly and handicapped persons, be integrated to form unbroken trail linkages between uses within the subdivision, and take advantage of opportunities to establish off-site linkages to nearby land uses, sidewalks, bikeways, and greenways. 
e.  Preservation of open space. Open space shall be preserved in perpetuity by use of conservation easements, deed restriction, or other means acceptable to the City. 
    4.08.02.  Duplex residential developments. Duplex dwelling units under single ownership may be converted so that each unit can be owned separately utilizing one of the following processes: 
A.  Duplex structures may be converted to the condominium form of ownership upon approval by the Land Use Administrator. Condominium association documents shall be provided that include ownership and maintenance of common areas and utility facilities. 
B.  Duplex sites may be subdivided into two separate lots in accordance with Chapter 2 review procedures as long as the individual lots meet the dimensional standards of the district. 
    4.08.03.  Manufactured/mobile home parks. 
A.  General requirements. 
1.  Minimum size of park; permitted location. A manufactured home park shall have a minimum of two and one-half acres. Manufactured home parks will only be permitted in the MHD District. 
2.  Plans and specifications required. Complete plans and specifications of all manufactured/mobile home parks shall be submitted to the Land Use Administrator. 
B.  Development criteria. 
1.  Setbacks. No manufactured/mobile home or attached structure shall be located closer than 25 feet to the property lines of the manufactured home park or a public right-of-way. Requirements for each manufactured/mobile home space are as follows: 
a.  Front yard required-Minimum of 20 feet. 
b.  Side yard required-Minimum of five feet. 
c.  Rear yard required-Minimum of 15 feet. 
2.  Private streets. No manufactured/mobile home in a park shall be allowed direct access to a public street. All lots in a manufactured home park must have access from a private street that shall comply with regulations established in Chapter 5. 
3.  Buffering. A manufactured/mobile home park shall comply with Type "A" Buffer Design Standards established in Chapter 11. 
4.  Recreational area required. Manufactured home parks with ten or more units shall retain an area of not less than five percent of the gross site area devoted to recreational facilities provided in an area accessible to all property owners. 
5.  Utilities. Each manufactured home shall be independently served by separate electric, gas, and other utility services. 
6.  Off-street parking. A minimum of one off-street parking space shall be required for each manufactured home. 
7.  Fences. If the manufactured/mobile home park management allows fences for individual lots, these fences shall comply with regulations established in Section 4.01. 
8.  Storage of recreational vehicles. Storage of recreational vehicles, boats, and boat trailers shall be allowed only on sites reserved for such storage within the manufactured/mobile home park. 
    4.08.04.  Multifamily residential buildings. The following standards apply to multifamily buildings: 
A.  Multifamily buildings shall be setback a minimum distance of five feet from vehicular use area. 
B.  There shall be a minimum distance of ten feet between buildings. 
    4.08.05.  Multiuse buildings. Multiuse buildings allow residential living quarters within the same buildings as offices or retail establishments, are permitted in the OFC-1, OFC-2, COM-1, COM-2, and MPD Districts, and require special exception approval in the COM-3 District. The following standards apply to multiuse buildings: 
A.  Nonresidential uses shall be located on the first floor of the building and residential units shall be located above the nonresidential use. 
B.  The mixture of nonresidential and residential uses within the multiuse building shall be designed to minimize, to the greatest extent practicable, the potential detrimental influence of nonresidential uses on the residential uses including, but not limited to, the location of entranceways and the use of soundproofing materials to minimize noise intervention between uses. 
    4.08.06.  Neotraditional development. 
A.  Purpose and intent. The purpose of a neotraditional development is to provide areas for detached single-family dwellings, duplexes, townhouses, and accessory uses in medium density neighborhoods featuring traditional design concepts and architectural themes. Features may include front porches, reduced setbacks, detached garages, alleyway access, narrower rights-of-ways, and shared parks and open spaces readily accessible to pedestrians and bicyclists. In order for the neotraditional development option to be approved, the site plan must be shown to: 
1.  Encourage walking and bicycling to reduce the need for local automobile trips by providing trails, bike paths, and other forms of walkable interconnectivity within and to adjacent uses. 
2.  Establish a specific neighborhood identity that shall consist of an overall architectural theme. Architectural themes may consist of, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Florida vernacular. 
b.  Cape cod. 
c.  Mediterranean. 
3.  Preserve natural features and scenic areas and provide a range of residential and open space land uses within close proximity to one another within the neighborhood. 
4.  Promote cost savings in infrastructure installation and maintenance by such techniques as reducing the distance over which utilities, such as water and sewer lines, need to be extended or by reducing the width or length of streets. 
B.  Applicability and general provisions. A neotraditional development is optional and shall be permitted as a right in any residential zoning district, except in the Estate, Agriculture, and Mobile Home Districts. All principal and accessory uses authorized in the applicable residential zoning district(s) shall be allowed in a neotraditional development. 
C.  Specific provisions. 
1.  Dimensional requirements. 
a.  Minimum size. Minimum gross size of a neotraditional development shall be five acres. 
b.  Width and depth. No minimum width or depth of a lot shall apply except where abutting a development with lower density, in which case the widths/depths shall conform as closely as possible to the abutting development. 
c.  Setbacks. No minimum setbacks shall apply; however, each lot shall conform as closely as possible to the setbacks established for the underlying zoning district and allow for parking and accessory structure requirements. 
d.  Height. The height of buildings shall be in accordance with that of the underlying zoning district. 
e.  Impervious surface ratio. A higher ISR shall be allowed, if determined appropriate by the Land Use Administrator; however, each lot shall conform as closely as possible to the ISR established for the underlying zoning district. 
f.  Backyard area. Each residential dwelling unit shall have a backyard, or courtyard area. 
2.  Single-family residential unit requirements. 
a.  Single-family residential units, inclusive of required porches, shall be constructed along the front setback line. 
b.  Single-family units shall have an attached front porch oriented with a minimum width of 12 feet and a minimum depth of six feet. 
3.  Garages. 
a.  Garages shall be separated from the main dwelling unit by a minimum distance of 12 feet, with the exception of a connecting breezeway, with a maximum width of four feet. Other than the breezeway, the garage and main dwelling unit shall be detached structures. 
b.  Garages shall have a maximum building footprint of 500 square feet and a maximum height of 24 feet. 
c.  Garage doors shall be oriented for access from a rear alley or a side street may provide an alternative access for corner lots. 
4.  Vehicular and pedestrian access. 
a.  Sidewalks or pedestrian paths, bicycle paths, or bicycle lanes and vehicular streets shall connect all uses. 
b.  A minimum of 80 percent of all streets shall connect at both ends to other streets at an intersection. 
c.  All paths or trails including, but not limited to, bicycle paths or lanes, shall interconnect to form a continuous network throughout the site and to paths or trails linked to adjacent neighborhoods. 
d.  Vehicular gates are prohibited on all streets, except alleys serving residential uses. 
5.  Neighborhood parks. 
a.  Neighborhood parks shall be located and distributed so that 100 percent of all dwelling units are located within 1,320 linear feet from a park or other recreation area. 
b.  The minimum pervious area of a park shall be 50 percent. 
c.  For pedestrian access, a minimum of 25 percent of an activity-based neighborhood park perimeter shall abut a street, excluding alley. 
6.  On-street parking. 
a.  On-street parallel parking shall be required on the local residential streets. 
b.  Parallel parking spaces shall have a minimum length of 23 feet and a minimum width of ten feet. 
c.  Each parking space shall be clearly delineated by pavement striping per City standards. 
d.  Between every five parallel parking spaces, a vehicular use area island shall be required per City standards. 
e.  Parallel parking spaces shall be located no closer than 28 feet from the last stall to the intersection. 
    4.08.07.  Townhouse residential developments. The following standards apply to townhouse buildings: 
A.  A minimum of three attached units and a maximum of eight attached units per building are permissible. 
B.  If rear alleyway access is provided, it is permissible to construct attached garages and detached garages that meet the standards of the neotraditional development option (refer to Section 4.08). In these cases, the rear setback may be decreased to five feet. 
Sec. 4.09 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-21 , § 2, adopted Oct. 2, 2018, repealed § 4.09 which pertained to drive-through facilities, and derived from Ord. No. 2009-26, § 26, adopted Dec. 15, 2009. See § 5.04.11 for similar provisions. 
Sec. 4.10. - Educational Facilities, Private. 
    A.  Setbacks. The front, rear, and side yard setbacks shall be the same as those required for the specific district, except that when adjacent to a residential land use or zoning district there shall be a 20-foot minimum building setback. 
    B.  Off-street parking and loading-School bus and vehicular drop-off facilities . Facilities must be provided for off-street bus and private vehicle loading and unloading of students. Use of the street right-of-way may be allowed if a license agreement is executed with the City. 
Sec. 4.11. - Garage and Yard Sales. 
    Refer to Chapter 16, Article V in the City of Palm Coast Code of Ordinances. 
Sec. 4.12. - Home Occupations. 
    4.12.01.  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of the home occupation regulations is to reasonably allow for a home to be used as a "doing business address" for low impact business activities from the home while ensuring that they are limited and controlled so they do not negatively impact the residential areas where they are located. Home occupations are limited by performance standards, requirements, and prohibitions. Procedures related to applications, evaluations, approvals, inspections, and revocations provide controls to ensure the home occupations do not adversely impact surrounding properties. 
    4.12.02.  Classifications. Home occupations are categorized into three classes as follows: 
A.  Class 1. Class 1 Home Occupations are limited, in-home business offices that are indistinguishable from activities associated with any typical office employee bringing home work outside of regular business hours. Class 1 Home Occupations utilize a single room in the residence where information-oriented business activities are limited to paperwork, computer, mail, telephone, and filing. Although home storage of a single vehicle used for business purposes is acceptable, Class 1 Home Occupations do not allow for on-site storage of any inventory, trailers, or mechanical equipment used for home occupation activities. 
B.  Class 2. Class 2 Home Occupations are in-home business offices that have the potential to create some impacts beyond Class 1 activities due to limited on-site storage of material, inventory, chemicals, work vehicles, trailers, equipment, limited product assembly, or business-related traffic from customers or deliveries. Businesses among those typically classified as Class 2 Home Occupations include offices for subcontractors or lawn services where work vehicles, equipment, and/or trailers are stored at the home. Pool cleaning services are also included if chemicals are stored at the home. Other examples include arts and crafts businesses, such as stained glass or candle making, and other businesses that involve light assembly. 
C.  Class 3. Class 3 Home Occupations are in-home business offices that have the potential to create some impacts beyond Class 2 activities due to increases of on-site storage of material, inventory, work vehicles, trailers, equipment, or business-related traffic from customers or deliveries. Class 3 Home Occupations are permitted on large, estate-sized residential properties, including farmland, where ample buffering prevents impacts to surrounding properties. Examples of Class 3 Home Occupations are small family businesses, such as horse boarding and riding stable operations. Other examples include plant nurseries or vegetable growing operations with limited sales to the public. 
    4.12.03.  Performance standards, requirements, and prohibitions. 
A.  Home occupation requirements. All home occupations (Class 1, 2, and 3) shall: 
1.  Be completely subordinate to the residential nature of the home; and 
2.  Not change the structural form of the home; and 
3.  Not create noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, dust, or smoke that is detectable to the normal senses at the lot line or beyond the exterior of any common walls; and 
4.  Not use equipment which creates off-site line voltage fluctuations or visual or audible interference with off-site radio or television receivers; and 
5.  Not adversely affect public safety through the storage or generation of explosive, flammable, or hazardous materials in quantities which could constitute a neighborhood danger based on the required submittal of MSDS sheets or the determination of the City Fire Marshal; and 
6.  The applicant shall be the primary resident of the home. 
B.  Prohibited home occupations. The following uses are prohibited home occupations; however, this list is not all-inclusive and other home occupations may be prohibited by the Land Use Administrator based upon the character and similarity of use, with the determination being subject to appeal as set forth in Chapter 2: 
1.  Food preparation. 
2.  Kennels and veterinary clinics. 
3.  Funeral homes. 
4.  Dance or exercise studios. 
5.  Beauty or barbershops. 
6.  Vehicle repair or sales. 
7.  Animal raising. 
8.  Medical/dental offices or clinics. 
C.  Performance Standards. Class 1, 2, and 3 Home Occupations are limited in accordance with the following performance standards. These limitations apply to business activities at the home related to the home occupation and are not intended to regulate business activities that occur outside of the home. Table 4-4 describes the performance standard limitations. 
Table 4-4: Performance Standard Limitations for Home Occupations 
Category Home 
Component Class 1 Class 2 Class 3 Traffic Generation Customers None permitted. Maximum of one per week. Maximum of ten per week. Deliveries Maximum of one per week. Maximum of two per week. Maximum of ten per week. Employees-Either working out of the home or convening at the home at any time. Limited to residents of the home. No outside employees are permitted to visit the home for business related purposes. Limited to residents of the home. No outside employees are permitted to visit the home for business related purposes. Limited to residents of the home plus a maximum of two outside employees who are not residents of the home. Other business trips Maximum of two round trips per day. Maximum of six round trips per day. Maximum of the ten round trips per day. Business Area and Storage Office space Maximum of one room. Maximum of one room in primary residence; or business may be located in separate ancillary on-site building. Up to 35 percent of gross floor area of primary residence; or business may be located in separate, ancillary on-site building. Storage of inventory/equipment None permitted. All inventory and equipment must be stored inside. A maximum of one single car stall of a garage area may be utilized. An on-site storage shed or the office may be used instead of the garage stall. All inventory and equipment must be stored inside. Full garage area or ancillary on-site building may be utilized. Storage of chemicals Limited to common household items, such as bleach or ammonia based cleaning products, stored in a single closet. MSDS sheets not warranted. All chemicals must be stored inside. A maximum of one single car stall of a garage area may be utilized. An on-site storage shed may be used instead of the garage stall. MSDS sheets required. Fire extinguisher required. All chemicals must be stored inside. Full garage area or ancillary on-site building may be utilized. MSDS sheets required. A fire extinguisher is required. Vehicles and Trailers Vehicle number and type Maximum of one sedan, SUV, or pickup truck for business Maximum of one sedan, SUV, or pickup truck for business Maximum of two vehicles for business. Vehicle dimensions Maximum height-seven ft. Maximum length-20 ft. Maximum height-seven and one-half ft. Maximum length-22 ft. Maximum height-eight ft. Maximum length-22 ft. Exterior ladders and pipe racks None permitted. None permitted if vehicle stored outside of garage. Permitted. Gross vehicle weight Maximum 8,500 lbs. Maximum 10,500 lbs. Maximum 20,000 lbs. Trailers None permitted. Maximum of one stored in garage. Maximum of two. May be stored outside if fully screened from public right-of-way and neighboring properties. Solid Waste Generation Quantity Maximum of one 32-gallon residential waste container per week. Maximum of two 32-gallon residential waste containers per week. Maximum of four 32-gallon residential waste containers per week. Hazardous None may be disposed of at home. None may be disposed of at home. None may be disposed of at home. Repair and Manufacturing Repair and manufacturing None permitted. Limited minor repair or manufacturing activities are permitted as well as arts and crafts, hobbies, and high tech custom/precision assembly only. Limited repair or manufacturing activities permitted. Machinery may be operated only in short bursts (defined as no longer than ten minutes per hour with cumulative maximum not to exceed one hour per day). Signage On-site None permitted. None permitted, although licensee may display license if required by the state. Maximum of one sign not illuminated, limited to six square feet in size. On vehicle(s) Any vehicle with signage not removable signage must be parked in the garage at all times. Any vehicle with signage not removable must be parked in the garage at all times. Permitted. Advertising Advertising (includes, but not limited to, telephone directories, newspapers, print media, logos, stationery, and business cards) Post office box number only and not a street address (unless otherwise required by state law). Post office box number only and not a street address (unless otherwise required by state law). May use home address. Visibility Visibility from right-of-way and neighboring properties The home occupation shall not be visible to neighbors. No products display or any aspect of the operation shall be visible outside the dwelling unit. The home occupation shall not be visible to neighbors. No products display or any aspect of the operation shall be visible outside the dwelling unit. Except for the sign permitted above, the home occupation shall not be visible to neighbors. Other outdoor activities or operations shall be fully screened from neighboring properties.  
    4.12.04.  Home occupation application, evaluation, and approval procedures. 
A.  Application. Applications for home occupation approvals shall be filed on a form provided by the City. The Land Use Administrator may request additional information to ensure that all application materials are sufficient to review the request. 
B.  Evaluation procedures to classify a home occupation. 
1.  The Land Use Administrator shall determine the classification of the home occupation upon reviewing the application, and determine whether a special exception is required. 
2.  Depending upon specific impacts and the nature of the operation, the same type of business may be classified differently. For example, a landscape business where all materials, equipment, and trailer are stored offsite may qualify as a Class 1 Home Occupation. A landscape business, where the materials, equipment, and trailer are stored in the home's garage may qualify as a Class 2 Home Occupation. If the landscape business also includes a small plant nursery, it may qualify as a Class 3 Home Occupation. 
C.  Approval procedures. 
1.  Permitted home occupations (not a special exceptions) 
a.  A development order for a home occupation shall be granted by the Land Use Administrator for permitted home occupations that meet the requirements of this section and do not require a special exception. 
b.  The Land Use Administrator may add special conditions to the development order for a home occupation related to the operation of the business to ensure compliance with this Code. 
c.  With regard to Class 2 and Class 3 home occupation development orders, the City shall notify the owners (as listed with the Flagler County Property Appraiser) of the lots immediately abutting the lot and immediately across a road right-of-way from the licensed lot. 
2.  Home occupation special exceptions 
a.  Home occupation special exceptions shall be noticed and advertised in accordance with Chapter 2 and reviewed by the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board at a public hearing. The Planning and Land Development Regulation Board decision shall be based on the proposed home occupation's adherence to the following standards and criteria: 
(1)  A proposed special exception for a Class 3 Home Occupation shall comply with the majority of the Class 2 Home Occupation performance standards. A proposed special exception for a Class 2 Home Occupation shall comply with the majority of the Class 1 Home Occupation performance standards. Further, the application shall be evaluated on the applicant's ability to moderate, lessen, or mitigate for those areas where they cannot meet the Class 1 or Class 2 Home Occupation performance standards to ensure that neighboring properties will not be adversely impacted. 
(2)  Additional special exception criteria found in Chapter 2 may be used to evaluate a proposed home occupation, if applicable. 
b.  The Planning and Land Development Regulation Board may add conditions related to the unique operational characteristics of the home occupation to ensure compliance with the regulations contained in this Code. The Land Use Administrator shall incorporate these conditions into the development order for the home occupation. 
3.  Development order. A development order for the home occupation is required for the home-based business. The issuance of a business tax receipt does not imply approval of the home-based business. 
    4.12.05.  Inspection and revocation. 
A.  Inspections. A home occupation inspection may be conducted by the City following the issuance of a development order for a home occupation for any home occupation. 
B.  Violations and revocation. 
1.  The Code Enforcement Board shall determine violations, fines, or penalties for violations of this Code relating to home occupations. Such violations shall be treated as an unpermitted use within the zoning classification. The Code Enforcement Board shall have the authority to revoke development orders for home occupations. 
2.  The Planning and Land Development Regulation Board shall have the authority to revoke a special exception for a home occupation. 
Sec. 4.13. - Houses of Worship/Religious Institutions, Civic Clubs/Fraternal Organizations, and Nonprofit Organizations. 
    Houses of worship/religious institutions civic clubs/fraternal organizations, and nonprofit organizations shall be allowed as specified in Table 3-4. The following conditions shall apply to these uses: 
    4.13.01.  Master plan for long range development. When submitting an application to expand an existing or construct a new house of worship/religious institution, a master plan for long-range development shall be submitted, including future plans for accessory uses such as educational facilities, gymnasiums, or similar facilities. 
    4.13.02.  Size limitations in the COM-1 District. Within the COM-1 District, new or expanded houses of worship/religious institutions, civic clubs/fraternal organizations, and nonprofit organizations shall not exceed 30,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
Sec. 4.14. - Industrial Uses. 
    4.14.01.  Industrial use classifications. 
A.  Heavy Industrial (IND-2) uses. Heavy industrial uses shall include any facility that meets at least one of the following criteria: 
1.  Emits 500 pounds or more per year of lead or lead compounds; or 
2.  Emits 100 tons per year or more of any one regulated pollutant (PM10; nitrogen oxides; sulfur dioxide; carbon monoxide; volatile organic compounds; and lead) subject to regulation under F.S. ch. 403; or 
3.  Emits ten tons or more per year of any one hazardous air pollutant (HAP) as defined by Chapter 62-210, Florida Administrative Code; or 
4.  Emits 25 tons or more per year of any combination of hazardous air pollutants as defined by Chapter 62-210, Florida Administrative Code; or 
5.  The facility would require a major source Title V air permit as required by the requirements under F.S. ch. 403; or 
6.  Bulk storage of hazardous or regulated chemicals in access of 25,000 gallons (excluding diesel and unleaded gasoline fueling facilities exclusively utilized for fueling of vehicles, public water/wastewater treatment and emergency generators); or 
7.  Large quantity generators of hazardous waste as regulated under Chapter 62-730, Florida Administrative Code; or 
8.  The following industrial uses are presumed to be considered heavy industrial based upon the above criteria: air curtain incinerators; asphalt plants; concrete batch plants; fabrication facilities (involving open air grit blasting or open air painting); phosphate/nitrate fertilizer manufacturing facilities; fiberglass products manufacturing facilities; explosive storage and or manufacturing facilities; biohazardous waste incinerator, pesticide formulation facilities; scrap yard/shredding facilities; soil remediation facilities; bulk solvent chemical storage and or processing facilities; paint/ink manufacturing facilities; secondary metals recovery or manufacturing facilities; chrome plating facilities; asbestos products fabricators; manufacturer, livestock importing/exporting facilities; and those uses listed in the IND-2 District outlined in Chapter 3, Table 3-4. 
This list is not all-inclusive and other uses may be considered heavy industrial based upon the above criteria as determined by the Land Use Administrator. 
B.  Light Industrial (IND-1) uses. All other manufacturing, processing, and assembly activities not meeting one of the heavy industrial criteria listed in this Code shall be presumed to be light industrial, including those uses listed in the IND-1 District outlined in Chapter 3, Table 3-4. 
C.  Approvals; permitting. Approvals, permits, or other forms of written assurances from appropriate federal, state, or local agencies that the use is likely to meet or exceed the specified standards for dust emissions, water consumption, air quality, hazardous, and regulated waste management set forth in Chapter 10 shall be considered competent and substantial presumptive evidence that the use complies with these zoning performance standards for permitting. 
    4.14.02.  Industrial use performance standards. Manufacturing, processing, and assembly operations shall meet the following performance standards. Proof of compliance shall be provided stating that all required permits for particular discharges can and will be met. All necessary environmental permits shall be obtained. Table 4-5 depicts the required performance standards for heavy industrial and light industrial and warehousing uses: 
Table 4-5: Performance Standards for Industrial Uses 
Light Industrial & 
Warehousing (IND 1) Heavy Industrial (IND 2) Application Requirements Lighting Lighting shall be in accordance with Chapter 9 of the LDC Lighting shall be in accordance with Chapter 9 of the LDC Detail lighting plan Sound 
Measured from property line Residential: 60 dBA (7AM-10PM) Residential: 60 dBA (7AM-10PM) Statement of compliance Residential: 60 dBA (10PM-7AM) Residential: 60 dBA (10PM-7AM) Commercial: 65 dBA (7AM-10PM) Commercial: 65 dBA (7AM-10PM) Commercial: 60 dBA (10PM-7AM) Commercial: 60 dBA (10PM-7AM) Industrial: 75 dBA (7AM-10PM) Industrial: 75 dBA (7AM-10PM) Industrial: 75 dBA (10PM-7AM) Industrial: 75 dBA (10PM-7AM) Water Consumption Consumptive Use Permit specifically approved by SJRWMD Consumptive Use Permit specifically approved by SJRWMD SJRWMP CUP permit submittal Hazardous/Regulated 
Waste Management New Large Quantity Generators of hazardous waste as regulated under Chapter 62-730, F.A.C., as amended are prohibited All hazardous waste generators shall comply with State and Federal regulations List of potential waste generated and anticipated amounts. New chemical containment areas to provide appropriate secondary containment New chemical containment areas to provide appropriate secondary containment Statement of compliance BMPs developed to prevent potential discharges of regulated substances BMPs developed to prevent potential discharges of regulated substances Submittal of BMP plan. Electrical/Electromagnetic 
Interference Use shall not cause, create or contribute Electrical/Electromagnetic Interference to adjacent properties Use shall not cause, create or contribute Electrical/Electromagnetic Interference to adjacent properties Statement of compliance Air Quality General Title V or non-Title V Major Source Title V Permit under F.S. ch. 403 F.S. as amended FDEP permit submittal Emits < 500 pounds per year of lead or lead compounds Emits > 500 pounds per year of lead or lead compounds FDEP Annual Operating Reports/Permits Emits < 100 tons per year of any regulated pollutant Emits > 100 tons per year of any regulated pollutant FDEP Annual Operating Reports/Permits Emits < 10 tons per year of any one HAP Emits > 10 tons per year of any one HAP FDEP Annual Operating Reports/Permits Emits < 25 tons of any combination of HAPs Emits > 25 tons of any combination of HAPs FDEP Annual Operating Reports/Permits BMPs to control dust BMPs to control dust Airborne discharges shall be minimized so as not to cause or contribute to an objectionable odor to adjacent residential areas Airborne discharges shall be minimized so as not to cause or contribute to an objectionable odor to adjacent residential districts Statement of compliance Regulated Pollutants shall meet federal and State air quality standards Regulated Pollutants shall meet federal and State air quality standards FDEP Annual Operating Reports/Permits/Monitoring Storage of Hazardous or 
Regulated Chemicals < 25,000 gallons permissible Storage of Hazardous or Regulated Chemicals permissible FDEP Registration/Inventory; 
Submittal of SPCC Plan Fire Prevention Standards Fire suppression devices shall be installed in accordance with City requirements Fire suppression devices shall be installed in accordance with City requirements Site plan and description of fire prevention measures with Fire 
Marshal/City approval New Septic Systems Not permissible Not permissible NA Radioactive Materials Fixed nuclear density gauges with sources exceeding 50 mCi prohibited Fixed nuclear density gauges permissible BRC radioactive material license and protection plan submittal Source material other than medical applications uses prohibited Source material with BRC approval BRC approval and documentation of RSO and authorized user  
Note: 
Regulated pollutants = shall consist of PM10, nitrogen oxides, sulfur dioxide, carbon monoxide, volatile organic compounds, lead. 
HAP (Hazardous air pollutant) = As defined by Chapter 62-210 F.A.C. as amended. 
BRC = Bureau of Radiation Control 
RSO = Radiation Safety Officer 
Sound = The standards set forth shall not apply to emergency warning devices, lawn care equipment, or construction operations. 
Storage of Hazardous or Regulated Chemicals = Aboveground and underground storage tanks regulated by FDEP and utilized for vehicular purposes are permitted in IND-1 and IND-2. 
Sec. 4.15. - Nonresidential Controlling Master Site Developments. 
    4.15.01.  Purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this section is to provide standards for a nonresidential controlling master site development. The standards will ensure internal consistency and compatibility with the character of the surrounding neighborhood. Elements of compatibility include the fundamental development pattern of the surrounding neighborhood, predominant building type, and features of site design, scale, and dimensions. 
    4.15.02.  Applicability. Nonresidential controlling master site developments and large-scale commercial centers shall comply with the requirements of this section. Such developments shall be planned as a unit and at a minimum, include the following: 
A.  Shared parking and driveways. 
B.  Master stormwater facilities. 
C.  Master drainage system. 
D.  Pedestrian and vehicular connectivity between sites, structures, and uses. 
E.  Owners association. 
F.  Applicable to moderate and major development. 
    4.15.03.  Development standards. In addition to the development requirements set forth in this Code, the following requirements apply to nonresidential controlling master site developments: 
A.  Building setbacks. 
1.  Buildings and ancillary structures within a nonresidential controlling master site development are encouraged to be constructed up to the interior lot line provided a plat has been recorded. 
2.  Reserved. 
3.  Setbacks shall be measured from project exterior boundary. 
B.  Parking lot orientation. No more than 60 percent of the off-street parking area for the entire property shall be located between the principal building(s) and the street unless the principal building(s) and/or parking lots are screened from view by abutting development (within outparcels) and additional tree plantings and/or berms. 
C.  Pedestrian access. 
1.  Continuous internal pedestrian walkways, no less than five feet in width, shall be provided from the public sidewalk or right-of-way to the principal customer entrance of all principal buildings on the site. At a minimum, walkways shall connect focal points of pedestrian activity such as, but not limited to, taxi stands, street crossings, building, and store entry points and shall feature adjoining landscaped areas that include trees, shrubs, benches, flowerbeds, groundcovers, or other such materials for no less than 50 percent of their length. 
2.  Sidewalks, no less than five feet in width, shall be provided along the full length of each building along any facade featuring a customer entrance, and along any facade abutting public parking areas. Such sidewalks shall be located at least six feet from the facade of each building to provide planting beds for foundation landscaping, except where features such as arcades or entryways are part of the facade. 
3.  Internal pedestrian walkways shall provide weather protection features such as awnings or porticos within ten feet of all customer entrances, constructed parallel to the facade of the building. This is not intended to extend into the driving aisles or parking areas. 
4.  All internal pedestrian walkways shall be distinguished from driving surfaces using durable, low-maintenance surface materials such as pavers, bricks, or scored concrete to enhance pedestrian safety and comfort, as well as the attractiveness of the walkways. Signs shall be installed to designate pedestrian walkways. 
D.  Public amenities. A nonresidential controlling master site development shall contribute to the establishment or enhancement of community and public spaces by providing at least two of the following: 
1.  Patio or seating area. 
2.  Pedestrian plaza with benches. 
3.  Transportation center. 
4.  Window shopping walkways. 
5.  Outdoor play area. 
6.  Kiosk area. 
7.  Water feature. 
8.  Clock tower. 
9.  Steeple. 
10.  Other such focal features or amenities that, in the judgment of the Land Use Administrator based on generally accepted planning principles adequately enhance such community and public spaces. 
Any such areas shall have direct access to the public sidewalk network and such features shall not be constructed of materials that are inferior to the principal materials of the building and landscape. 
E.  Outdoor storage, trash collection, and loading areas. 
1.  Areas for outdoor storage, truck parking, trash collection or compaction, loading, or other such uses shall not be visible from public or private rights-of-way. 
2.  No areas for outdoor storage, trash collection or compaction, loading, or other such uses shall be located within 20 feet of any public or street, public sidewalk, or internal pedestrian way. 
3.  Loading docks, truck parking, outdoor storage, utility meters, HVAC equipment, trash dumpsters, trash compaction, and other service functions shall be incorporated into the overall design of the building and the landscaping. This is to ensure that the visual and acoustic impacts of these functions are fully contained and out of view from adjacent properties and public streets, and no attention is attracted to the functions by the use of screening materials that are different from or inferior to the principal materials of the building and landscape. 
4.  Areas not enclosed for the storage and sale of seasonal inventory shall be permanently defined and screened with walls or fences. Materials, colors, and designs of screening walls or fences and the cover shall conform to those used as predominant materials and colors of the building. If such areas are to be covered, then the covering shall conform to those used as predominant materials and colors on the buildings. 
5.  Temporary sales/displays, such as Christmas trees, landscape materials, and fireworks, shall follow all requirements as outlined in this Code. 
F.  Architecture. All nonresidential controlling master site developments shall comply with architectural standards established in Chapter 13. In addition, the applicant shall provide, upon request, alternative designs or prototypes in addition to any typical corporate prototype. Alternative designs shall be provided to reflect the local character of the surrounding areas. Design templates may include, but not be limited to, Art Deco, Mediterranean, Main Street, and Green Design. 
    4.15.04.  Wall signage. Signs shall be consistent and complementary in style, color, and materials to the style, color, and materials of the principal structure. Refer to Chapter 12 for sign requirements. 
    4.15.05.  Maintenance of property; abandonment. During any period of vacancy following relocation of the business and prior to reuse, the vacant building shall meet the following standards: 
A.  All exterior surfaces shall be maintained and in good repair. 
B.  The exterior walls shall be maintained free from holes, rotting materials, and graffiti. 
C.  Roofs and buildings shall be maintained in structurally sound, safe, and weather tight conditions. 
D.  Window glass shall be in place and maintained in a safe and weather tight condition. 
E.  The grounds shall be maintained and free of trash, stored materials, inoperative or unlicensed vehicles, and equipment. 
F.  Accessory structures, such as fences, walls, signs, accessory buildings, or other physical improvements, shall be maintained in a safe condition and free of graffiti. 
G.  Outdoor sales may be permitted on a case-by-case basis in accordance with this chapter. 
H.  Outdoor security lighting shall be maintained and operated. 
I.  Landscaping shall be watered, pruned, and weeded as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, §§ 27-30, 12-15-09) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2009-26, § 27, adopted December 15, 2009, changed the title of Section 4.15 from "Large-scale commercial center" to "Nonresidential controlling master site developments." 
Sec. 4.16. - Marinas. 
    4.16.01.  General. Except as expressly set forth in this section, no application shall be approved by the Land Use Administrator and a permit issued unless the application conforms to the requirements of this Code, and the application fees have been paid. 
    4.16.02.  Applicability. When permitted as an accessory use, the marina shall be accessory to a developed use on any waterway within the district. Marinas shall be allowed as specified in Table 3-2 and Table 3-4 and subject to the following standards: 
A.  Compliance with federal and state laws. All marina facilities shall comply with all applicable federal and state laws, rules, and regulations including, but not limited to, the requirements and permits of the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, St. Johns River Water Management District, and the Army Corps of Engineers. Verification that all necessary permits and/or required studies have been obtained shall be submitted to the City prior to commencing construction activities. 
B.  Live aboard watercraft prohibited. Under no circumstances shall a vessel docked or moored off the pier at a noncommercial marina be used as a live aboard watercraft. 
    4.16.03.  Permit required. Any person or entity must be issued a marina facility permit before operating a marina facility within the City. 
A.  Marina facility permit applications shall be considered and acted upon by the Land Use Administrator and, if applicable, the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board, subject to the terms and conditions of this Code. Marina facility permits, when approved, shall be approved in the form of a development order which may be subject to such terms and conditions as the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board or Land Use Administrator may deem appropriate consistent with the provisions of this Code. Except as provided in this section, no person may cause, suffer, or allow construction of a marina facility without first obtaining a permit from the City. Except as provided in this Code, and after issuance of a permit or permit amendment to the marina facility, no person may cause, suffer, or allow the operation of a marina facility without first obtaining from City staff a final inspection and authorization to begin operation of the marina facility as described in this Code. 
B.  Except as otherwise expressly stated in this Code, any person who is required by this Code to obtain a marina facility permit or permit amendment shall demonstrate compliance with the performance standards set out in this Code. 
C.  A person who already has a permit for a marina facility may commence emergency reconstruction of damaged marina facilities without first obtaining a permit amendment from the City, provided that written notice of the commencement of reconstruction activities is provided to the City within 72 hours of commencement of reconstruction. Within 30 working days of commencement of reconstruction, the marina facility owner shall submit an application for a marina facility permit amendment. 
    4.16.04.  Review authority. 
A.  Application submittal. An application for a marina facility permit may be submitted on a form provided by the City and shall include such information as the Land Use Administrator may determine necessary. 
B.  Land use administrator. The Land Use Administrator shall perform the technical review for all marina facilities and shall have the authority to approve issuance of development orders for all noncommercial marina facilities. 
C.  Planning and land development regulation board. The Planning and Land Development Regulation Board shall receive recommendations from the Land Use Administrator for commercial marina facilities. The Planning and Land Development Regulation Board shall have the authority to approve issuance of development orders for all commercial marinas. 
    4.16.05.  Location and configuration. 
A.  General location standards. 
1.  No marina facility shall be permitted to be located or configured to extend into navigable waters of the City to such a distance that it would constitute a navigation hazard or a flood control hindrance or would unreasonably infringe upon public legal use of and access to the water surface. 
2.  Marina facilities shall not be so located or configured in such a way as to potentially displace boating traffic into shallow areas. 
3.  In accordance with the City's wetland protection regulations and through avoidance and minimization strategies, proposed marina facilities shall demonstrate that impacts to wetlands have been avoided and/or minimized to the maximum extent practicable. 
4.  A marina facility site may be approved only when the applicant has demonstrated that the location has adequate depths to accommodate the proposed watercraft use. All marina facilities access shall be through existing channels or through areas greater than three feet in water depth at mean low water. If existing channel or through areas contain less than three feet of low mean water depth and dredging is required, the applicant must demonstrate that the initial dredging operations are necessary and measures were taken to avoid and minimize, to the extent practical, negative impacts to environmental resources of the City including, but not limited to, water quality, threatened and endangered species, fish, and wildlife habitat. The issuance of permits to the applicant from the Army Corps of Engineers and the St. Johns River Water Management District or Department of Environmental Protection shall satisfy the requirements of this provision. 
B.  Setback requirements. Marina facilities shall include the following minimum setbacks for structures located over or on the water surface and related facilities: 
1.  Adjoining properties. A 50-foot setback shall be established from the riparian property line of adjoining waterfront properties for marina facilities located on the Intracoastal Waterway. A 25-foot setback shall be established for other navigable waters of the City. 
2.  Public water supply wells. No commercial marina facility or marine service station shall be located within 500 feet of an existing public water supply well that is licensed and operated in accordance with all applicable law. 
3.  Designated swim areas. No marina facility structure shall be located on or over the water surface within 100 feet from any existing City designated swim area. 
4.  Residentially designated property. No commercial marina building or structures, or marine service station, shall be located within 100 feet of a residential property line, unless otherwise specified within this section of the Code. 
C.  Property ownership. 
1.  Marinas shall be located on and over the navigable waters of the City that are owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the applicant, or marina owner, or operator and shall not materially and significantly interfere with established legal rights and privileges of an adjoining property owner including, but not limited to, those conveyed through covenants, deed restrictions, easements, court judgments, or other legally binding documents. 
2.  The applicant or marina facility owner or operator shall provide the name and address of the owner of the lot or parcel including, but not limited to, that portion of the lot or parcel under the water surface. The applicant shall provide, at a minimum, the following documentation: 
a.  An affidavit, in a form prescribed by the City, stating that the applicant owns, leases, or otherwise controls the lot or parcel over which the marina will be located. 
b.  If the applicant, or marina facility owner or operator, and the property owner are different individuals or entities, documentation, such as a lease, easement, or other deed-recorded instrument, supporting applicant's claim that the applicant has the authority from the property owner to locate the marina on or over the lot or parcel. 
c.  Other documentation, if required by the City, to demonstrate ownership or control, which may include a title opinion from an attorney or a title insurance commitment, if such ownership or control is questioned. Any such title opinion shall state that the attorney has reviewed the chain of title or other appropriate documents and finds that, in the attorney's professional opinion, the applicant is the owner or has the legal right to construct a marina facility on or over the lot or parcel in question. 
3.  Dock or slips associated with a noncommercial marina facility shall only be sold, leased, used, or otherwise conveyed to residents of the residential development associated with the noncommercial marina. Deed restrictions acceptable to the Land Use Administrator, shall be required to ensure that residents will be subject to restrictions prohibiting residents from improperly using any dock slips or the marina facility and further obligating the residents observance of all rules and policies established by this Code. Deed restrictions shall require that the marina facility be private and that ownership of the marina facility slips, at a minimum, be restricted to residents. Applicable deed restrictions shall require language that prohibits any rental of dock slips by the residents to the public at large. Unit owners may lease their slip(s) to tenants or other unit owners. 
4.  Docks or slips as an accessory use in the SFR, DPX, EST, AGR, and MPD zoning districts shall not be sold, leased, used, or otherwise conveyed to anyone other than the owner of the lot, parcel, or tract. If the dwelling unit is leased or rented, the dwelling unit is required to be registered with the City in which the dock or slip is automatically included as part of the registered dwelling unit as the dock or slip is an accessory use to the dwelling. Owners of the dwelling unit shall be held responsible for any vessel moored, docked, and/or stored at the dock or slip. 
    4.16.06.  Protection of water quality. 
A.  Water exchange and flushing action. The following requirements apply to all marina facilities: 
1.  Site and design the marina facility such that wind and currents will aid in flushing of the site or renew its water regularly. 
2.  Site and design the marina facility such that the bottom of the marina facility and the entrance channel are not deeper than adjacent navigable water unless it can be demonstrated that it will not negatively impact flushing and water quality standards. 
3.  Design marina facilities with as few segments as possible to promote circulation within the basin. 
4.  Design and locate entrance channels to promote flushing. 
5.  Establish two openings, where appropriate, at opposite ends of the marina facility to promote flow through currents; provided, however, that when the establishment of two openings is not practical, as determined by the Land Use Administrator, and adequate flushing action is demonstrated to the Land Use Administrator for the proposed number of slips, two openings shall not be required. 
6.  Consider other design alternatives in poorly flushed waterbodies (e.g. open marina basin over semi-enclosed design) to enhance flushing. 
7.  Land surface drainage patterns shall be designed with swales, contours, shallow depressions, or other acceptable water retention and treatment standards, to minimize direct runoff in surface waters. 
8.  The dredging of new channels to provide marine facility access to a site may be permitted if an applicant can demonstrate to the Land Use Administrator that such activities will improve or maintain surface water quality and flushing and will not cause a safety hindrance to navigation. 
B.  Dredging and spoil management. 
1.  An applicant must provide a description of the measures taken to avoid and minimize impacts to submerged aquatic vegetation. Submerged aquatic vegetation means shoal grass, paddle grass, star grass, Johnson's seagrass, sago pondweed, clasping-leaved pondweed, widgeon grass, manatee grass, and turtle grass. Appropriate location and complementary design of the dock facility may be necessary to protect shoreline and aquatic vegetation. Mitigation shall be consistent with federal and state regulations. 
2.  Dredging activities shall be conducted by a qualified contractor familiar with the applicable best management practices concerning dredging operations. All dredging activities shall obtain all necessary permits from the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, the St. Johns River Water Management District, and the Army Corps of Engineers or any other agency with applicable jurisdiction. 
3.  As part of the application for marina facilities, a dredging maintenance plan shall be submitted to the City. The plan shall describe best management practices, projected amount of dredge materials, and spoil disposal. The plan shall describe anticipated maintenance dredging activities and anticipated maintenance dredging intervals. 
4.  Dredging shall be prohibited in those special and Outstanding Florida Waters as provided for by the state unless specifically authorized by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, the St. Johns River Water Management District, or the Army Corps of Engineers. 
5.  Dredge spoil shall be disposed of in upland areas as approved by applicable federal, state, and local agencies. 
6.  Designed engineering controls shall be utilized for marina facilities parallel to the Intracoastal Waterway to minimize maintenance dredging unless it can be clearly demonstrated to the Land Use Administrator that the proposed marina facility will not require excessive maintenance dredging. For the purposes of this Code, excessive maintenance dredging means maintaining adequate water depth at the marina facility by the use of maintenance dredging more than one time in a one-year period. In lieu of requiring engineering controls, the owner or applicant may require the utilization of shallow drafting boats. For the purposes of this Code, shallow drafting boats are designed and approved to draft less than two feet of water. 
C.  Erosion, shoaling, and shoreline stabilization. 
1.  Applicants proposing a marina facility must address existing and future erosion or shoaling in the proposed design. Each development order will have a general condition, which requires the applicant or owner to utilize appropriate erosion control practices and to correct any current or future adverse erosion or shoaling problems. 
2.  To help prevent shoreline erosion, facilities adjacent to the Intracoastal Waterway shall stabilize the shoreline through the construction of a coquina rock revetment or other suitable material running the length of the shoreline. The revetment work shall occur above the mean high waterline. If necessary, submerged bulkheads shall be installed parallel to the Intracoastal Waterway to alleviate shoreline erosion and prevent excessive shoaling. 
    4.16.07.  Design of marina facilities. 
A.  Dimensional standards. 
1.  The width of a marina facility, inclusive of all structures, shall not exceed 75 percent of the width of the owner's waterfront property line. Newly created shoreline associated with internal basins may be fully developed with marina facilities provided additional marina facilities are not developed in areas along the Intracoastal Waterway abutting a newly created internal basin. Existing vegetative and environmental features of the area immediately abutting the Intracoastal Waterway shall be preserved to the greatest extent feasible in accordance with the City's tree preservation regulations. 
2.  Total dock surface area shall not exceed ten square feet per linear foot of the applicant's waterfront property line. Calculations for dock surface area shall include gazebos, access walkways, platforms, catwalks, and other associated water-dependant structures. This standard may be increased to 12.5 square feet per linear foot of the owner's waterfront property line if it can be demonstrated to the Land Use Administrator that the additional coverage results in an improved structural or safety design without adverse environmental impacts. 
3.  Marina facility structures shall not extend further waterward from the edge of the Federal channel of the Intracoastal Waterway than as permitted by the Army Corps of Engineers or other relevant regulatory authority. 
4.  Walkways shall be constructed above the water level at all times and shall be structurally sound. Main walkway widths shall be a minimum of four feet wide. If significant pedestrian traffic is likely, the width shall be a minimum of six feet. Finger walkways shall be a minimum of three feet wide. Specific areas shall be designated and constructed to ensure handicap accessibility. Where practicable, dock and decking design and construction shall ensure penetration of light sufficient to support existing shallow water habitats. 
5.  No marina facility structure shall, at any time, extend to a height of more than 20 feet above the mean high water line. Boathouses within a marina facility shall not exceed 13 feet above the top of adjacent bulkhead or revetment and shall not exceed 18 feet above mean sea level (1929 NGVD). 
6.  Proposed marina facilities and associated structures shall be constructed in a visually pleasing manner as determined by the Land Use Administrator based upon generally accepted planning principles with the existing terrain and vegetation. Structures shall obstruct as little as reasonably practical scenic views from the shoreline or other navigable waters of the City. Long unbroken extensions of line shall be avoided by alleviating long monotonous structures through architectural design and by separating watercraft slips. A 15-foot no slip buffer shall be required for every 20 watercraft slips. 
7.  Architectural design shall consider pedestrian access to the shoreline area of the Intracoastal Waterway. Design standards shall include, but are not limited to, step-ways as well as the incorporation of raised spans in the dock design. 
8.  Boathouses within a marina facility shall utilize "hip" roofs and shall not be enclosed or contain walls. All marina facilities that include slips shall be consistent by either having all slips that contain boathouses or no slips that contain boathouses. Roofs for boathouses shall be of the same material and color. Roofs for any purpose other than for a boathouse or slip, excluding gazebo type structures, may be permitted by the Land Use Administrator using the same criteria as applicable for variances. 
9.  Fairways shall accommodate a minimum fairway width of one time the length of the longest boat slip. 
10.  Channel entrances and the channel leading to a marina facility shall provide safety and ease of passage and to promote flushing. Exclusive of any docks or berths, channels and channel entrances shall be at least 40 feet wide or four times the beam of the widest watercraft berthed in the marina facility unless an adequate channel traffic control program is provided. 
B.  Vehicular watercraft launching ramps. 
1.  Vehicular launching ramps shall be properly placed and designed to ensure minimal impact on aquatic and terrestrial resources. 
2.  Vehicular launching ramp slopes shall be designed and constructed between 12 and 16 percent above the waterline and 15 to 20 percent below the waterline at mean high water. 
3.  If practical, launching ramps shall be paved to approximately five feet below the extreme low tide and contain a gravel shelf at the end of the ramp. 
4.  For safety purposes, a pier or similar structure shall be provided adjacent to the ramp for boarding and holding a boat while launching. If feasible, piers or similar structure should be provided on both sides of the ramp. 
5.  To provide adequate traction for vehicles, the surface of the ramp shall be scored or patterned. Deep grooves in concrete should be perpendicular to the slope of the ramp to provide adequate traction for vehicular traction. 
6.  Ramps shall be adequately maintained and kept free of algae growth and siltration. 
7.  Adequate safety lighting and appropriate warning signs are required. 
C.  Safety design standards and certification. 
1.  All marina facilities shall be designed and maintained in such a manner as to ensure public safety. 
2.  Fire suppression devices and other associated firefighting facilities shall be installed. Accommodations shall be made and approved by the Land Use Administrator to provide appropriate accessibility for firefighting response teams. Marina facilities shall be constructed in such a manner that would not increase the risk of fire to nearby residential dwellings or that would reasonably be deemed to cause an increase in fire insurance premiums of nearby structures. 
3.  All permit and permit amendment applications for construction or modification or expansion of a marina facility must contain a signed certification from a professional engineer or architect authorized to do business in the state of Florida. The certification must state that the civil, structural, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, and other associated systems of the marina facility are designed to ensure public safety and comply with the most recent editions of the following codes: Florida Building Code, National Electrical Code, Fire Prevention Code, and National Fire Protection Association. 
4.  Upon completion of construction, expansion, or modification of a marina facility, the applicant shall submit follow-up certifications (as-builts) signed by the engineer, architect, and/or master electrician stating that the construction, expansion, or modification was completed in accordance with above-referenced publications and plans submitted to and approved by the City. 
5.  With respect to the electrical requirements only, in lieu of an engineer's certification, a master electrician may design and certify the electrical installations and systems of a marina facility as complying with the most recent editions of the National Electrical Code. 
    4.16.08.  Performance standards. All marina facilities shall be designed, constructed, and operated to protect the natural resources of the City and prevent wastewater and other pollutants from entering water. Except as otherwise expressly stated in this Code, any person who is required to obtain a marina facility permit or permit amendment shall demonstrate compliance with the performance standards set out in this section. 
A.  Natural resource analysis statement. 
1.  All marina facilities. An applicant for a marina facility permit shall prepare and submit as part of the application a natural resource analysis statement, which shall describe the following specific impacts listed below and further identify those best management practices that will be implemented by the applicant to minimize potential environmental impacts. The applicant shall use the results of the natural resource analysis statement to design and operate the marina facility with the least amount of environmental impact reasonably achievable. The applicant is encouraged to consider for inclusion those best management practices listed below after each specific impact, but may include alternative best management practices that are comparable to those listed. 
a.  Solid waste collection and disposal. 
b.  Litter and debris collection and disposal. 
c.  Watercraft cleaning. 
d.  Source pollution control. 
2.  Noncommercial marinas. An applicant for a noncommercial marina permit shall prepare and submit as part of the application, a natural resource analysis statement, which shall describe the following specific impacts listed below and further identify those best management practices that will be implemented by the applicant to minimize such impacts: 
a.  Watercraft sewage management. 
b.  Hazardous material storage. 
3.  Commercial marinas. An applicant for a commercial marina permit shall prepare and submit as part of the application, a natural resource analysis statement, which shall describe the following specific impacts listed below and further identify those best management practices that will be implemented by the applicant to minimize such impacts. Upon two years following application approval and construction, a commercial marina shall pursue a "Clean Marina" designation from the Department of Environmental Protection, Clean Marina Program. 
a.  Watercraft sewage management. 
b.  Hazardous material storage and pollution prevention. 
B.  Threatened and endangered species. All marina facilities shall comply with all applicable laws, rules, regulations, and Ordinances that relate to the protection of endangered or threatened species or species of special concern or which otherwise protect fish and wildlife. 
C.  Dockmaster. All commercial marina facilities shall provide for a dockmaster. All noncommercial marina facilities that include greater than 40 slips shall provide for a dockmaster. The purpose of the dockmaster is to oversee the proper usage of the facility and to ensure compliance with the applicable provisions and requirements of this section. 
D.  Marine service station. Marine service stations shall be permissible in commercial marinas in compliance with the following provisions: 
1.  All construction, components, and operational maintenance standards of marine service station fuel systems shall comply with all federal, state, and local regulations and be constructed in a manner to avoid spills. If a spill occurs, it shall be promptly reported in accordance with all federal, state, and local requirements. 
2.  Provide fueling stations with spill containment equipment, adequate supply of absorbent materials, and other necessary equipment to clean up any minor spills that may occur. 
3.  Promote the use of oil-absorbing materials in the bilge areas of all watercraft with inboard engines. Encourage the examination of these materials at least once a year and replace as necessary. Provide receptacles to recycle materials, if possible, or dispose of them in accordance with all applicable disposal laws, rules, and ordinances. 
E.  Risk management for marina facilities. 
1.  Fire hazards. No activity shall be conducted, and no materials will be stored of such a nature, or in such a manner, so as to constitute a fire hazard. When an activity is being conducted which could constitute a fire hazard, it shall be the responsibility of the party involved to have proper fire protection on the site as determined by the City Fire Marshal. 
2.  Hurricane contingency plan. Marina facilities shall prepare and make available a hurricane contingency plan, which shall include those methods to be taken to secure property and facilities at a marina facility. Commercial marinas shall provide educational materials that include procedures for securing of watercraft for those who own or rent space at the commercial marina. 
3.  Lighting. Marina facilities shall be continuously lighted from sunset to sunrise and during periods of restricted visibility. 
a.  The minimum safety lighting shall adequately define the presence of all structures located on or over the water surface. 
b.  When possible, lighting shall be so located and configured or shielded so as not to present a hazard to navigation and to minimize ambient light pollution. 
c.  Marina facility lighting shall be wired with a photo-electric cell-operated switch so that the lights will automatically operate. 
d.  All watercraft proceeding within the marina confines shall be at "idle speed - no wake", meaning a very slow speed whereby the wake or wash created by the watercraft would be minimal, and shall adhere to any limits related to manatee protection areas. 
e.  Personal throwable flotation devices shall be readily available on the marina facility at intervals of every 100 feet at the marina facility. Ladders shall be installed in appropriate locations and intervals to provide emergency access to the surface water within a marina facility. 
F.  Prohibited acts. 
1.  It is prohibited and unlawful for a watercraft to transmit stray electrical current. Compliance with this requirement will be deemed satisfied when the electrical resistance is more than 1,000 ohms as measured between the water adjacent to the watercraft and all of the three alternating current conductors at the dock end of the shore power cord. This cord, at the time of measurement, must be connected to the watercraft's alternating current terminals. The watercraft's alternating current circuit shall be switched to the "on" position and connected as for normal dockside operation. 
2.  If a watercraft is found by a certified electrical contractor or a certified marina electrical contractor to be producing stray current, notice shall be given to the owner and a reasonable amount of time provided to correct the problem. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the marina owner or operator or the dockmaster shall have the authority to disconnect the watercraft from shore power immediately if the level of stray current being produced poses a real and immediate threat to personal safety or the rapid corrosion of the watercraft and/or its neighboring watercraft/structures. If the watercraft is unplugged upon discovery of the stray current, every effort will be made to promptly notify the watercraft's owner as to the action taken. The dockmaster, however, shall assume no liability whatsoever for any losses or damage suffered from the denial of shore power to a watercraft producing stray current. If the problem is not corrected in a reasonable amount of time, the dockmaster will have the right to disconnect the watercraft from shore power until corrective action is taken. If the licensee reconnects the watercraft without being fixed, for any other purpose than stray-current testing, the dockmaster may deny use of shore power. Continued reconnection to shore power, if the watercraft's ground fault has not been corrected, may result in the cancellation of the berth license agreement. Shore power cords shall be of the three wire type including a functioning ground wire with insulation types SO, ST or STO and with a wire thickness in accordance with all applicable building and safety codes. Cords that are found to be a significant hazard to personal safety shall be unplugged immediately. 
3.  It is prohibited and unlawful to carry, store, or transfer either gasoline or diesel onto any dock of any marina facility, except for less than 25 gallons of premixed outboard motor fuel. All other fueling shall be accomplished at a marina service station or other appropriate location. 
4.  It is prohibited and unlawful for an owner, operator, or person in command of any watercraft to operate or allow such watercraft to be operated within a marina facility at a speed in excess of posted limits, or in any reckless or negligent manner. Watercraft operators and owners shall be responsible for any damage or injury produced by their creation of an excessive wake within a marina facility. 
5.  It is prohibited and unlawful to tie up, moor, or operate a watercraft in a marina facility area in such a manner as will prevent or obstruct the passage of other watercrafts or voluntarily or carelessly sink any watercraft in any channel, or float loose timbers, logs, or piles in any channel in such a manner as to obstruct, impede, or create a menace to navigation. 
6.  It is prohibited and unlawful to swim, dive, water-ski, or skin dive within a marina area; provided, however, that a person may dive or skin dive for the purpose of bona fide scientific research, inspection of the marina or a watercraft, maintenance of a watercraft, or making of emergency repairs on any watercraft. 
7.  Live-aboard watercraft is prohibited and unlawful in a noncommercial marina facility. 
8.  It is prohibited and unlawful to discharge any human waste whatsoever, or any substance or material deleterious to fish, plant, or bird life from a watercraft except in a lawful manner. Waste of any nature may only be disposed of in accordance with law and it is prohibited and unlawful to dispose of waste in any manner contrary to law or in a manner that could reasonably result in adverse impact to natural resources or the public health, safety, or welfare. 
9.  It is prohibited and unlawful to allow a person to perform any work on, or provide any service to any licensee or watercraft within a marina for which such person receives a fee, compensation, or any other thing of value, unless such person has first paid the City's local business tax. 
10.  It is prohibited and unlawful to conduct any activity that endangers any endangered or threatened species or species of special concern or to threaten, harass, or endanger wildlife in a manner inconsistent with the provisions of federal and state law, regulations, or ordinances. 
G.  Abandoned, derelict, and hazardous structures. 
1.  No abandoned, derelict, or hazardous marina structures shall be allowed upon navigable waters of the City or shores of the City. Marina facility structures that are likely to damage private or public property or become a hazard to navigation shall not be permissible. 
2.  The owner, homeowners association, or other legal authority responsible for the marina facility shall be responsible for providing maintenance and repairs of the marina facility and associated structures. Structures that are found to be hazardous to the public health safety, and welfare or damaging to environmental resources, are subject to being removed following written notification by the City. 
3.  Refer to Palm Coast Code section entitled "Abandoned or Derelict Vessels." 
    4.16.09.  Inspections. 
A.  Right of entry. Authorized agents, firefighting personnel, law enforcement officers, or employees of the City shall have the right to enter at all reasonable times in or upon any property, whether public or private, for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to construction, modification, or operation of a marina facility or existing marina facility. The City shall not enter private property having management in residence without first notifying the management, or the person in charge at the time of the inspection, of their presence and exhibiting proper credentials. Authorized City employees shall observe the rules of the establishment being inspected concerning safety and fire protection. Nothing in this section, however, shall preclude a law enforcement officer from entering the property without notice to investigate suspected criminal activity as might otherwise be allowed under the laws of the State of Florida. 
B.  Final inspection. When a development order for a marina facility is issued in accordance with the requirements of this Code and upon completion of construction activities, the City will complete a final inspection of a marina facility to ensure that it is in compliance with all applicable regulations and construction standards, and is consistent with approved construction plans prior to operation. The following items shall be provided to the City prior to initiating a final inspection: 
1.  Four copies of as-builts; 
2.  Auto Cad format as-builts provided on a compact disc; 
3.  All original testing reports; 
4.  All federal, state, and other applicable permits or clearance letters; and 
5.  Certificate of completion from the engineer stating that the marina facility has been constructed per his/her signed and sealed construction plans. 
    4.16.10.  Exemptions. The following are exempt from the provisions of Section 4.16: 
A.  Docks as an accessory use to a single-family home abutting a single-family lot. 
B.  Marina facilities existing, or which have not been constructed, but have received local governmental approval prior to August 19, 2008 shall be exempt from the provisions of this Code, but shall be subject to all other applicable permit requirements of any and all agencies with jurisdiction. Any modification to marina facilities to increase the existing number of slips will be subject to the provisions of this Code. 
    4.16.11.  Deviations and variances. 
A.  Deviations. The Land Use Administrator may issue a deviation of up to five percent of any development standard contained herein if it is determined that the effect of the deviation is minimal or insignificant and meets the variance conditions in Subsection 4.16.11.B below. Any deviation request shall be submitted in writing and approval shall be issued in writing. 
B.  Variance. The Planning and Land Development Regulation Board shall have the power to grant a variance to the provisions of this Code where strict adherence to one or more of the standards would either: 1) result in an undue hardship demonstrated on the basis of an irregular or unusual shoreline configuration; or 2) result in marina facility design or placement which, for unintended or unanticipated reasons, does not meet the general purposes and intent of this Code. Variance requests shall be in accordance with requirements established in Chapter 2 and shall also be evaluated based upon their effects or impacts on: 
1.  State surface water quality standards; 
2.  Endangered and threatened species; 
3.  Navigability within the marina facility or the abutting waterbodies; 
4.  Abutting properties including, but not limited to, waterfront usability, views, or riparian rights; 
5.  The public health, safety, and welfare including, but not limited to, boater safety, the provision of fire safety mechanisms, and provision of adequate sanitary sewer facilities; and 
6.  The variance, if granted, shall not impair the overall purposes and intent of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, §§ 31-33, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 4.17. - Outdoor Oriented Uses and Activities. 
    4.17.01.  Outdoor storage in SFR, EST, DPX, MHD, and MFR Districts. Refer to Chapter 44, Article II in the City of Palm Coast Code of Ordinances. 
    Refer to Section 4.19 for temporary uses, i.e. special events, and seasonal promotions and sales. 
    4.17.02.  Outdoor storage in COM, OFC, PSP, IND, P&G, and PRS Districts. Where outdoor storage is a principal permitted use or a regularly recurring accessory use (not including outdoor displays of merchandise) in nonresidential zoning districts the following requirements shall apply: 
A.  Screening. 
1.  Screening shall be attained through one of the following options: 
a.  Landscape material in conjunction with a black vinyl chain link fence at least six feet in height, or more than six feet when used to screen shipping containers. 
b.  Opaque fence or wall meeting the requirements outlined in Section 4.01. 
c.  Architectural features consistent with all approved structures on site. 
d.  An administrative waiver may be granted by the Land Use Administrator upon a finding that a natural buffer or wetland area adequately screens the area. 
2.  No merchandise, equipment, machinery, materials, motor vehicles, or other items (including shipping container storage areas) shall be stored above the height of the screening. 
B.  Shipping container storage. Temporary storage of shipping containers is allowed if storage is limited to a 90 calendar day period, with containers not to be replaced within 90 calendar days. Temporary areas used for shipping container storage shall be depicted on site plans. Containers shall be located a minimum of 20 feet from all building openings on a durable all weather surface and shall not be located where visible from any surrounding rights-of-way, in any driveways, fire lanes, pedestrian ways, or parking spaces required to meet the minimum standards for the site. 
    4.17.03.  Outdoor display of merchandise. 
A.  Outside displays. Outside retail displays (not including seasonal promotions and sales-refer to Subsection 4.19.04) shall be permitted during normal business hours when located on the same lot as an existing retail business that is operating from an approved building provided that: 
1.  Outside displays are subordinate and accessory to the existing business; 
2.  Outside displays are conducted only by the owner or tenant leasing a unit on the site; 
3.  Outside displays are limited to the goods and services normally offered by the owner or tenant leasing a unit; 
4.  Outside displays are consistent with the zoning of that parcel; 
5.  Outside displays do not hinder required access to the site or create safety hazards; 
6.  Outside displays are located adjacent to the building and not located within any portion of the vehicular use area; and 
7.  The outside display area was depicted on a site plan. 
B.  Vending machines. A maximum of two vending machines per 100 feet of linear building frontage shall be permitted outside of commercial buildings provided they are located under roof, placed flush against a building wall, and do not obstruct pedestrian accessibility. 
Sec. 4.18. - Recreational Vehicle Parks. 
    4.18.01.  Intent. It is the intent of the City to provide for areas to be developed for the parking of recreational vehicles, travel trailers, motor homes, camping tents, and trailers occupied as a temporary living quarters in an environment that provides for recreational amenities and on-site conveniences. It is further intended that the individual spaces not be marketed or sold for individual ownership, but that the site be retained in a form of single or common ownership. 
    4.18.02.  Applicability. The regulations in this section apply to all developments providing for the accommodation of transient recreational vehicles, camping tents, and trailers in zoning districts that allow such uses as permitted, limited, or special exception. 
    4.18.03.  Limitations. Recreational parks are intended for temporary accommodations and shall not be developed for permanent residential use or for homesteading purposes. An occupant shall not remain in the same recreational park for a period exceeding six months in any 12-month period. Spaces shall be rented by the day, week, or month only. 
    4.18.04.  Permitted uses, facilities, and structures. 
A.  Parking of recreational vehicles, travel trailers, motor homes, camping tents, and trailers. 
B.  Recreational facilities including, but not limited to, community room or center, fields and courts, docks, swimming pools, boat-launching areas, and similar facilities. 
C.  Shower, restroom, laundry, and maintenance facilities. 
D.  Sale of groceries, sundries, (liquefied petroleum gas, bait, tackle, and supplies). 
E.  Management office and manager or caretaker residence. 
F.  The only permitted enclosed storage structure and garage facilities are those associated with the park manager or caretaker residence. 
G.  Free standing screen rooms and/or cabanas may be permitted if such structures are totally independent from the recreational vehicle and shall be constructed in such a manner as not to impede the immediate removal of any recreational vehicle from its designated site. 
H.  Concrete slabs, decks, and patios may be permitted provided such facilities are detached and structurally independent from the accompanying recreational vehicles and in no way impede the immediate removal of recreational vehicles from the site. 
    4.18.05.  Development standards. 
A.  Size. 
1.  The minimum area for a recreational park shall be three acres. 
2.  The minimum recreational vehicle space size shall be 30 feet by 60 feet. 
B.  Setbacks. 
1.  All structures shall comply with the minimum building setback requirements of the zoning district upon which the subject property is located, except that no RV space site shall be located within 30 feet of the project's perimeter. 
2.  All commercial structures that are accessory to the principal use shall be oriented to the interior of the recreational park. 
C.  Building height. The maximum building height shall be 35 feet. 
D.  Utilities. 
1.  Central water and sewer facilities and electricity shall be provided except for primitive campgrounds designed for tents only. 
2.  Dumpsters for trash and recyclables shall be located no farther than three 300 [feet] from any individual site. 
3.  Unless every recreational vehicle site has a sanitary waste outlet, a central pump-out station shall be provided. 
E.  Landscaping and buffers. Landscaping and buffers shall be required as outlined in Chapter 11. 
F.  Recreation areas. There shall be at least one active recreational area comprising at least five percent of the total land area of the project. The recreation area shall be easily accessible to all occupants of the project. 
G.  Parking. 
1.  Parking for individual sites is not required to be paved. However, sufficient space shall be provided at each site to accommodate at least one vehicle. 
2.  Off-street parking spaces meeting the parking requirements outlined in Chapter 5 shall be provided for all other uses within the recreational vehicle park. 
H.  Access. 
1.  The recreational vehicle park shall be located near an arterial road. No entrance or exit to a recreational vehicle park shall be allowed through a residential district. 
2.  All accessory structures shall only be accessible from a street within the recreational park. 
Sec. 4.19. - Temporary Uses. 
    The temporary uses included in this section are not meant to be all-inclusive or to address every type of use or special event that may occur from time-to-time. Uses and events not specifically included in this section shall be reviewed by the Land Use Administrator to determine if the proposed use or event is temporary and how it should be regulated. Determinations and requirements established by the Land Use Administrator may be appealed to the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board and the City Council in accordance with the appeal procedures established in Chapter 2. 
4.19.01.  Construction trailers. Construction trailers are permitted to provide contractors with a temporary shelter for office use, project management, and on-site storage of equipment in conformity with the following standards: 
A.  Only one temporary construction trailer per contractor for office use within the construction site is permitted. Additional trailers may be approved on a case-by-case basis as determined by the Land Use Administrator based upon clear evidence of necessity. 
B.  The placement of the trailer(s) on the site is subject to review and approval by the Land Use Administrator. 
C.  The trailer(s) shall be removed within three working days following the Land Use Administrator's acceptance of the construction completion. 
D.  Approved water and wastewater facilities shall be provided. 
E.  Pedestrian access shall be provided from the parking area to the office. 
F.  A fence or similar barrier shall be provided to prevent visitors and customers from entering the construction area. 
G.  Only one identification sign per trailer is permitted. The sign area shall not exceed six square feet. 
4.19.02.  Model homes. 
A.  Intent and applicability. This section is intended to ensure that impacts associated with model homes in residential zoning districts are temporary in nature and reasonably controlled. This section is applicable to model homes located in residential zoning districts and does not apply to model home centers located in commercially zoned areas. 
B.  General. The following are required prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a residential dwelling to be used as a model home: 
1.  City water and wastewater facilities shall be operating and accessible to the public. 
2.  Adequate fire protection shall be in place. 
3.  A stabilized access road shall be in place. 
C.  Duration of use. A residential dwelling unit may be used as a model for a maximum period of five years from the date the certificate of occupancy is issued. Any residential dwelling unit legally permitted as a model as of the effective date of this ordinance shall be permitted to remain as a model home until January 1, 2016. 
Permitted and prohibited activities. 
1.  A model home may be used for activities typical to an "open house" for sale, including tours by a real estate agent and negotiation or execution of sales contracts for the sale of that builder's homes or products. 
2.  A model home shall not: 
a.  Be used as a primary or secondary office for a homebuilder or real estate agent with regard to conducting business activities outside of those permitted above. 
b.  Be used for storage of building materials. 
3.  The garage of the model home may be used as an office for sales staff if separate off-street parking is provided. 
4.  The garage must be equipped with a standard garage door, unless dedicated off-site parking is provided, excluding rights-of-ways. 
5.  If the space for the required garage has been converted to space for purposes other than a garage, the space must be converted back to a residential garage and equipped with a standard garage door prior to the sale and use as a dwelling unit. 
D.  Hours of operation. A model home may be open to the public during the following time periods: 
1.  Monday through Saturday: Between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
2.  Sunday: Between the hours of 12:00 noon and 5:00 p.m. 
3.  Holidays: Between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
E.  Signage. Refer to Chapter 12 in this Code. 
F.  Lighting. Lighting at the sites of model homes shall be limited to interior and exterior lighting normally associated with single-family residences. Exterior flood lights may not be used. 
    4.19.03.  Sales trailers and leasing offices. Temporary sales and leasing offices for residential development are allowed in any residential zoning district. In addition to applicable zoning district regulations, a temporary sales and leasing offices must comply with the following standards: 
A.  The development plan for the residential development shall indicate the location of the temporary sales and leasing offices. 
B.  Only one sales trailer shall be allowed for every 200 lots or units. 
C.  Temporary sales and leasing offices proposing to operate for a period of six months or less shall be skirted and landscaped. In addition, temporary sales and leasing offices remaining for a period greater than six months shall be located on a concrete slab or stem wall and shall be skirted and landscaped. Temporary sales and leasing offices may be used for a maximum period of two years from the date the certificate of occupancy is issued. The Land Use Administrator may grant a one-year extension. 
D.  Pedestrian access shall be provided from the parking area to the office. 
E.  Parking shall be provided on a paved surface and shall be designed to prevent the need to back onto a street right-of-way or pedestrian-way. 
F.  A fence or similar barrier shall be provided to prevent visitors and customers from entering the construction area. 
G.  Only one identification sign per office is permitted. The sign area shall not exceed six square feet. 
H.  Water and wastewater facilities shall be provided. 
    4.19.04.  Seasonal promotions and sales. 
A.  General requirements. Seasonal and holiday related promotions and sales including, but not limited to, Christmas tree sales, pumpkin sales, fireworks, etc., may be permitted subject to the following: 
1.  The use is consistent with the zoning, development, and dimensional standards of that parcel; 
2.  If a tent, electric, or water is used, a building permit is required; 
3.  All local business license taxes shall be paid; 
4.  The use may be permitted for a maximum period of 45 consecutive days; 
5.  Written, notarized permission from all owners of record of the property, or authorized agent of the owner (must provide proof of being an authorized agent), shall be submitted to the City. 
6.  A plan shall be submitted illustrating the location of the space for the seasonal sale and depicting, at a minimum, the following: 
a.  Adequate and safe ingress and egress; 
b.  On-site parking availability; and 
c.  Sanitary facilities. 
7.  The use does not result in the reduction of any existing parking spaces to less than the minimum number of spaces required for the primary use. 
B.  Determination of additional seasonal events. The Land Use Administrator shall determine the types of event, other than those listed herein, that constitute a seasonal holiday related promotion or sale. 
    4.19.05.  Special events. Refer to the City of Palm Coast Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, § 34, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2010-13, § 2, 10-5-10) 
Sec. 4.20. - Wireless Telecommunications. 
    4.20.01. Legislative purposes. 
A.  The legislative purposes of this section are to: 
1.  Promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the public by regulating the siting of wireless communication facilities. 
2.  Minimize the impacts of wireless communication facilities on surrounding areas by establishing standards for location, structural integrity and land use compatibility. 
3.  Establish standards for preferred siting, design and screening by requiring consistency with the City's Wireless Master Plan, consistent with the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012 ("Spectrum Act"). 
4.  Encourage the use of public lands, buildings, and structures as locations for wireless telecommunications infrastructure thereby establishing more ability to manage selected sites identified in the City's Wireless Master Plan. 
5.  Encourage coordination and collocation of antennas on existing structures to meet coverage needs and promote the efficient use of existing infrastructure. 
6.  Accommodate the growing need and demand for wireless communications services in a manner that ensures the placement, construction or modification of wireless communication facilities complies with all applicable state and federal laws. 
7.  Ensure there is sufficient wireless infrastructure to support public safety communication services throughout the City, including times of evacuation and disaster response. 
8.  Encourage providers of wireless communication facilities to locate wireless communication facilities in areas where the need is demonstrated and planned for and adverse impacts on the community is minimal. 
9.  Respond to the rational policies embodied in the Telecommunications Act of 1996 in such a manner as not to unreasonably discriminate between providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services or to prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting personal wireless services. 
10.  Ensure that land use decisions are made in consideration of, and in compatibility with, the goals, objectives and policies of the City of Palm Coast Comprehensive Plan and its land development regulations as set forth in the Land Development Code (LDC). 
B.  It is the intent of this section that all actions of the City be consistent with controlling federal and state law. 
C.  The City Council of the City of Palm Coast hereby finds and determines that this section is consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the City of Palm Coast Comprehensive Plan and other controlling law. 
    4.20.02. Definitions. 
    Ancillary structure means, for the purposes of this section, any form of development associated with a WCF including, but not limited to: foundations, concrete slabs on grade, guy anchors, generators, and transmission cable supports; provided, however, specifically excluding equipment cabinets. 
    Antenna means any apparatus designed for the transmitting and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves including, but not limited to: telephonic, radio or television communications. Types of elements include, but are not limited to: omni-directional (whip) antennas, sectionerized (panel) antennas, multi or single bay (FM and TV), yagi, or parabolic (dish) antennas. 
    Antenna array means a single or group of antenna elements and associated mounting hardware, transmission lines, or other appurtenances which share a common attachment device such as a mounting frame or mounting support structure for the sole purpose of transmitting or receiving electromagnetic waves. 
    Antenna element means any antenna or antenna array. 
    Anti-climbing device means a piece or pieces of equipment, which are either attached to an antenna support structure, or which are freestanding and are designed to prevent people from climbing the structure. These devices may include, but are not limited to, fine mesh wrap around structure legs, "squirrel-cones," or other approved devices, but excluding the use of barbed or razor wire. 
    Attached WCF means an antenna or antenna array that is secured to an existing base station with any accompanying pole or device which attaches it to the building or structure, together with transmission cables, and an equipment cabinet, which may be located either on the roof or inside/outside of the building or structure. An attached WCF is considered to be an accessory use to the existing principal use on a site. 
    Base Station means a structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term does not encompass a tower as defined herein, or any equipment associated with a tower. "Base station" includes, without limitation: 
1.  Equipment associated with wireless communications services such as private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul. 
2.  Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including distributed antenna systems ("DAS") and small-cell networks). 
3.  Any structure other than a tower that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the City under this subsection, supports or houses equipment described in subsections (1) and (2) of this definition that has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another state or local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing that support. 
    The term does not include any structure that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the City under this subsection, does not support or house equipment described in subsections (1) and (2) of this definition. 
    Breakpoint technology means the engineering design of a monopole wherein a specified point on the monopole is designed to have stresses concentrated so that the point is at least five percent more susceptible to failure than any other point along the monopole so that in the event of a structural failure of the monopole, the failure will occur at the breakpoint rather than at the base plate, anchor bolts, or any other point on the monopole. 
    Collocation means the situation in which a second or subsequent communications services provider or a pass-through provider uses an existing structure to locate a second or subsequent antenna or wireless communication facility. The term includes the ground, platform, or roof installation of equipment enclosures, cabinets, or buildings, and cables, brackets, and other equipment associated with the location and operation of a communication antenna. 
    Combined antenna means an antenna or an antenna array designed and utilized to provide services for more than one wireless provider for the same or similar type of services. 
    Concealed means a tower, base station, ancillary structure, or equipment compound that is not readily identifiable as a wireless communication facility, and is designed to be aesthetically compatible with existing and proposed building(s) and uses on a site or in the neighborhood or area. There are two types of concealed facilities: 
1.  Concealed base stations may include painted antenna and feed lines to match the color of a building or structure, faux parapets, windows, dormers, or other architectural features that blend with an existing or proposed [building] or structure. 
2.  Concealed freestanding towers which look like something else that is common in the region such as a church steeple, bell tower, clock tower, light standard, flagpole with a flag that is proportional in size to the height and girth of the tower, or tree that grows naturally or is commonly found in the area. 
    Development area means the area occupied by a WCF including, but not limited to, areas inside or under the following: an antenna-support structure's framework, equipment cabinets, ancillary structures and accessways. 
    Eligible Facilities Request means any request for modification of an existing tower or base station that, in accordance with the definitions contained in FCC regulations codified at 47 C.F.R. § 1.40001, does not substantially change the physical dimensions of the existing support structure and is requesting: 
1.  Collocation of new transmission equipment; 
2.  Removal of existing transmission equipment; or 
3.  Replacement of existing transmission equipment. 
    Eligible support structure means any tower or base station that is existing at the time the relevant application is filed with the City under this subsection. 
    Environmentally Sensitive Lands are as provided in Chapter 10 of the Unified Land Development Code - Environmental and Cultural Resource Protection. 
    Equipment cabinet means any structure above the base flood elevation including, but not limited to, cabinets, shelters, pedestals, and other similar structures. Equipment cabinets are used exclusively to contain radio or other equipment necessary for the transmission or reception of wireless communication signals. 
    Equipment compound means the fenced area surrounding the ground-based wireless communication facility including, but not limited to, the areas inside or under the following: the tower's framework and ancillary structures such as equipment necessary to operate the antenna on the WCF that is above the base flood elevation including: cabinets, shelters, pedestals, and other similar structures. 
    Equipment facility means a room, cabinet, shelter, pedestal, build-out of an existing structure, building, or similar structure used to house ancillary equipment for a communication tower or antenna. Each such cabinet, shelter, or building shall be considered a separate equipment facility. 
    Existing means a constructed tower or base station existing for purposes of this section that has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another State or local regulatory review process, provided that a tower that has not been reviewed because it was not in a zoned area when it was built, but was lawfully constructed, is existing for purposes of this subsection. 
    Expedited collocation application means collocation applications, or portions thereof, on towers or base stations, excluding collocations on a historic building, structure, site, object, or district, that meet the criteria set forth in F.S. § 365.172(13)(a), as amended. 
    FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Feed lines means cables used as the interconnecting media between the transmission/receiving base station and the antenna. 
    Flush-mounted means any antenna or antenna array attached directly to the face of the support structure or building such that no portion of the antenna extends above the height of the support structure or building. Where a maximum flush-mounting distance is given, that distance shall be measured from the outside edge of the support structure or building to the inside edge of the antenna. 
    Freestanding WCF or collocations means those where the antenna or antenna array is located on towers, concealed or nonconcealed, together with the ancillary structures, feed lines, equipment shelters, and other necessary facilities, which may be located either on or in the tower. 
    Geographic search ring means an area designated by a wireless provider or operator for a new base station, produced in accordance with generally accepted principles of wireless engineering. 
    Guyed structure (see tower). Guyed structures for new WCFs are prohibited within the City. 
    Handoff candidate means a wireless communication facility that receives call transference from another wireless facility, usually located in an adjacent first "tier" surrounding the initial wireless facility. 
    Lattice structure (see Tower). Lattice structures for new WCFs are prohibited within the City. 
    Least visually obtrusive profile means the design of a wireless communication facility intended to present a visual profile that is the minimum profile necessary for the facility to properly function. 
    Level I refers to a wireless communication facility permit subject to administrative review and approval by the Land Use Administrator or designee, with no public hearing requirement. 
    Level II refers to wireless communication facility permit subject to the special exception approval process set forth in Section 2.07 of the Land Development Code, except that the application review and approval timeframes set forth in Section 4.20.10 shall apply. New towers proposed in non-Wireless Master Plan Sites shall require Level II permits. All other installations only require Level I permits. 
    Micro Wireless Facility (see Section 42-103). 
    Modification means a modification of an existing tower or base station to increase the height, or to improve its integrity, by replacing or removing one or several tower(s) located in proximity to a proposed new tower in order to encourage compliance with this section or improve aesthetics or functionality of the overall wireless network. 
    Monopole structure (see Tower). 
    Non-concealed WCF means a wireless communication facility that is readily identifiable as such and can be either freestanding or attached. 
    Personal wireless service means commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services, as defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996. 
    Public safety communications equipment means all communications equipment utilized by a public entity for the purpose of ensuring the safety of the citizens of the City and operating within the frequency range of 700 MHz and 1,000 MHz and any future spectrum allocations at the direction of the FCC. 
    Public View means a non-amplified visual range of site from rights-of-way, sidewalks, adjacent properties, or other publically accessible vantage points. 
    Radio frequency (RF) emissions means any electromagnetic radiation or other communications signal emitted from an antenna or antenna-related equipment on the ground, antenna support structure, building, or other vertical projection. 
    Radio frequency (RF) propagation means wireless telecommunications signal service area as shown on maps. 
    Satellite Earth Station means a single or group of parabolic (or dish) antennas are mounted to a support device that may be a pole or truss assembly attached to a foundation in the ground, or in some other configuration. A satellite earth station may include, but is not limited to, the associated separate equipment cabinets necessary for the transmission or reception of wireless communications signals with satellites. 
    Site means for towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the tower, and any access or utility easements currently related to the site, and, for other eligible support structures, further restricted to that area in proximity to the structure and to other transmission equipment already deployed on the ground. 
    Small wireless facility (See Section 42-103). 
    Substantial Change means a modification that substantially changes the physical dimensions of an eligible support structure if it meets any of the following criteria: 
1.  For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it increases the height of the tower by more than ten percent or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever is greater; for other eligible support structures, it increases the height of the structure by more than ten percent or more than ten feet, whichever is greater. Changes in height should be measured from the original support structure in cases where deployments are or will be separated horizontally, such as on buildings' rooftops; in other circumstances, changes in height should be measured from the dimensions of the tower or base station, inclusive of originally approved appurtenances and any modifications that were approved prior to the passage of the Spectrum Act; 
2.  For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that would protrude from the edge of the tower more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater; for other eligible support structures, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the structure that would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than six feet; 
3.  For any eligible support structure, it involves installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four cabinets; or, for towers in the public rights-of-way and base stations, it involves installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if there are no preexisting ground cabinets associated with the structure, or else involves installation of ground cabinets that are more than ten percent larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets associated with the structure; 
4.  It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site; 
5.  It would defeat the concealment elements of the eligible support structure; or 
6.  It does not comply with conditions associated with the siting approval of the construction or modification of the eligible support structure or base station equipment; provided, however, that this limitation does not apply to any modification that is noncompliant only in a manner that would not exceed the thresholds identified in subsections (1) through (4) of this definition. 
    Tower means any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any FCC-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including structures that are constructed for wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site. Towers do not include any device used to attach antennas to an existing building, unless the device extends above the highest point of the building by more than 20 feet. A tower may be concealed or non-concealed. Non-concealed towers include: 
1.  Guyed structure means a style of tower consisting of a single truss assembly composed of sections with bracing incorporated. The sections are attached to each other, and the assembly is attached to a foundation and supported by a series of wires that are connected to anchors placed in the ground or on a building. Guyed structures for new WCFs are prohibited within the City. 
2.  Lattice structure means a self-supporting tapered style of tower that consists of vertical and horizontal supports with multiple legs and cross-bracing, and metal crossed strips or bars to support antennas. Lattice structures for new WCFs are prohibited within the City. 
3.  Monopole structure means a style of freestanding tower consisting of a single shaft usually composed of two or more hollow sections that are in turn attached to a foundation. This type of tower is designed to support itself without the use of guy wires or other stabilization devices. These facilities are mounted to a foundation that rests on or in the ground or on a building's roof. All feed lines shall be installed within the shaft of the structure. 
    Transmission Equipment means equipment that facilitates transmission for any FCC- licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supply. The term includes equipment associated with wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul. 
    WCF (see Wireless Communication Facility). 
    Wireless communication facility (WCF) means any staffed or unstaffed location for the transmission and/or reception of radio frequency signals, or other personal wireless communications, as defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and usually consisting of an antenna or antenna array, transmission cables, feed lines, equipment cabinets, towers, cabling, antenna brackets, and other such equipment. The following shall be deemed a wireless communication facility: new, replacement, or existing towers, government-owned towers, modified towers, collocation on existing towers or base stations, attached concealed and non-concealed antenna, dual purpose facilities, DAS, small cell, concealed towers, and non-concealed towers, so long as those facilities are used in the provision of personal wireless services as that term is defined in the Telecommunications Act. 
    Wireless communications means any personal wireless service, which includes but is not limited to, cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), unlicensed spectrum services utilizing devices described in Part 15 of the FCC's regulations (e.g., wireless internet services and paging). 
    Wireless Master Plan means the Wireless Telecommunications Master Plan developed and adopted by the City, as amended from time to time, to enforce applicable development standards, land development regulations, state law and federal law related to the deployment of wireless telecommunications infrastructure. 
    4.20.03. Applicability. 
A.  Except as provided in Section 4.20.04, the following shall apply to the development activities including, but not limited to, installation, construction or modification of the following wireless communications facilities: 
1.  Existing towers. 
2.  Proposed towers. 
3.  Public towers. 
4.  Replacement of existing towers. 
5.  Collocation on towers and base stations. 
6.  Attached WCF. 
7.  Concealed WCF. 
B.  These regulations are subject to state and federal law limitations. 
    4.20.04.  Exempt installations. The following uses are exempt from the provisions of this section notwithstanding any other provision of the City's land development regulations, but are subject to all applicable building code compliance and building permit reviews: 
1.  Non-commercial, amateur radio antennas as provided for in F.S. § 125.561. 
2.  Satellite earth stations that are one meter (39.37 inches) or less in diameter in all residential districts and two meters or less in all other zoning districts and which are not greater than 20 feet above grade in residential districts and 35 feet above grade in all other zoning districts. 
3.  A government-owned WCF, upon the declaration of a state of emergency by federal, state, or local government, and a written determination of public necessity by the City; except that such WCF must comply with all federal and state requirements. This exemption shall terminate upon the state of emergency ending. 
4.  A government-owned WCF erected for the purposes of installing antenna(s) and ancillary equipment necessary to provide communications for public health and safety. 
5.  A temporary, commercial WCF, upon the declaration of a state of emergency by federal, state or local government, or determination of public necessity by the City, and approval by the City; except that such WCF must comply with all federal and state requirements. The exemption may be permitted by the City to continue to three months after the duration of the state of emergency. 
6.  A temporary, commercial WCF for the purposes of providing coverage of a special event such as news coverage or sporting event, subject to approved by the City, except that such WCF must comply with all federal and state requirements. Said WCF may be exempt for a period of up to one week after the duration of the special event. 
7.  Antenna support structures, antennas, and/or antenna arrays for AM/FM/TV/HDTV broadcasting transmission facilities that are licensed by the FCC shall be regulated in accordance with federal, state and other applicable regulations. 
    4.20.05.  Wireless Master Plan. 
A.  The City has adopted a Wireless Master Plan by Resolution of the City Council. The Wireless Master Plan identifies existing or proposed City or publicly owned sites for wireless communication infrastructure and service. 
B.  Design standards for proposed towers in the Wireless Master Plan shall be consistent with this Ordinance and the Wireless Master Plan but may be further detailed and addressed through the required lease terms for use of any public property. 
C.  The Wireless Master Plan was adopted by the City Council by Resolution No. [2018-], as may be amended by City Council resolution hereafter. And, by this reference, the Wireless Master Plan is incorporated herein. 
D.  The Land Use Administrator or designee may waive application requirements in Section 4.20.09 for sites within the Wireless Master Plan. The applicable requirements are listed in Section 4.20.09. 
E.  If an applicant receives a permit to develop a site on City-owned property, the permit shall not become effective until the applicant and the City have executed a written agreement or lease setting forth the applicable terms and provisions. 
F.  No permit granted under this section shall convey an exclusive right, privilege, permit, or franchise to occupy or use the publicly owned sites of the jurisdiction for delivery of wireless communications services or any other purpose. 
G.  No permit granted under this section shall convey any right, title or interest in the public lands, but shall be deemed a permit only to use and occupy the public lands for the limited purposes and term stated in the agreement between the lessor and lessee. 
H.  Sites located within the Wireless Master Plan may utilize a standard landscape plan, approved by the Land Use Administrator or designee. 
I.  Sites within the Wireless Master Plan may utilize alternative compliance standards to access a WCF site, if approved by the Land Use Administrator or designee. 
    4.20.06.  Preferred siting locations. 
A.  All new WCFs and any supporting structures, except for those proposed within the public rights-of-way, shall generally adhere to the following siting preferences, in order of preference: 
1.  City-owned property identified in the Wireless Master Plan; 
2.  Other public property identified in the Wireless Master Plan; 
3.  Other City-owned or public property not identified in the Wireless Master Plan; 
4.  Privately owned property not identified in the Wireless Master Plan. 
B.  If the proposed location for the new WCF is not consistent with the preferred hierarchy and the Wireless Master Plan, the applicant must file relevant information as indicated in Section 4.20.09 with the siting application including, at minimum, the following: 
1.  An affidavit by a radio frequency engineer demonstrating that despite diligent efforts to adhere to the geographic preferences established in the wireless master plan, wireless master plan options are not technically infeasible, practical or justified given the location of the proposed WCF; 
2.  An affidavit demonstrating that the proposed site will not adversely affect existing or future single-family uses or environmentally sensitive areas and is not contrary to the City's Comprehensive Plan and Unified Land Development Code; and 
3.  The existing land uses of the subject and surrounding properties within 300 feet of the proposed site. 
C.  This section shall not be interpreted to require applicants to locate on publicly-owned sites when lease negotiation processes are prohibitively lengthy or expensive relative to those of the private sector as determined by the Land Use Administrator or designee, based upon competent substantial evidence. The applicant is considered justified in selecting a lower-ranked privately-owned property option if the government entity fails to approve a memorandum of agreement or letter of intent to lease a specified publicly-owned site within 90 days of the application date or if it is demonstrated that the proposed lease rate for the specified public-owned site significantly exceeds the market rate for comparable privately-owned sites. 
    4.20.07.  Permitted uses. 
A.  The placement, maintenance or modification of WCFs shall be permitted only in accordance with the wireless communication permit, and the land development requirements of this Code. The placement or maintenance of wireless communication facilities in the public rights-of-way shall comply with the regulations of Chapter 42 of the Code of Ordinances: 
B.  Applicable permits. All applications shall meet the review timeframes as shown in Section 4.20.10. 
1.  Level I wireless communication facility permit. All applicable non-exempt applications to place, maintain, modify, or collocate wireless communications facilities, not subject to special exception use approval, shall be subject to administrative review and approval by the Land Use Administrator or designee, with no public hearing requirement. 
2.  Level II wireless communication facility permit. All applicable non-exempt applications to place, maintain, or substantially change wireless communications facilities that do not qualify for an administrative permit shall be subject to the special exception approval process set forth in Section 2.07 of the Land Development Code, except that the application review and approval timeframes set forth in Section 4.20.10 shall apply. New towers proposed in non-master planned sites shall require Level II permits. All other installations only require Level I permits. 
3.  Communications Rights-of-Way Permit. All non-exempt applications to place, maintain, modify, or collocate wireless communications facilities within the public rights-of-way shall be subject to the review and approval requirements set forth in Chapter 42, Code of Ordinances, and the applicable land development regulations set forth herein. Wireless communication facilities, other than small wireless facilities and micro wireless facilities, are prohibited within the public rights-of-way. 
4.  Eligible facilities requests. Any request for modification of an existing tower or base station involving collocation of new transmission equipment; removal of transmission equipment; or replacement of transmission equipment that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station shall be reviewed and processed in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 4.20.12. 
C.  Expedited collocation applications. 
1.  Expedited collocation applications for antenna on towers. In accordance with F.S. § 365.172, collocation of antenna on towers, including nonconforming towers, are subject only to building-permit review, which may include a review for compliance with this section, if the applicants meet the following requirements: 
a.  The collocation does not increase the height of the tower to which the antennae are to be attached, measured to the highest point of any part of the tower or any existing antenna attached to the tower; and 
b.  The collocation does not increase the ground space area, commonly known as the compound, approved in the site plan for equipment facilities and ancillary facilities, except as allowed under this section; and 
c.  The collocation consists of antennas, equipment facilities, and ancillary facilities that are of a design and configuration consistent with all applicable regulations, restrictions, or conditions, if any, applied to the initial antennas placed on the tower and to its accompanying equipment facilities and ancillary facilities and, if applicable, applied to the tower supporting the antennas. Such regulations may include the design and aesthetic requirements but not procedural requirements, other than those authorized by this subsection, of the applicable land development code in effect at the time the initial antenna's placement was approved. 
Such collocations shall not be subject to the design or placement requirements of the land development code in effect at the time of the collocation that are more restrictive than those in effect at the time of the initial antenna placement approval, to any other portion of the land development code, or to public hearing review. Such collocation applications shall be decided by the Land Use Administrator or designee. 
2.  Expedited collocation applications for antenna on base stations. In accordance with F.S. § 365.172, except for an historic building, structure, site, object, or district, the following collocation applications on all other existing base stations shall be subject to no more than administrative review for compliance with this section and building permit standards if they meet the following requirements: 
a.  The collocation does not increase the height; 
b.  The collocation does not increase the existing ground space area, otherwise known as the compound, if any, approved in the site plan for the equipment facility and ancillary facilities. 
c.  The collocation consists of antennas, equipment facility and ancillary facilities that are of a design and configuration consistent with any applicable structural or aesthetic design requirements and any requirements for location on the structure in effect at the time of approval of the structure, but not prohibitions or restrictions on the placement of additional collocations on the existing structure or procedural requirements, other than those authorized by this subsection at the time of the collocation application; and 
d.  The collocation consists of antennas, equipment facility and ancillary facilities that are of a design and configuration consistent with all applicable restrictions or conditions, if any, that do not conflict with subsection (c), and were applied to the initial antennas placed on the structure and to its accompanying equipment facility and ancillary facilities and, if applicable, applied to the structure supporting the antennas. 
3.  If only a portion of the collocation does not meet the requirements of any of the above subsections, such as an increase in the height or a proposal to expand the ground space approved in the site plan for the equipment facility by more than 400 square feet or 50 percent, where all other portions of the collocation meet the requirements of this subsection, that portion of the collocation only may be reviewed as set forth in subsection (6) below. A collocation proposal under this subsection that increases the ground space area approved in the original site plan, for equipment facilities and ancillary facilities, by no more than a cumulative amount of 400 square feet or 50 percent of the original compound size, whichever is greater, shall require no more than administrative review for compliance with the City's regulations; including, but not limited to, land development code and building permit review; provided, however, that any collocation proposal that increases the original compound size more than such greater cumulative amount shall be reviewed as if it were a new communications facility. 
4.  Any existing tower, including a nonconforming tower, may be structurally modified to permit collocation, or may be replaced through no more than administrative review and building permit review, and is not subject to public hearing review, if the overall height of the tower is not increased and, if the replacement tower is a monopole tower, or if the pre-existing tower is a stealth tower, the replacement tower is a similar stealth tower. 
5.  The owner of the existing tower on which the proposed antennas are to be collocated shall remain responsible for compliance with any applicable condition or requirement of a permit or agreement, or any applicable condition or requirement of the land development code to which the pre-existing tower must comply, including any aesthetic requirements, provided the condition or requirement is consistent with this subsection. 
6.  Collocations or portions of collocations that are not exempt from this section and do not fall under the provisions of subsections 4.20.07.C(1) through (4), shall be reviewed through a full permitted use review. Those located on historic structures or in historic districts, shall be reviewed through the review processes for historic structures or districts indicated in the LDC. 
    4.20.08.  Development standards. 
A.  General: 
1.  All development standards and land development code regulations relating to the property upon which the WCF is located shall apply. Additionally, where permitted as provided in Section 4.20.07, the following development standards apply to all attached collocations and all new, modified, or combined WCF installations. Where any environmentally sensitive lands, historic or scenic overlay districts or corridor plans also apply, the most restrictive standards shall govern. 
2.  Cabinets shall be provided within the principal building, behind a screen on a rooftop or on the ground within the fenced-in and screened equipment compound. This is not required if out of the public view. 
3.  All equipment compounds shall be enclosed with a wood/brick/masonry fence or otherwise secured and screened with opaque landscaping. Fencing shall be subject to the requirements as outlined in the LDC. 
4.  WCF equipment compounds shall be landscaped as required in Chapter 11 of the LDC. Wireless Master Plan sites may utilize a standard alternative landscape plan approved by the Land Use Administrator or designee. 
5.  Attaching commercial messages for off-site and on-site advertising to a WCF is prohibited and unlawful. The placement of a religious symbol as part of the concealment of a WCF shall not be considered prohibited commercial messages or signage. The only signage that is permitted upon a tower, equipment cabinet, or fence shall be informational, and for the purpose of identifying the tower (such as ASR registration number), as well as the party responsible for the operation and maintenance of the facility, its current address and telephone number, security or safety signs, and property manager signs (if applicable). On permitted signs which are not located on a tower, cabinet or fence, a WCF may be concealed inside such signage, provided that all applicable standards for both the signage and the concealed WCF are met. 
6.  Lighting on WCFs, if required by the FAA, shall not exceed the FAA minimum standards. Any lighting required by the FAA must be of the minimum intensity and number of flashes per minute (i.e., the longest duration between flashes) allowable by the FAA to minimize the potential attraction to migratory birds. Dual lighting standards are required and strobe light standards are prohibited unless required by the FAA. The lights shall be oriented so as not to project directly onto surrounding residential property, consistent with FAA requirements. Any security lighting for on-ground facilities and equipment shall be in compliance with the LDC. 
7.  Each WCF and its equipment compounds shall be constructed and maintained in conformance with all applicable building code requirements. 
8.  Equipment compounds shall not be used for the storage of any excess equipment or hazardous waste (e.g., discarded batteries). It is prohibited and unlawful to allow an outdoor storage yard in a WCF equipment compound or to use the equipment compound as habitable space. 
9.  The WCF shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local regulations. 
10.  The WCF applicant shall comply with all applicable American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standards as adopted by the FCC. 
11.  Each WCF shall be designed to ensure that no sound emissions from machinery, alarms, bells, buzzers, or similar noise making devised are audible beyond the perimeter of the equipment compound and shall comply with the City of Palm Coast Code of Ordinances. Emergency backup power generators are allowed to operate in short term maintenance durations, and during power outages. 
12.  Building permits. A building permit shall be required for the construction, modification, and collocation of all WCFs, including any accessory structures or equipment, as provided in Section 4.20.07 above. A compliance letter from the State Historic Preservation Office of Cultural and Historic Programs of the Florida Department of State is a condition of receiving a building permit. 
13.  The WCF and its equipment compound shall be subject to the setbacks of the underlying zoning district. Antennas may extend a maximum of 30 inches into the setback. However, no antenna or portion of any structure shall extend into any easement. 
B.  Attached WCFs: 
1.  Attached WCFs may be permitted in all zoning districts. The top of the attached WCF shall not be more than 20 feet above the existing or proposed building or structure. 
2.  Feed lines and antennas shall be designed to architecturally match the facade, roof, wall, or structure on which they are affixed in order to blend with the existing structural design, color, and texture and in order to provide the least visually obtrusive profile. 
C.  Freestanding WCFs: 
1.  All new freestanding WCFs shall meet minimum lot size standards of the underlying zoning district and are subject to the LDC. 
2.  New freestanding towers shall be configured and located in a manner that shall minimize adverse effects including, but not limited to, visual impacts on the landscape and adjacent properties. New freestanding WCFs shall be designed to match adjacent structures and landscapes with specific design considerations such as architectural design, height, scale, color and texture, and shall have the least visually obtrusive profile. 
3.  Grading shall be minimized and limited only to the area necessary for the new WCF as approved by the Land Use Administrator or designee. 
4.  All support structures shall be certified to comply with the safety standards contained in the Electronics Industries Association/Telecommunications Industries Association (EIA/TIA) Document 222-F, Structural Standards For Steel Antenna Towers and Supporting Structures, as amended, by a Florida professional engineer. 
5.  Freestanding towers may only be permitted as monopole towers. Guyed and lattice structures are prohibited, unless the applicant demonstrates to the City by clear and convincing evidence that monopole towers are not feasible to accommodate the intended uses. Freestanding monopoles are prohibited from single-family or multi-family residential districts unless the applicant can conclusively demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that it cannot reasonably provide its service to the residential zone from outside of the district. The City shall cooperate to determine an appropriate location for the freestanding tower of an appropriate design within the residential district. The applicant shall reimburse the City for all reasonable costs incurred by the City for this cooperative determination. 
6.  The height of a new monopole tower shall not exceed the heights provided in the table below: 
Freestanding Non-Wireless Master Plan SitesZoneMaximum Height WCFSingle family Residential Not permitted unless applicant can conclusively demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that it cannot reasonably provide its service to the residential zone from outside of the district. Multifamily Residential Not permitted unless applicant can conclusively demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that it cannot reasonably provide its service to the residential zone from outside of the district. MPD As determined by the MPD ordinance, unless within a Wireless Master Plan All other districts Up to 150 feet. Wireless Master Plan SitesAll districts Up to 150 feet.  
7.  In calculating the height limit, above ground foundation shall be included, but lightning rods or lights required by the FAA that do not provide any support for antennas shall be excluded. If the freestanding WCF is located within the Wireless Master Plan, the maximum height may be up to 150 feet. 
8.  A freestanding monopole and its equipment compound shall be subject to the land development code regulations applicable to the underlying zoning district. The minimum setback distance for a freestanding tower shall be 150 feet from any residentially zoned or platted property. Freestanding monopoles are not allowed in residentially zoned or platted property. In the event of any conflict between this section and the Land Development Code, this section shall control. 
9.  New towers shall maintain a galvanized gray finish or other approved contextual or compatible color and provide the least visually obtrusive profile, except as required by Federal regulations. The level of required concealment for antenna placement shall be determined based upon the visibility and location of the proposed tower and the network objectives of the desired coverage area. 
10.  All new or modified freestanding WCFs shall be engineered to maximize collocation. 
D.  Attached Collocation or Combined WCFs: 
1.  An attached collocation or combined WCF shall not increase the height of an existing tower or base station by more than 20 feet, unless required by Federal law. The maximum total height shall be 150 feet. 
2.  The City may require new antenna to be flush-mounted or concealed on a case by case basis, if it is determined that a practical visual and aesthetic benefit can be achieved if in the public view. If the applicant demonstrates through RF propagation analysis that flush-mounted or concealed antennas will not meet the network objectives of the desired coverage area, this requirement shall not apply. This provision does not apply to Wireless Master Plan Sites. 
    4.20.09.  Submittal requirements for Level I and Level II permits. 
A.  Application form. Requests for Level I and Level II wireless communication permits shall be made only on application forms approved by the City. Applications shall contain all information required by this land development code and other City regulations, and shall be reviewed for completeness. 
B.  Application materials. In addition to the application materials specified in this code for the appropriate type of review, all applications shall provide sufficient materials (plans, graphics, narratives, or expert statements) to demonstrate compliance with all applicable requirements of this section. 
1.  Level I and Level II applications shall contain the following: 
a.  Application. 
b.  A site plan addressing the development standards of the LDC. If applicable, an application meeting the special exception requirements of Section 2.07 of the LDC shall be submitted. 
c.  An affidavit by a RF engineer demonstrating compliance with Section 4.20.05. If a non-master plan site is proposed, the affidavit must address why master plan sites are not technically feasible, practical or justified given the location of the proposed WCF communications facility. 
d.  FCC documentation including a copy of FCC license submittal or registration, and FCC license or registration. 
e.  Proposed maximum height of the WCF including, but not limited to, individual measurement of the base, the tower or base station, and lightning rod. 
f.  Photo-simulated post-construction renderings of the completed proposed tower, base station, equipment cabinets, and ancillary structures from locations to be determined during a mandatory pre-application conference. The renderings shall include proposed exterior paint and stain samples for any items to be painted or stained, exterior building material and roof samples. The applicant shall provide simulated photographic evidence of the proposed WCFs appearance from a maximum of four vantage points chosen by the City with consultation with the applicant. 
g.  If the proposed WCF is subject to FAA regulation, then, prior to issuance of a building permit, evidence of compliance with applicable FAA requirements under 14 C.F.R. § 77 et seq., as amended, together with any FAA "no hazard" determinations concerning the WCF (if applicable) shall be timely provided by the applicant to the City. 
h.  In order to facilitate the regulation, placement, and construction of WCFs and to ensure that all parties comply with the rules, regulations and applicable guidelines of the FCC, each owner of a WCF or applicant for a WCF shall provide an affirmative statement that it will comply with all applicable federal, state and local statutory and regulatory requirements. 
i.  For applications for new towers or other freestanding WCFs, as necessary to determine that there is no other existing structure that could reasonably be used for the placement of the proposed antennas, or for applications for new WCFs or attached collocations that increase the height of an existing structure, as needed to determine if the proposed height is necessary to provide the carrier's designed service, materials detailing the locations of existing WCFs to which the proposed antenna will be candidate for placement, including, but not limited to, latitude and longitude of the proposed and existing antenna. This material is not required for Wireless Master Plan sites. 
j.  For applications for new towers or other freestanding WCFs, as necessary to determine that there is no other existing structure that could reasonably be used for the placement of the proposed antennas, a map showing the designated search ring. This map is not required for Wireless Master Plan sites. 
k.  With regard to attached collocations, attached and combined WCFs, the applicant shall also submit: 
i.  Certification furnished by a Florida registered professional engineer that the WCF has sufficient structural integrity to support the proposed antenna and feed lines in addition to all other equipment located or mounted on the structure. 
l.  With regard to freestanding concealed or non-concealed WCFs, and modification of WCFs, for non-Wireless Master Plan sites only, the applicant shall also submit: 
i.  A report and supporting technical data demonstrating that all antenna attachments and collocations, including all potentially useable utility distribution poles or transmission towers and other elevated structures within the proposed geographic search ring, and alternative antenna configurations have been examined, and found unacceptable. The report shall include reasons that existing facilities such as utility distribution poles and transmission towers and other elevated structures are not acceptable alternatives to a new freestanding WCF. The report regarding the adequacy of alternative existing WCFs or the mitigation of existing WCFs to meet the applicant's need or the needs of service providers indicating that no existing WCF could accommodate the applicant's proposed WCF shall demonstrate any of the following: 
a.  No existing WCFs located within the geographic search ring meet the applicant's engineering requirements, and why. 
b.  Existing WCFs are not of sufficient height to reasonably meet the applicant's engineering requirements, and cannot be increased in height. 
c.  Existing WCFs do not have sufficient structural integrity to support the applicant's proposed WCFs and related equipment, and the existing WCF cannot be sufficiently improved. 
d.  Other limiting factors that render existing WCFs unsuitable. 
ii.  The applicant shall provide simulated photographic evidence of the proposed WCFs appearance from four vantage points chosen by the City with consultation with the applicant, including the facility types the applicant has considered and the impact on adjacent properties including, but not limited to: 
a.  Overall height. 
b.  Configuration. 
c.  Physical location. 
d.  Mass and scale. 
e.  Materials and color. 
f.  Illumination. 
g.  Architectural design. 
This does not apply to Wireless Master Plan sites. 
iii.  If applicable, the applicant shall provide a statement as to the potential visual and aesthetic impacts of the proposed WCF on all adjacent properties assigned a residential land use designation or zoning district. This does not apply to Wireless Master Plan sites. 
iv.  A certification by a Florida professional engineer that the WCF has sufficient structural integrity to accommodate the required and a proposed number of collocations. 
v.  A certification by a Florida professional engineer specifying the design structural failure modes of the proposed WCF, if applicable. 
vi.  Identification of the proposed intended service providers of the WCF. 
m.  With regard to antenna element replacements. 
i.  Any repair or replacement of an existing antenna or antenna array with another of equal number that does not increase the number and/or size of transmission lines, and that is not readily discernibly different in size, type and appearance when viewed from ground level from surrounding properties, as reasonably determined by the City, and which will not alter the structural integrity of the support structure, is exempt from further review, provided that a notarized certification is submitted by a qualified technician stating that the replacement will not alter the structural integrity of the support structure and that any changes will not affect electrical specifications. 
ii.  For any repair or replacement of an existing antenna or antenna array on a WCF that changes the mechanical, structural or electrical specifications of the WCF, but does not increase the number and/or size of feed lines and does not increase the number and/or size of antenna elements to the existing WCF, the applicant must, prior to making such modifications, apply for a new building permit review for such requested changes, and, for structural changes to freestanding WCFs, shall provide, in addition to any other documentation necessary for building permit review, a stamped or sealed structural analysis of the existing freestanding WCF prepared by a Florida professional engineer indicating that the existing tower or base station as well as all existing and proposed appurtenances meets the City and Florida Building Code requirements (including, but not limited to, wind loading) for the tower or base station. 
n.  With regard to the replacement of or modification to an existing WCF, except a tower. The replacement of or modification to a WCF, except a tower, that results in a WCF facility not readily discernibly different in size, type and appearance, when viewed from ground level from surrounding properties, and the replacement or modification of equipment that is not visible from surrounding properties, all as reasonably determined by the Land Use Administrator, are subject only to building permit review. 
2.  Level II applications. 
a.  A completed special exception approval application, and all items required pursuant to Section 2.07, including compliance with all applicable special exception requirements. 
C.  Disclosure of ownership. A notarized affidavit from all owners having a legal, equitable, or beneficial ownership interest in the tower or base station, or privately owned real property upon which a facility is or will be located or collocated, granting permission to the applicant to locate upon such real property, or attach to the tower or base station being collocated upon or attached to. 
D.  Submission of fee. All applications must be accompanied by the permit fee as established by resolution of the City Council. 
    4.20.10.  Application Review Process. 
A.  A pre-application conference is required. To minimize issues related to permit application, prior to submitting materials for a permit application, an applicant must request a pre-submittal meeting with the Land Use Administrator or designee. The City shall undertake efforts to accommodate an applicant's request for a pre-application conference within ten business days of a request. 
B.  Expert review. The City may require that all wireless communications permit applications be reviewed by a third-party consultant or expert at the expense of the applicant for compliance with the requirements set forth herein. No permit shall be issued to any applicant that has not fully reimbursed the City for the third-party review fees, which shall be limited to the specifically identified reasonable expenses incurred in the review. 
C.  Application Review Timeframes: "shot clock". The City's action on proposals to place, maintain, modify, or collocate wireless communications facilities shall be subject to the applicable standards and timeframes set out in F.S. § 365.172, 47 U.S.C. § 1455 (a) and Orders issued by the FCC, as same may be amended from time to time. All Federal and State "shot clock" timeframe guidelines that apply to any particular permit are hereby recognized by the City, and the City will make all reasonable efforts to comply. Except for eligible facilities request applications reviewed in accordance with Section 4.20.12, the following procedures apply to installation of a new WCF or modification: 
1.  Notification of completeness. The Land Use Administrator or designee shall notify the applicant within 20 business days after the date the application is submitted as to whether the application is, for administrative purposes only, properly completed and has been properly submitted in accordance with the requirements set forth above. However, such determination shall not be deemed as an approval of the application. Such notification shall indicate with specificity any deficiencies which, if cured, could make the application properly completed. 
2.  Expedited collocation applications. The City shall grant or deny each properly completed expedited collocation application for collocation based on the application's compliance with this section, applicable provisions of the City Code and any other applicable regulations, and within the normal timeframe for a similar building permit review, but in no case later than 45 business days after the date the application is determined to be properly completed. This timeframe shall not apply to lease negotiations for collocation on City-owned property. 
3.  All other applications. The City shall grant or deny each properly completed application for any other non-exempt WCF, including special exception approvals and collocations that do not qualify for an expedited collocation, based on the application's compliance with this section and any other applicable law, including but not limited to the City Code, and within the normal timeframe for a similar type of review, but in no case later than 90 business days after the date the City determines the application is completed. This timeframe shall not apply to lease negotiations for wireless communications facilities on City-owned property. Collocations located on historic base stations, or within a historic district, shall be reviewed through the review processes for historic structures or districts indicated in the LDC. 
4.  An application is deemed submitted or resubmitted on the date the application is received by the City. If the City does not notify the applicant in writing that the application is not completed in compliance with the City's regulations within 20 business days after the date the application is initially submitted or additional information resubmitted, the application is deemed, for administrative purposes only, to be properly completed and properly submitted. However, the determination shall not be deemed as an approval of the application. If the application is not completed in compliance with the City's regulations, the City shall so notify the applicant in writing indicating with specificity any deficiencies in the required documents or deficiencies in the content of the required documents which, if cured, would make the application properly completed. Upon resubmission of information to cure the stated deficiencies, the City shall notify the applicant, in writing, within the normal timeframes of review, but in no case longer than 20 business days after the additional information is submitted, of any remaining deficiencies that must be cured. However, if applicant does not cure the application deficiencies within 20 business days after receiving the notice of deficiencies, the application shall be considered withdrawn or closed unless an extension, due to reasonable circumstances, of the time to cure is requested by the applicant prior to the expiration of the 20-day period, and such extension is granted by the Land Use Administrator or designee. 
5.  The timeframes specified above may be extended, but in no case longer than 90 calendar days for collocations, and 150 calendar days for new installations, and only to the extent that the application has not been granted or denied because the City's procedures generally applicable to all other similar types of applications require action by the City Council or Planning and Land Development Regulation Board, and such action has not taken place within the specified timeframes. Under such circumstances, the City Council or Planning and Land Development Regulation Board, as applicable, shall either grant or deny the application at its next regularly scheduled meeting, or, otherwise, the application shall be deemed automatically approved; accordingly, the Land Use Administrator or designee may by letter to the applicant extend the timeframe for a decision until the next available scheduled meeting date of the City Council or Planning and Land Development Regulation Board as to whether to grant or deny an application for a permit. To be effective, a waiver of the timeframes set forth herein must be voluntarily agreed to by the applicant and the City. The City may request, but not require, a waiver of the timeframes by the applicant, except that, with respect to a specific application, the City may require a one-time waiver in the case of a declared local, state, or federal emergency that directly affects the administration of all permitting activities of the City. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City and an applicant may voluntarily agree to waive the timeframes set forth above. 
D.  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by an administrative decision rendered by the Land Use Administrator regarding the provisions of this Section 4.20 may appeal such decision to the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board in accordance Section 2.16.01 of the LDC. 
    4.20.11.  Interference with public safety communications. 
A.  The City adopts a policy of requesting prior notification of activation or modification of WCF facilities as provided for in 47 C.F.R. § 22.973 and 47 C.F.R. § 90.675 and in accordance with those provisions, WCF providers shall notify the Land Use Administrator or designee prior to a new site activation or existing site modification and provide the information required by the federal regulations. 
B.  Whenever the City has encountered radio frequency interference with its public safety communications equipment, and it believes that such interference has been or is being caused by one or more WCFs, the following steps shall be taken: 
1.  The City shall provide notification to all WCF service providers operating within 5,000 feet of the public safety communications equipment at issue, in accordance with the procedures indicated in 47 C.F.R. § 22.972 and 47 C.F.R. § 90.674, using the website www.Publicsafety800mhzinterference.com. Upon such notification, the owners shall use their best efforts to cooperate and coordinate with the City and among themselves to investigate and mitigate the interference, if any, utilizing the procedures set forth in 47 C.F.R. § 22.972 and 47 C.F.R. § 90.674 and following the applicable FCC adopted Best Practices Guide, as may be amended or revised by the FCC from time-to-time. 
2.  If any WCF owner fails to cooperate with the City in complying with the owner's obligations under this section and if the FCC makes a determination of radio frequency interference with the City public safety communications equipment, an owner who fails to cooperate and/or the owner of the WCF which caused the interference, shall be responsible, upon FCC determination of radio frequency interference, for reimbursing the City for all reasonable costs associated with ascertaining and resolving the interference including, but not limited to, any engineering studies obtained by the City to determine the source of the interference. For the purposes of this subsection, failure to cooperate shall include failure to initiate any response or action as described in 47 C.F.R. § 22.972 and 47 C.F.R. § 90.674. 
    4.20.12.  Eligible Facilities Requests. 
A.  Applicability and Intent. This section implements Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012 ("Spectrum Act") as interpreted by the Federal Communications Commission's ("FCC") Acceleration of Broadband Deployment Report and Order dated October 21, 2014, which requires local governments to approve any eligible facilities request for modification of an existing tower or base station that does not result in a substantial change to the physical dimensions of such tower or base station. This section shall apply only to eligible facilities requests for an eligible support structure that is a legal conforming or legal nonconforming structure at the time a completed eligible facilities request is submitted to the City. To the extent that the nonconforming structures and use provisions of the City of Palm Coast LDCs would operate to prohibit or condition approval of an eligible facilities request otherwise allowed under this section, such provisions are superseded by this section. This subsection shall not apply to an eligible facilities request replacement of the existing tower or base station. This subsection shall also not apply where the WCF requested to be modified is located upon a City-owned structure, or upon non-right-of-way property which is either City-owned or City-leased. 
B.  Sole and Exclusive Procedure. Except as may otherwise be provided in this section, and notwithstanding any other provisions in the City Code, the provisions of this section shall be the sole and exclusive procedure for review and approval of an eligible facilities request which the applicant asserts is subject to review under the Spectrum Act. To the extent that other provisions of the City Code establish a parallel process for review and approval of a project application for a proposed eligible facilities request, the provisions of this section shall control. In the event that an application for a project approval includes a proposal to modify an eligible support structure, and the applicant does not assert in the application that the proposal is subject to review under Section 6409 of the Spectrum Act, such proposal shall not be entitled to review under this section and may be subject to review under other applicable provisions of the City Code. 
C.  Application Requirements. No eligible facilities request shall be deemed complete unless it is in writing, accompanied by the application fee, includes the required submittals, and is attested to by the authorized person submitting the application on behalf of the applicant. The application shall be submitted on a form prepared by the City. The applicant shall be obligated to demonstrate conclusively that the proposed modification satisfies the standards set forth herein and that the modification shall meet all applicable building codes. 
D.  Review of Application. The City shall review an eligible facilities request application to determine if the proposed modification is subject to this section, and if so, if the proposed modification will result in a substantial change to the physical dimensions of an eligible support structure. 
E.  Timeframe for Review. Within 45 calendar days of the date on which an applicant submits a request seeking approval under this subsection, the City shall approve, and may not deny, an eligible facilities request, unless it determines that the application is not covered by this section or proposes a substantial change to the physical dimensions of the eligible support structure. 
F.  Tolling of Timeframe for Review. The 45-day period begins to run when the application is filed with the Land Use Administrator or designee in person during the City's regular business hours, and may be tolled only by mutual agreement, or in cases where the City determines that the application is incomplete. 
1.  To toll the timeframe for incompleteness, the City must provide written notice to the applicant within 30 calendar days of receipt of the application, clearly and specifically delineating all missing documents or information. 
2.  The timeframe for review begins running again when the applicant makes a supplemental submission in response to the City's notice of incompleteness. 
3.  Following a supplemental submission, the City shall have ten calendar days to notify the applicant that the supplemental submission did not provide the information identified in the original notice delineating missing information. The timeframe is tolled in the case of second or subsequent notices pursuant to the same procedure used for the first notice of incompleteness. Except as may be otherwise agreed to by the applicant and the City, second or subsequent notices of incompleteness may not specify missing documents or information that were not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness. 
4.  Notices of incompleteness from the City shall be deemed received by the applicant upon the earlier of personal service upon the applicant, three days from deposit of the notice in the U.S. Mail, postage prepaid, to the applicant, or by electronic mail if the applicant has agreed to receive notices in such a manner. 
5.  If after submittal of the application the applicant modifies the eligible facilities request, the modified application shall be considered a new application subject to commencement of a new application review period. 
G.  Approval or Denial. An eligible facilities request shall be approved, and an eligible facilities permit issued, upon determination by the City that the proposed modification is subject to this section and that it does not substantially change the physical dimensions of an eligible support structure. An eligible facilities request shall be denied upon determination by the City that the proposed modification is not subject to this section or will substantially change the physical dimensions of an eligible support structure. 
H.  Denial. A denial of an eligible facilities request shall be in writing and shall set forth the reasons for the denial. 
I.  Remedies. Applicant and City retain any and all remedies that are available at law or in equity and any action challenging a denial of an application or notice of a deemed approved remedy, may be brought in a court of competent jurisdiction within 30 days following the date of the denial or following the date of notification of the deemed approved remedy. 
J.  Applicable Code Requirements. Nothing in this section shall relieve the applicant from compliance with applicable building, structural, electrical, and safety codes and with other laws codifying objective standards reasonably related to health and safety. Any approved eligible facilities request may be conditioned upon compliance with such codes and other laws. 
K.  Expiration of Approval. An approved eligible facilities request shall be valid for a term of 180 days from the date of approval or the date the application is deemed approved. 
L.  Not Covered as an Eligible Facilities Request. Should the City determine that an applicant's request is not covered by Section 6409(a) of the Spectrum Act, the presumptively reasonable timeframe under 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7), as prescribed by the FCC's Shot Clock order, will begin to run from the issuance of the City's decision that the application is not a covered request. To the extent such information is necessary, the City may request additional information from the applicant to evaluate the application under 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7), pursuant to the limitations applicable to other reviews under that statute. 
M.  Failure to Act. In the event the City fails to approve or deny a request under this section within the timeframe for review, accounting for any tolling, the request shall be deemed granted. The application deemed granted does not become effective until the applicant notifies the City in writing after the review period has expired, accounting for any tolling, that the application has been deemed granted. 
    4.20.13.  Abandonment. Any WCF and equipment compound that is not operated for a continuous period of 210 days shall be considered abandoned. The Land Use Administrator may require removal of the WCF and equipment compound under the following circumstances, which are deemed detrimental to the health, safety and welfare interests of the City: 
1.  The WCF has not been operated for a continuous period of 210 days, except for periods caused by force majeure, in which case, repair or removal shall commence within 90 days or within such other reasonable time approved by the Land Use Administrator; 
2.  The WCF creates a public health or safety hazard, which shall be deemed a nuisance per se; or 
3.  The WCF has been located, constructed, or modified without obtaining all permits and approvals required by law, or located, constructed, or modified in a manner inconsistent with applicable permit requirements and state or federal law. 
    If the Land Use Administrator makes such a determination the owner of such WCF and equipment compound shall remove the same, at the owner's expense, within 90 days of receipt of notice from the City notifying the owner of such abandonment. An owner may apply to extend the time for removal or reactivation by submitting an application stating the reason for such extension. The City may extend the time for removal or reactivation up to 90 days upon a showing of good cause. If the WCF or equipment compound is not removed in accordance with the requirements of this section, the City may give notice that it will contract for removal within 90 days following written notice to the owner. Thereafter, the City may cause removal of the WCF and equipment compound with all costs being borne by the owner. The City may record a lien against the property in the amount of all costs and expenses of the City. Upon removal of the WCF, the equipment compound and the foundations, including two feet below ground level, the development area shall be returned to its natural state and topography and vegetated consistent with the natural surroundings or consistent with the current use of the land at the time of removal. The cost of rehabilitation shall be borne by the owner. Except as provided herein, the abandonment of WCFs within public rights-of-way shall be managed in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 42-123, City Code of Ordinances. Any special exception approval for a WCF shall automatically expire 210 days from the date of abandonment without reactivation, or upon completion of dismantling and removal, whichever is first, or pursuant to the notice required by Section 42-123 of the City Code of Ordinances. 
    4.20.14.  Code enforcement. 
A.  The City may enforce the provisions of this section in accordance with the provisions of applicable state law and pursue any and all available legal remedies. 
B.  The City shall engage in a program of periodic inspections to ensure continuing adherence to the standards of this section and to ensure that WCFs are being appropriately maintained. 
    4.20.15.  Compliance with state and federal regulations; preemption. In implementing this section and the provisions set forth herein, the City shall comply with applicable state and federal regulations, and the provisions of this section shall be given force to the maximum amount and greatest extent permissible under state and federal law. Except as authorized pursuant to state and federal law, in the event of any conflict between the terms of this section and state or federal law, state and federal law shall control. In the event any provision of this section is specifically preempted, or judicially determined to be preempted by state or federal law, then the preempted provision shall automatically be deemed null and void and the superseding provision of state or federal law shall prevail. 
( Ord. No. 2018-02 , § 5(Att. A), 2-6-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-02 , § 5(Att. A), adopted Feb. 6, 2018, changed the title of § 4.20 from "Wireless Communications Facilities" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 4.21. - Electronic Game Promotions. 
    4.21.01.  Purpose and intent. In the interest of the public health, peace, safety, and general welfare of the citizens and inhabitants of the City of Palm Coast, this section is established to regulate the use of electronic means to effect giveaways through drawings by chance conducted in connection with the sale of a consumer product or service, sweepstakes, and game promotions. 
    4.21.02.  Separation requirements. Establishments conducting electronic game promotions with electronic equipment on site shall not operate within 1,000 feet of a church, public park, or school, unless such establishment was in operation prior to the church, park, or school locating nearby. Distances shall be measured from property line to property line without regard to the route of travel. This subsection does not apply to de minimis activity establishments. 
    4.21.03.  Compliance with city and state law. Electronic game promotions and de minimis activity establishments shall comply with Chapter 16, Article IX, in the City of Palm Coast Code of Ordinances and F.S. ch. 166. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3, § 3, 5-1-12) 
Chapter 5 - TRANSPORTATION, CONNECTIVITY, ACCESS, AND PARKING 

Sec. 5.01. - Purpose and Applicability. 
    5.01.01.  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish requirements for a transportation system that operates by moving people and goods efficiently, safely, and provides a balance between mobility and accessibility. 
    5.01.02. Applicability. All development shall provide transportation, access, parking, loading, stacking, bicycle, and pedestrian facilities in compliance with the standards of this chapter. All facilities shall be maintained as long as the principal use continues. 
( Ord. No. 2018-21 , § 3, 10-2-18) 
Sec. 5.02. - Transportation and Connectivity. 
    5.02.01.  Streets. 
A.  All proposed developments, except for sites developed with utility facilities such as cable substations, communication towers, etc., shall front on a paved street or paved access easement. This street, if not already paved, shall be paved by the developer from the entrance of the development to the nearest public paved street(s). The character, width, grade, and location of all streets shall conform to City standards and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. Construction and material specifications for streets shall conform to the Florida Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction and the following: 
1.  The City Council may approve developer proposed private streets in residential areas via a plat approval. In such cases, all such streets shall meet all design and construction criteria of the City for public streets, and a condominium or homeowners association or equivalent shall be created with all duties and powers necessary to ensure perpetual maintenance of such private streets. All streets shall be constructed to the exterior property lines of the development unless they are permanently terminated by a cul-de-sac or an intersection with another street. Public streets shall not be gated. 
2.  City Council may approve developer proposed private streets in commercial or industrial areas via a plat approval. In such cases, all streets shall meet the design and construction criteria of the City for public streets unless overriding conditions, such as sharing entrances or parking areas, require different design criteria. A property owners' association or equivalent shall be created with all duties and powers necessary to ensure perpetual maintenance of such private streets. 
B.  The arrangement of streets in a development shall: 
1.  Provide efficient and orderly hierarchy of streets. 
2.  Conform to official plans and maps of the City. 
3.  Be integrated with the existing and planned street system of the surrounding area in a manner that is not detrimental to existing neighborhoods. 
4.  Ensure that the use of local streets by through or nonresidential traffic is discouraged. 
5.  Facilitate and coordinate with the future development of adjoining property of a similar character, and provide for local circulation and convenient access to neighborhood facilities. 
6.  Local streets shall be patterned in such a way that continuous traffic from a collector road to another collector or arterial road is discouraged. 
    5.02.02.  Minimum right-of-way and pavement widths. The following are the minimum right-of-way widths required for streets within the City. Developers shall dedicate sufficient land to meet the right-of-way requirement resulting from the development in accordance with a rational nexus and rough proportionality analysis. A cul-de-sac, even one with a minimally acceptable radius, does not preclude the developer from having a landscaped island within its center as long as the developer can demonstrate that the island does not impede safe turning movements for larger vehicles. 
Table 5-1: Minimum Right-of-Way Width 
Functional Classification Minimum Right-of-Way (ft.) Principal Arterial 200 Minor Arterial 120 Collector/Minor Collector 100/80 Local Streets 50  
Note: The Land Use Administrator may approve, based upon sound and generally acceptable engineering practices and principles, narrower rights-of-way, provided utilities and sidewalks can be accommodated. 
Table 5-2: Required Right-of-Way and Pavement Width 
Street Type Right-of-Way In Feet Pavement In Feet Urban Rural Urban Rural Local (> 75 lots) 50 80 24 24 Residential 
 Up to 75 lots 50 70 24 24 Cul-de-sac 
(radius) 62 62 52 52  
Note: The Land Use Administrator may approve, based upon sound and generally acceptable engineering practices and principles, narrower rights-of-way, provided utilities and sidewalks can be accommodated. 
    5.02.03.  Additional right-of-way. 
A.  Within the area of the setbacks required by this Land Development Code, additional right-of-way may be required to promote public safety and convenience or to ensure adequate access, circulation, and parking based upon a rational nexus and rough proportionality analysis. 
B.  Whenever a street is programmed for improvement (in the adopted budget and the Capital Improvements Element of the Comprehensive Plan) and the need for the improvement is due to development being approved, as determined in a rational nexus and rough proportionality analysis, the owner of the proposed development must convey necessary right-of-way to the City. 
C.  Where a proposed subdivision or site development abuts an existing street of inadequate right-of-way, and the need for additional right-of-way is rationally related to the development being approved, the owner of the development must convey additional right-of-way based upon a rational nexus and rough proportionality. 
D.  All right-of-way dedications, except easements, shall be conveyed to the City by means of a warranty deed or dedication by plat, at the City's discretion. Easements shall be conveyed to the City in a form acceptable to the City. 
E.  All right-of-way dedications are subject to acceptance by the City Council and/or the Land Use Administrator. 
F.  The following requirements shall be adhered to regarding right-of-way for corner clip radius: 
1.  On any corner parcel with access to at least one adjacent road classified as a collector or above, additional right-of-way shall be dedicated to the City if needed to accommodate intersection radius improvements. 
2.  Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded with a minimum radius of 25 feet. A greater radius shall be required at an angle of intersection of less than 75 degrees, as determined by the Land Use Administrator based upon sound and generally accepted engineering practices and principles. 
G.  Right-of-way donations/dedications may be eligible for transportation impact fee credits if the donation or dedication is in accordance with City requirements. 
    5.02.04.  Connectivity and interconnectivity. 
A.  When nonresidential developments are proposed to front on public streets, the City shall require the use of joint driveways and cross-access easements in order to minimize the number and maximize the spacing of access connections unless determined not feasible by the Land Use Administrator due to a unique configuration of the properties or substantial environmental constraints. Whenever cross-access corridors or coordinated or joint parking designs are provided to accomplish access management, each applicant for development approval shall provide such easements or agreements as may be necessary to ensure that adjoining properties shall be appropriately connected in order to implement a unified system allowing general cross-access to and from the other properties in the affected area. Such easements or agreements shall be recorded in the Public Records of Flagler County by the developer at developer's expense and shall constitute a covenant running with the land. When cross-access is provided to an undeveloped adjoining property, a temporary curb shall be provided at the end of the pavement to ensure drivers do not use the cross-access until the adjoining property is developed. Nonresidential developments shall provide a second means of ingress when required by the Florida Fire Prevention Code or this Code. 
B.  All new residential developments of more than 50 dwelling units, or which use as access a street that is 2,500 feet or more in length from another roadway, shall provide a minimum of two vehicular entrances from a public right-of-way, with at least one of the vehicular entrances connecting to a public collector or arterial road, but both directly connecting to a public road. A deviation to the requirement that at least one of the vehicular entrances connect to a public collector or arterial road may be granted by the Land Use Administrator if it is determined by a traffic study administered by a licensed engineer that the additional traffic will not exceed the capacity of surrounding local streets at build-out of the surrounding area, or if the entrance connects to a private roadway meeting City standards, which then connects to a public roadway. 
C.  All developments shall provide for bicycle and pedestrian interconnectivity to promote the use of bicycles and walking and as a means to reduce traffic on collector and arterial roads. 
D.  All residential and nonresidential development that abuts an existing or proposed trail system shall provide pedestrian and bicycle links to the trail system unless it would not be safe. 
E.  All new roads, except those where bicyclists are unlawful, such as controlled access highways, shall be designed and constructed for the provision of bicycle access. Bicycle safe design practices shall be followed including, but not limited to, safe drainage grates, railroad crossings, smooth pavements, and signals responsive to bicycles. In addition, the desirability of adding facilities such as bicycle lanes, bicycle routes, shoulder improvements, and wide curb lanes shall be considered. 
F.  To the fullest extent practicable, all rural arterial and collector sections within one mile of an urbanized area shall be considered for the construction of paved shoulders four feet in width, and all urban arterial and collector sections shall be considered for either a curb lane 14 feet in width or an undesignated lane four feet in width. Generally, such facilities shall not be marked to attract bicycle traffic. 
    5.02.05.  Intersections. 
A.  Streets shall intersect at an angle of 90 degrees, unless unique circumstances justify a lesser angle of intersection based upon sound and generally accepted engineering practices and principles. 
B.  Spacing of street intersections shall be determined based upon Florida Department of Transportation Access Management Standards and Classifications. 
    5.02.06.  Visibility at intersections. 
A.  Sight triangles and sight distance requirements shall adhere to Section 11.03.01.L., including Table 11-3 - Sight Triangle Dimensions Along Driveways and Roadways. 
B.  Within that portion of a lot or parcel that lies within the sight triangle, as defined in Chapter 14, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially obstruct vision between a height of two feet to seven feet above the average grade at the centerline of the adjoining road. 
C.  Low-growing shrubs, annuals, and other lower growing vegetation may be utilized within sight triangles or other areas to ensure visibility is not reduced. 
D.  Trees may be permitted in the sight triangle, at the discretion of the Land Use Administrator, if the trees have a single-trunk and foliage is kept trimmed between two feet and seven feet in height. 
( Ord. No. 2018-21 , § 3, 10-2-18) 
Sec. 5.03. - Access. 
    5.03.01.  Vehicular access. 
A.  Access management, location, design, and construction of driveway connections to the City's road network shall follow criteria and standard practices as established by the City, based upon Florida Department of Transportation's Access Management Standards and Classifications rules. 
B.  All development sites shall provide permanent access from a paved street to each lot or parcel within the development in accordance with City standards. 
C.  Cutting or altering a curb on a public street is prohibited without a permit issued by the City in accordance with Chapter 9. 
D.  In addition to City approval, approval from Florida Department of Transportation for state roads, or Flagler County for county roads, is also required for any access onto such roads. 
E.  All driveways shall be designed and constructed to comply with all drainage standards as outlined in Chapter 9 and shall be constructed utilizing an approved paving material in accordance with City standards. 
    5.03.02.  Pedestrian access. 
A.  All development shall provide paved sidewalks, meeting the latest ADA (Americans with Disabilities Act) and City standards, whenever the development fronts on a collector or arterial street. 
B.  All proposed development fronting a local street shall provide a five-foot wide paved sidewalk(s) along the entire frontage with the local streets, except as outlined below, based on the following standards: 
1.  Where sidewalks are present along frontage with a local street, a five-foot wide paved sidewalk shall be provided connecting the existing sidewalk to the principal building(s). Where development has frontage on more than one local street, five-foot wide paved sidewalks shall connect the principal building(s) to each local street. 
2.  Where no sidewalks are present, a sidewalk shall be provided. The City shall determine the location and size of the sidewalk based on the characteristics of the right-of-way. 
3.  If the construction of a sidewalk is not currently feasible or practical, the Land Use Administrator may allow the developer to make a payment into the Palm Coast Sidewalk Improvement Trust Fund in lieu of sidewalk construction. 
C.  All new residential and nonresidential development adjacent to a proposed multi-use path, consistent with the Bicycle/Pedestrian Master Plan, shall provide an eight-foot to ten-foot wide trail pathway (hard or soft surface per City standards) within the right-of-way or in an easement to provide for the extension of the trail system based upon a rational nexus and rough proportionality analysis. 
D.  Where development fronts on a collector or arterial road, a five-foot paved sidewalk shall be provided to connect the public sidewalk to the principal building(s) with the sidewalk being placed along the collector or arterial road. Where development fronts on more than one collector or arterial roadway, sidewalks shall connect the principal building(s) to each collector/arterial roadway. Five-foot paved sidewalks shall also be provided to connect to adjacent properties. 
E.  All new nonresidential and multifamily residential development shall provide safe and convenient pedestrian access and connectivity throughout the site. 
    5.03.03.  Surfacing. Access to any project or development shall require a hard surface driveway apron meeting City engineering standards connecting the driveway to the pavement of a public street. 
    5.03.04.  Single-family, duplex and townhouse driveway and garage standards. 
A.  Parking spaces and garages for single-family, duplex and townhouse units shall be provided as follows with garages not counting towards minimum required parking spaces: 
1.  Single-family homes with less than 1,200 square feet in living area shall have at least a one-car attached garage and a permanent surface for two exterior parking spaces. Single-family homes with at least 1,200 square feet in living area shall have at least a two-car attached garage unless an exception is specifically permitted by another provision of this Code. 
2.  Duplexes with less than 1,300 square feet in living area per unit shall have at least a one-car attached garage and a permanent surface for two exterior parking spaces per dwelling unit. Duplexes with 1,300 or greater square feet in living area per unit shall have at least a two-car attached garage per dwelling unit unless an exception is specifically permitted by another provision of this Code. 
3.  A townhouse with less than 1,500 square feet in living area shall have at least a one-car garage and a permanent surface for two exterior parking spaces. A two-car garage is required for a townhouse with 1,500 or greater square feet in living area. 
4.  Off-street parking is prohibited adjacent to either side of the dwelling, except when such parking space provides access to a garage. 
B.  Driveways for single-family, duplex and townhouse units shall be provided as follows: 
1.  Driveways shall be completely paved. However, on one-acre or larger lots, where the garage is located at least 100 feet from the right-of-way, the pavement area may be limited as follows: Only the 20 feet closest to the garage, the driveway apron area within the right-of-way, and other portions of the driveway that are visible from the right-of-way and within 100 feet of the right-of-way, are required to be paved. The unpaved driveway area shall be of a stabilized material that will support emergency vehicles and meet City standards, such as graded and compacted asphalt milling or similar material. Pervious and permeable pavers and pavement which meet City standards are allowed and are acceptable Green Building materials. 
2.  Garages must have a driveway extending for a minimum of 20 feet in front of each garage door. The driveway shall be at least the width of the garage door(s), with a minimum width of ten feet, to allow for safe access. For the 20 feet of the driveway that is closest to the garage, driveways for one and two-car garages shall have a minimum width of 16 feet, and driveways for three-car or larger garages shall have a minimum width of 24 feet. 
3.  Residential driveways entering the public right-of-way shall be a minimum of ten feet wide at the right-of-way line and 16 feet wide at the roadway edge. On corner lots, driveways shall not enter the right-of-way within 25 feet of where the two rights-of-way lines would intersect if extended. 
4.  Driveways shall either lead to a garage (standard driveway), or a circular driveway may be constructed. Except for corner lots, one approach of a circular driveway shall double as the standard driveway. 
5.  A standard driveway may also have a flare where the driveway widens to provide for an additional lane for vehicle parking. Additionally, standard driveways may have a turnaround so residents may avoid backing out onto the street. Turnarounds shall be located solely on the homeowner's property, except for radii, and not within rights-of-way. In side yards, flares and turnarounds shall not encroach into side yard easements and shall not be located within five feet of side property lines. 
6.  Maximum driveway widths internal to the lot shall be 18 feet for circular driveways and turnarounds; and for standard driveways, including any flares, the internal widths shall be limited to 20 feet for a one-car garage, 36 feet for a two-car garage, 42 feet for a three-car garage, and 48 feet for a four-car garage. For circular driveways that merge with standard driveways, only the standard driveway area may exceed the maximum width of 18 feet. 
7.  The lot area in front of the home's building façade out to the front property line must have a minimum of 25 percent landscaped planting area. 
8.  Driveways, driveway aprons and culverts beneath driveways shall conform to City design and permitting standards. 
9.  Owners proposing to utilize pavers as pavement on the portion of the driveway in the City right-of-way shall execute a Right-of-Way Utilization Agreement prior to City final approval. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, § 35, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2018-21 , § 3, 10-2-18) 
Sec. 5.04. - Parking. 
    5.04.01.  Plan requirement. Off-street parking, loading space, and drive-through facility plans shall be submitted and approved during the site plan review process as outlined in Chapter 2. 
    5.04.02.  Off-street vehicle parking. Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided for any new use established, for any addition or enlargement of an existing use, or any change of occupancy or manner of operation that would result in additional parking. See Chapter 1 for nonconforming uses and the remodeling threshold. Additional parking may be required only for such addition, enlargement, or change, and not for the entire building or use, unless it is determined, based on the historical function of the use or similar such uses, there is a need for additional parking. 
A.  Off-street parking spaces required. 
1.  Minimum number required. The required number of off-street motor vehicle spaces and any special requirements that may apply are provided in Table 5-3. When the number of off-street spaces required by this Code results in a fractional space, the number shall be rounded to the nearest whole number. Where parking is based on seating on benches or pews, each 24 lineal inches of the bench/pew shall be considered one seat. 
Table 5-3: Parking Ratios 
NOTE: Unless otherwise noted, all square footages (s.f.) are based on the gross floor area of the unit or building. 
Type of use Minimum Number

of Spaces Adult entertainment 1 space per 100 s.f. Assembly places (houses of worship/religious institutions, funeral homes, movie theaters, auditoriums, arenas, stadiums, civic centers, and facilities with an auditorium, sanctuary, or gathering place, whether fixed seats or open area) 1 space per 4 seats Banks and credit unions 1 space per 200 s.f. Barber shops and beauty salons 1 space per 250 s.f. Bowling alley 3 spaces per lane Call centers and contact centers 1 space per 115 sq. ft. Civic clubs and lodges (including civic membership organizations) 1 space per 3 seats plus 2 spaces per 100 s.f. of area devoted to public assembly without seats Colleges, universities and business/technical schools 1 space per 3 on-site school population (students, faculty and staff but excluding online students) Convenience store (with or without fueling stations) 1 space per 200 s.f. + 1 space per 2 seats for food patrons Day care, child care, private schools (k-12) 2 spaces per employee on the largest shift. For private high schools, add 1 space per 2 students in 11th and 12th grade Fitness center/health club/dance studio 1 space per 125 s.f. Furniture/mattress store 1 per 700 s.f. Gasoline service stations/vehicle service and repair facilities 1 space per 250 s.f. of area devoted to sales or customer lounges, plus sufficient area to accommodate vehicles at pumps without interfering with other parking, plus 3 spaces per service bay Golf course 4 spaces per hole; plus 1 space per 250 s.f. of clubhouse Golf driving range/putting greens 1 space per 2 driving tees/putting greens + parking for any structures Golf, miniature 1.25 spaces per hole + parking for any structures Grocery/supermarket 1 1 space per 200 s.f. Group lodging, including nursing homes, rest homes, convalescent homes, assisted care facilities, and other similar facilities 1 space per 2 beds or 0.75 space per unit Home Improvement/Building Materials and Garden Centers 1 3.5 spaces per 1,000 s.f. Hospitals and other medical facilities providing overnight accommodations 2 spaces per bed Hotels, motels, and other similar lodging and accommodations establishments, without restaurants or lounges open to the public 1.15 spaces per sleeping room Hotels, motels, apartment hotels, and other similar lodging and accommodations establishments, with restaurants or lounges open to the public 1.15 spaces per sleeping room, plus parking required at 50% of normal rates for any restaurant or drinking establishment Independent living units (associated with a continuing care retirement community) 1.25 spaces per unit Industrial, manufacturing and production uses 1 space per 750 s.f. Marinas 1 space per 3 boat berths (wet slip or dry storage) Medical or dental offices, medical or dental laboratory, and medical clinics, and veterinary clinics 1 space per 250 s.f. Mini-warehouse or self-storage facilities including boat and recreational vehicle storage 2 spaces per 100 storage units and a minimum of 4 vehicle/boat storage spaces Multi-family dwellings 1 space per efficiency unit 
1.5 spaces per 1 bedroom 
2 spaces per 2 bedrooms and over Offices (general, professional, or government) 1 space per 250 s.f. Plant nursery 1 space per 250 s.f. of building area + 1 space per 2,000 s.f. of display areas open to the public Restaurants (with or without a drive-through), drinking establishments 1 space per 50 s.f. of areas open to the public + 1 space per 75 s.f. of outdoor eating/drinking areas Shopping centers, discount superstores, and multi-tenant retail centers 1 1 space per 250 s.f. Retail including pharmacies and business services 1 space per 250 s.f. Single-family dwelling, duplex, two-family and townhouse units 2 spaces per unit Tennis, bocce ball, pickle ball, shuffleboard and racquetball facilities 1.5 spaces per court Vehicle and boat sales/dealership 1 per 3,000 s.f. of open or enclosed sales area Warehouse 1 space per 1,200 s.f. [ 1 An additional parking space equivalent is required for every 50 parking spaces for shopping cart storage for shopping center development exceeding 50,000 s.f.]  
2.  Uses not listed. The required number of spaces for any use not specifically mentioned shall be the same as the use most similar to the proposed use, based on data provided by the Institute of Transportation Engineers in Parking Generation or similar studies. 
3.  Multiple uses. Except for a multi-tenant retail center or shopping center, where a combination of uses is proposed for development, parking shall be provided for each of the uses as prescribed by Table 5-3, unless a shared parking agreement acceptable to the City is reached by the property owner(s) (see Section 5.04.08). 
4.  Maximum parking permitted. For all land uses, except for single-family and two-family residences, the maximum permitted number of parking spaces shall not exceed 1.2 times the minimum parking required by this section unless the Land Use Administrator finds that exceeding the maximum is justified based upon sound and generally accepted land use planning practices and principles as demonstrated within a Parking Flexibility Study. 
5.  Screening. Screening is required for off-street parking spaces in accordance with Section 11.03.04.A. 
6.  Internal parking lot landscaping. For parking lot islands and their related landscaping requirements see Section 11.03.04.B. 
B.  Flexibility. 
1.  The Land Use Administrator may authorize an adjustment in the total parking requirements where it is demonstrated that the application of the parking ratios is inappropriate for a proposed use due to the mix of existing or proposed uses on the property. A request for adjustment may require the submission of a site plan, traffic and parking study, and floor plan, which address the rationale for reducing or increasing parking requirements. Considerations and approval shall be contingent upon the continued operation of like or similar uses as identified under the approved plan. A change in the use category of parking shall require separate consideration. Pervious surface materials may be utilized when increasing parking requirements, where feasible, and may include pervious pavement, brick pavers, or other permanent pervious materials supported by green building principles. Stabilized grass parking with paved parking aisles may be considered, where feasible, for periodic overflow parking. Reducing parking requirements may require additional pervious areas and adequate stormwater capacity to accommodate potential future parking spaces per Code. 
2.  The Land Use Administrator may approve de minimis variations of parking lot or design standards if it is determined that a substantial public benefit would be attained. The de minimis variance may include reducing the required number of parking spaces; the use of alternative surface materials; or varying from design standards when specimen or historic trees can be saved, utility conflicts can be avoided, or where architectural aesthetics can be improved. 
3.  Up to 33 percent of required parking for not-for-profit and non-profit groups and civic clubs that only use the parking periodically (one day or less per week except for occasional special events), may be provided as stabilized grass parking, with approval of the Land Use Administrator, where those spaces are served by paved parking aisles and are generally located further from the use being served than the paved spaces. Landscaped islands are required with stabilized grass parking (see Section 11.03.04.B.3.b). Stabilized grass parking spaces shall be appropriately graded and computed as impervious areas for water management purposes, and stabilized grass parking spaces that are utilized more often than periodically as defined above shall be paved if required by the Land Use Administrator based on amount of use. 
4.  All of the overflow parking (parking that exceeds the minimum number of required spaces) for not-for-profit and non-profit groups and civic clubs that only use the parking on an occasional basis may be provided as stabilized grass parking and stabilized grass drive aisles, with approval of the Land Use Administrator, where those spaces are generally located further from the use being served than the required parking. Landscaped islands are required with stabilized grass parking spaces (see Section 11.03.04.B.3.b). Stabilized grass parking spaces and stabilized grass drive aisles shall be appropriately graded and computed as impervious areas for water management purposes. 
C.  Location. 
1.  Each off-street parking space shall be located on the site it services, unless provided otherwise in this Code. 
2.  Nonresidential off-street parking spaces and access ways shall not be located closer than eight feet from any side property line, unless both adjoining properties are part of a master plan, share an access way, or similar circumstances exist. The minimum queuing distance required from the property line along a right-of-way to the first parking space or parking aisle is: a) 20 feet along a local public roadway: b) 35 feet along a collector roadway: or c) 50 feet along an arterial roadway: unless the applicant demonstrates, based on a traffic study, that a reduced queuing distance will not pose a hazard or interfere with pedestrian and vehicle traffic operations. However, traffic from a proposed development must not stack onto a public right-of-way during typical peak hour operating conditions. 
3.  All required parking stalls shall have direct and unobstructed access from a parking aisle. 
D.  Off-street circulation. 
1.  Internal circulation patterns, and the location and traffic direction of all access ways and parking aisles, shall be designed and maintained in accordance with accepted principles of traffic engineering and traffic safety, and clearly marked as required by the City. 
2.  Vehicular circulation shall be completely contained within the property and vehicles located within a portion of the development must have access to all other portions without using the adjacent street system. 
E.  Parking facility design. 
1.  All parking facilities shall be graded and provided with permanent storm drainage facilities meeting the construction specifications set by the City. Surfacing, curbing, and drainage improvements shall be sufficient to preclude the free flow of water onto adjacent properties or public streets or alleys, and to provide adequate drainage. 
2.  Reserved. 
3.  Any off-street parking facility shall have access ways of sufficient width to allow for two-way traffic, or one-way access ways that are connected to parking aisles, parking areas, or maneuvering areas in such a manner as to permit traffic to simultaneously enter and leave the property. An access way that is only wide enough for one-way traffic shall have signage designating it for one-way operation. 
4.  Single-lane one-way access ways shall be a minimum of 14 feet wide. Two-way access ways shall be a minimum of 24 feet wide, exclusive of any median. Required access way widths may be increased by the City based on vehicle types and numbers of vehicles expected to use the facility, or if the Fire Prevention Code justifies such increase based upon traffic engineering and safety considerations. 
5.  Parking spaces and parking aisles shall be designed in accordance with Table 5-4. 
6.  Applicants are encouraged to reduce paved areas by reducing the perpendicular depth of standard parking spaces to 18 feet of pavement with two feet of overhang area, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Continuous curbing shall be used at the overhang. 
b.  The overhang will not interfere with the healthy growth of adjacent landscaping material. 
c.  Any abutting sidewalk is raised a minimum of six inches and is a minimum of seven feet wide. A sidewalk located at least two feet from the front of curb does not need to meet these standards. 
Table 5-4: Parking Space and Parking Aisle Requirements 
Parking Angle (degrees) Standard Stall Width (feet) Stall Depth
Perpendicular
to Aisle (feet) Curb Length Parallel to
Aisle (feet) Parking Aisle Width
One-Way
Traffic (feet) Parking Aisle Width
Two-Way
Traffic (feet) 0 (parallel) 10 10 23 12 24 45 9 21.2 12.7 14 24 60 9 22.3 10.4 18 24 90 9 20 9 24 24  
Note: Parking spaces are measured from the center-line of painted stripe to edge of curb or center-line of painted stripe. 
7.  Parking stalls shall be delineated with a white pavement striping that is six inches wide. 
8.  Reserved. 
9.  For any nonresidential or multi-family use providing 50 or more spaces, a maximum of three for every 50 required spaces may be reduced in size and designed to accommodate parking for motorcycles. When provided, motorcycle parking shall be clearly identified by a sign, be at least 4.5 feet wide, surfaced with concrete, and have pavement striping. Motorcycle spaces may count towards required vehicular parking spaces. 
10.  All permanent off-street parking and loading and/or unloading areas except as permitted under Sections 5.04.02.B.3 and 5.04.02.B.4, shall be surfaced with brick, pavers, asphalt, or concrete, and all materials shall meet City design standards. 
F.  Maintenance. 
1.  All required parking facilities shall be properly maintained in perpetuity by the property owner or appropriate property owners association. Such facilities shall be used exclusively for the temporary parking of motor vehicles. 
2.  Parking facilities shall not be used for the sale, display, or storage of merchandise, for the storage or repair of vehicles or equipment, or activities other than providing public and employee parking, unless another activity was approved on the site plan. 
3.  All parking and loading facilities shall be properly maintained to ensure the desirability and usefulness of the facility, including maintenance of finished and stabilized surfaces, parking stripes and required signage. Parking stripes that are faded shall be repainted, and faded or missing required signage shall be replaced. Such facilities shall be maintained free of pot holes, refuse, debris, or other accumulated matter and shall at all times be available for the off-street parking or loading use consistent with applicable development approvals. 
4.  Landscaping materials located within sight triangles shall be properly trimmed and maintained. 
    5.04.03.  Bicycle parking. 
A.  All developments (except for single-family and duplex platted lots) requiring off-street parking shall provide parking for bicycles in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  Multifamily development shall provide bicycle parking spaces to the equivalent of ten percent of the required vehicular parking spaces. 
2.  Nonresidential developments shall provide bicycle rack spaces as follows: 
Table 5-5: Bicycle Rack Ratios for Nonresidential Developments 
Required Number of Automobile
Parking Spaces Minimum Number of Required
Bicycle Rack Spaces 1-40 2 41-60 3 61-80 4 81-100 5 Over 100 5 plus 1 for each 20 automobile parking spaces over 100, provided that the maximum number of required bicycle spaces shall not exceed 20  
B.  Bicycle rack facilities shall meet the following standards: 
1.  Shall be designed to allow each bicycle to be secured against theft. 
2.  Shall be installed in a permanent manner to resist removal. 
3.  Shall be installed to resist damage by rust, corrosion, or vandalism. 
4.  Shall accommodate a range of bicycle shapes and sizes and allow easy locking without interfering with adjacent bicycles. 
5.  Shall not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular movement. 
6.  Shall be located within 200 feet of the building entrance(s) they are intended to serve. 
    5.04.04. Parking lot lighting. The lighting design for new and redevelopment sites shall meet the lighting requirements set forth in Chapter 9. 
    5.04.05.  Americans with Disabilities Act requirements for access and parking. Accessible parking shall comply with Florida Department of Transportation Design Standards and Chapter 17 of the Florida Americans with Disabilities Act Architectural Barrier Removal and Compliance Manual, 2005 Edition, as amended. The total number of parking spaces required in this chapter includes the minimum number of accessible parking spaces required. 
    5.04.06.  Temporary parking. The Land Use Administrator may require new nonresidential uses to provide a minimum of one and a maximum of two parking spaces for temporary pick-up and drop-off based on the size and use of the development. The temporary parking space(s) shall be located near the primary building entrance. Temporary parking shall count towards the total required parking spaces. 
    5.04.07.  Off-street loading or unloading space requirements. 
A.  At the time of construction of any of the categories of buildings listed in Table 5-6, or at the time of structural alteration for an increase in their size or capacity, off-street loading and/or unloading spaces with adequate means of ingress and egress from a public street or access way shall be provided without interfering with the public use of streets, off-street parking spaces, or taxi stands. Off-street parking spaces shall not be used to meet off-street loading requirements. 
B.  The dimensions, design, and location of all off-street loading spaces shall meet the requirements as outlined in this Code. 
C.  Loading spaces shall not block streets, alleys, driveways, or sidewalks. Loading spaces shall not impair the movement of vehicles or pedestrians on streets, alleys, or sidewalks. Loading areas shall not use a public right-of-way or adjacent property as part of a maneuvering area, or use a public right-of-way or adjacent property as part of a temporary or permanent parking area for loading or unloading. 
D.  The minimum number of off-street loading and/or unloading spaces and the design shall meet the needs of the proposed use and reasonably expected future uses, and shall have the minimum dimensional requirements as displayed in the following tables: 
Table 5-6: Loading or Unloading Space Requirements 
Use Category Floor Area in Square Feet Number of Spaces
Required Retail Sales and Service, Restaurants, or Similar Uses 5,000-20,000 1 20,001-50,000 2 Each additional 25,000 square feet or major fraction thereof 1 Offices, Hotels, Hospitals, Nursing Homes, Adult Congregate Living Facilities, Multi-Family Project or Similar Uses 30,000-100,000 1 Each additional 100,000 square feet or major fraction thereof 1 Arenas, Auditoriums, Stadiums, Convention Centers, Exhibition Halls, Museums, or Similar Uses 10,000-50,000 1 50,001-100,000 2 Over 100,000 4 Any Industrial Use and any Wholesale, Retail, and Nonresidential Storage Facility (Not Required for a Self-Storage Facility) 5,000-25,000 1 25,001-55,000 2 55,001-85,000 3 Each additional 30,000 square feet or major fractions thereof 1  
E.  Every loading space shall demonstrate adequate turning radius and movement based upon the requirements of the delivery truck and meet the following minimum dimensions: 
Table 5-7: Loading Space Dimensional Requirements 
Length or Depth of Space 30 feet* Width 12 feet Height or Vertical Clearance 14 feet  
* For tractor-trailer trucks, a 55-foot length is required. Retail and industrial buildings with 50,000 square feet of retail area or more shall have at least one loading space for tractor-trailer trucks, and buildings with 100,000 square feet of retail area or more shall have at least two loading spaces for tractor-trailer trucks, unless the applicant demonstrates a standard size loading space will suffice for one or both spaces based on the nature of the use(s). 
F.  Loading spaces for tractor-trailer trucks shall not be located within 100 feet of any residential use or zoning district boundary and these spaces shall be located to the rear of the principal structure and screened from view of the public right-of-way or access easement. 
G.  Uses not listed. The required number of loading spaces for any use not specifically mentioned above shall be the same as the use most similar to the proposed use, or be guided by requirements for such use in other jurisdictions, or by data provided by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, or other similar studies. 
H.  An adjustment in the loading requirements may be approved where it is demonstrated that the application of the loading ratios is inappropriate for a proposed use due to specific site or use conditions. The applicant must submit a site plan and operational analysis which address the rationale for reducing or increasing loading requirements. Approval shall be contingent upon the continued operation of like or similar uses as identified under the approved site plan. If there is a change in the use category of loading, a new application must be submitted. 
    5.04.08.  Shared parking and joint use of facilities. 
A.  The Land Use Administrator may permit the required off-street parking spaces for a use to be shared as required parking spaces for another use upon finding that: 
1.  The shared parking spaces are in close proximity and readily accessible to the uses served thereby; 
2.  The uses served thereby have different peak periods or the required parking is excessive for one use; and 
3.  The design of the parking area in terms of traffic circulation, vehicular and pedestrian access, stormwater management, landscaping, open space preservation, and public safety meets the requirements of this Code. 
B.  A shared parking usage analysis shall be employed for calculating parking requirements for multiple uses. 
C.  Accessible spaces shall be based on the single use parking requirement. The shared parking methodology shall only reduce the general parking requirement. 
D.  Upon a finding by the Land Use Administrator that shared parking is appropriate, the Land Use Administrator shall issue a development order or approve an agreement for shared parking, which shall be recorded in the public records, and shall be enforceable by the City. 
    5.04.09.  Fleet storage. 
A.  General requirements. In all zoning districts except industrial zoning districts or industrial type uses in the PSP Zoning District, the following requirements apply to the storage of five or more operable and inoperable motor vehicles which are owned (includes ownership under another corporate entity for which vehicles serve the business establishment located at the site) or leased by a business establishment located on the site on which the motor vehicles are located, excluding lawful and permitted businesses that inherently require the display of motor vehicles, trailers, heavy commercial vehicles, and construction equipment (i.e. automobile dealerships, tractor dealerships, etc.). 
1.  Areas specifically designated for fleet vehicles shall be screened from public view using a Tall Screen Planting described in Table 11-4 in this Code. 
2.  Fleet vehicle parking spaces and areas shall not be used to satisfy the required off-street parking for its land use as required in this Code. 
3.  It is prohibited and unlawful to park an inoperable motor vehicle for any part of a 24-hour period unless the motor vehicle is enclosed within a building or located within an opaque enclosure that is no less than six feet in height. 
4.  Fleet vehicles shall be used solely for the purpose of conducting activity associated with the business establishment (licensed by applicable federal, state, and local agencies) at the location where the motor vehicles are parked. 
5.  A business with fleet vehicles desiring to locate into an existing building in an appropriately zoned district shall establish a designated area for the fleet vehicles in compliance with this section if such area is not already established. A site plan shall be submitted to the Land Use Administrator to determine compliance. 
B.  Exemptions. This section does not apply to commercial motor vehicles parked during active loading and unloading for any part of a 24-hour period within areas designated as loading spaces on an approved site plan or to automobiles or sport utility vehicles. 
    5.04.10.  Boat and recreational vehicle commercial storage facilities. Where boats or recreational vehicles are commercially stored outside, they shall only be stored on pavement located behind buildings or preserved wooded areas so they are generally hidden from the public rights-of-way, unless specifically permitted by Code. 
    5.04.11.  Drive-through facilities. 
    5.04.11.01.  Location. 
A.  A site that contains drive-through facilities shall be located on a collector or arterial road. 
B.  Drive-through facilities for an automated teller machine (ATM) shall only be located on sites with a financial institution; or, if within a multi-tenant retail center or shopping center, where the applicant demonstrates that the facilities will not interfere with the safe movement of traffic. 
    5.04.11.2.  Stacking lanes and spaces. 
A.  All facilities providing drive-through service shall provide stacking lanes in compliance with the standards of this section. A stacking space shall be a minimum of ten feet in width and 20 feet in length, measured starting ten feet behind the pickup window. 
1.  Drive-through lanes must be clearly distinguished from parking aisles by acceptable pavement markings or pavement color. 
2.  On-site stacking spaces must accommodate stacking demand under the typical a.m., mid-day, and p.m. peakhour conditions of adjacent roadways. 
3.  A 12-foot wide paved bypass lane (11 feet if the stacking lane is increased to a width of 11 feet) shall be provided for drive-through facilities, unless the City determines the bypass lane is unnecessary due to unique site conditions. 
B.  Restaurants with drive-through facilities shall provide a minimum of nine stacking spaces. The bypass lane shall serve customers at least until they have traveled past the point where orders are taken. 
C.  Banks, financial institutions, dry cleaners, and pharmacies shall provide a minimum of four stacking spaces per lane; except for automated teller machines, which shall have three spaces per lane. 
D.  An automated car wash, and a manned or unmanned gatehouse or entry control structure, shall provide a minimum of three stacking spaces per service lane. 
E.  A six feet high solid decorative wall shall be provided along all property lines abutting lots or parcels zoned or used for residential purposes in order to block lights and noise from vehicles in the stacking lanes or drive-through facility. 
F.  Stacking lanes shall not be located within a designated delivery area or loading zone. 
G.  Within the OFC-1 District, drive-through facilities may have only a single lane with a single service window, unless the second lane is serviced by the same single window, or by an automated device (e.g., ATM). 
H.  Uses not listed. The required number of stacking spaces for any use not specifically mentioned shall be the same as the use most similar to the proposed use, or be guided by requirements for such use in other jurisdictions, or data provided by the Institute of Transportation Engineers in Parking Generation, or other similar studies. 
I.  The Land Use Administrator may determine an increase or reduction in the stacking requirements is required where it is demonstrated that the stacking number is inappropriate for a proposed use due to the property configuration, the specific nature of the use, or traffic flow patterns. 
1.  To request a modification, an applicant must submit a site plan and traffic study which address the rationale for reducing the stacking requirements. 
2.  Approval shall be contingent upon the continued operation of like or similar uses as identified under the approved site plan. 
3.  A change in the use category shall require a new application for modification. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, §§ 36-40, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2012-3, § 4(Exh. 2), 5-1-12; Ord. No. 2018-21 , § 3, 10-2-18) 
Chapter 7 - CONCURRENCY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 

Sec. 7.01. - Purpose and Intent. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to implement the concurrency provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, as mandated by F.S. ch. 163, and the Florida Administrative Code. No development order or permit which contains a specific plan of development, including the densities and intensities of development, shall be issued except in accordance with this chapter. 
Sec. 7.02. - Public Facilities. 
    The public facilities subject to concurrency and the regulations in this chapter include: transportation facilities, potable water, sanitary sewer, solid waste, drainage, schools, and parks and recreation. 
Sec. 7.03. - Tracking and Reporting. 
    7.03.01.  Concurrency management monitoring system. The City hereby establishes and shall maintain a concurrency management monitoring system which consists of an inventory of public facility capacity and a demand accounting system that reflects the current status and availability of public facilities. A status report on the concurrency management monitoring system shall be prepared by the City on annual basis. 
    7.03.02.  Concurrency baseline statement. 
A.  The Land Use Administrator shall develop a concurrency baseline statement which shall be effective for one year after its issuance. Nothing herein precludes, however, the issuance and effectiveness of more frequent amendments to the concurrency baseline statement. The concurrency baseline statement is an assessment of public facility available capacity anticipated for the reporting period. 
B.  The available capacity reported for each public facility in the concurrency baseline statement shall be determined by using calculations from the concurrency management monitoring system and projections of public facility demand for vested developments. The public facility demand for vested projects shall be based upon a reasonable projection of the progress of each proposal or project, population projections, and other technical considerations, such as the practices and assumptions utilized in the Comprehensive Plan. 
Sec. 7.04. - Concurrency Review. 
    7.04.01.  Applicability. All proposed developments or improvements to property requiring a final development order, except those developments or improvements which are exempt, as outlined in Subsection 7.04.02, or vested by this chapter, shall be subject to concurrency review prior to the issuance of a final development order. 
    7.04.02.  Exemptions. 
A.  Final development orders, including building permits, which permit or approve the following types of development, are exempt from concurrency review if the Land Use Administrator finds that no additional impact on public facilities is created: 
1.  Approved development plans which are specifically exempted from or specifically determined to be vested from the concurrency requirements in the Comprehensive Plan, pursuant to applicable laws. 
2.  Single-family and duplex residential lots platted as of November 16, 2008 are only exempt from transportation concurrency review. 
3.  Modifications to residential dwellings that include additions, renovations, or reconstruction that do not increase the number of dwelling units on the site or approved for the property prior to the modifications. 
4.  Additions, renovations to, or reconstruction of, accessory dwelling units, garage apartments, or other similar accessory units on parcels properly zoned to allow the accessory dwelling units. 
5.  Public facilities such as City offices, community centers, fire stations, parks, police stations, hospitals (public or not for profit), water or sewer facilities, other public works, and other public facilities as determined by the Land Use Administrator. 
B.  A Development of Regional Impact that has been approved pursuant to F.S. ch. 380, for which the development is proceeding in compliance with the conditions of the Development of Regional Impact approval, may be exempt from transportation concurrency as provided by the Development of Regional Impact Development Order, if the development meets all the requirements of F.S. § 163.3180(12), and this chapter. 
C.  Final development orders which permit or approve development that creates a de minimis impact, as defined by F.S. § 163.3180(6), shall be exempt from concurrency review for transportation facilities. 
    7.04.03.  Deferral option. 
A.  Any applicant for a final development order may elect to defer concurrency review until the time at which an application for the final development order preceding a preconstruction conference or the commencement of any construction activity is filed. The applicant shall execute an affidavit acknowledging that development rights have not been vested and that development on the subject parcel shall be required to undergo concurrency review in the future. 
B.  Reserved. 
C.  A deferral affidavit shall be submitted to the Land Use Administrator. 
    7.04.04.  Standards for review. 
A.  The City shall not issue a final development order, or an extension or amendment to an approved development order, unless there is sufficient available capacity of public facilities to meet the established levels of service. The City shall not grant a final development order unless one of the following standards is met: 
1.  The necessary public facilities are available and in place at the time the development is authorized in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan; or 
2.  The development order is issued subject to the condition that the necessary public facilities will be in place when the impacts of the development occur; or 
3.  The necessary public facilities are under construction at the time the development is authorized; or 
4.  The necessary public facilities are guaranteed in an enforceable development agreement that requires that the public facilities will be in place, except transportation facilities, when the impacts of development occur and that the applicant or developer will pay a proportionate fair-share of the costs incurred to fulfill the need for the facilities and services created by proposed development. The enforceable development agreement for improvements must be financially guaranteed by cash, letter of credit, or similar instrument approved by the Land Use Administrator on a form satisfactory to the City and issued by a financial institution acceptable to the City or Land Use Administrator; or 
5.  The final development order permits or approves development that is exempt from concurrency review as outlined in Subsection 7.04.02. 
B.  For transportation facilities, the facilities must be available, programmed, or contracted to be under construction within three years of the subject final development order, or consistent with provisions of the Florida Administrative Code. The impact thresholds and spheres of influence for arterial and collector roads shall be consistent with sound and generally accepted engineering standards and principles. When transportation facilities or segments are identified as deficient through the Concurrency Management System, including transportation facilities maintained by the Florida Department of Transportation or another jurisdiction, the Proportionate Fair-Share Program as provided in Section 7.07 may satisfy this requirement. 
    7.04.05.  Application for concurrency. 
A.  General requirements. 
1.  Applications for concurrency may be submitted at any stage of development, but may only result in the issuance of a certificate of concurrency when issued in conjunction with a final development order. 
2.  For the purpose of the concurrency review, the maximum density or intensity allowed under the future land use and zoning designation shall be used, unless the applicant provides a development scenario. If an applicant provides a development scenario, concurrency will be determined based upon that scenario and the density or intensity of the subject property can not be increased without a new concurrency review. 
3.  Methodologies consistent with sound and generally accepted engineering and planning practices and principles shall be utilized to determine the impacts of proposed development and their effect on the available capacity of public facilities. 
B.  Traffic study requirements. An application for concurrency must include a traffic impact analysis. The traffic impact analysis shall be consistent with sound and generally accepted engineering and planning practices and principles. In addition, the applicant is required to meet with the Land Use Administrator before conducting the traffic impact analysis to discuss appropriate methodology and/or mitigation proposals to be included in the traffic impact analysis. At a minimum the traffic study shall: 
1.  Identify the land use type of the proposed development, based on a generally accepted land use classification system (e.g., the North American Industry Classification System, the Land-Based Classification Standards, and/or Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip Generation Manual); 
2.  If the proposed development consists of multiple land uses, the traffic study must reflect the aggregated demand for capital transportation improvements generated by each land use type within the proposed impact-generating development; 
3.  Identify additional new trips (PM Peak Hour), additional vehicles (PM Peak Hour), current capacity/volume of affected roadway(s) (PM Peak Hour), available capacity/volume of affected roadway(s) (PM Peak Hour) before the proposed development, estimated capacity/volume of affected roadway(s) (PM Peak Hour), after the proposed development is complete (may be shown in phases of development), anticipated turning movements (PM Peak Hour), and additional anticipated roadway(s) capacities/volumes or improvements that may be needed to accommodate a reduced level of service identified through traffic study analysis; and 
4.  Utilize the latest edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip Generation, 7th Edition or later. 
The findings of a traffic study satisfying the above requirements, including approval by the Land Use Administrator regarding the acceptability of the proposed traffic study methodology, shall be considered valid and applicable for a period of one year after the date it was either received by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, §§ 41-44, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 7.05. - Certificate of Concurrency. 
    7.05.01.  General provisions. 
A.  Certificates of concurrency may only be issued in conjunction with the issuance of a final development order. 
B.  Certificates of concurrency are not transferable to another parcel or parcels of real property. Certificates of concurrency shall benefit and run with the parcel of real property to which the application related subject to the limits prescribed in this chapter and shall contain detailed information relating to limitations on uses and development densities and intensities. 
C.  If an application for development is found to be exempt from the concurrency review of the Concurrency Management System review requirements of the Comprehensive Plan, this chapter, applicable requirements of the Florida Statutes, or state law, then, consistent with the provisions of this chapter, a certificate of exemption shall be issued without conditions being attached thereto. 
D.  If a parcel of real property is not vested by the concurrency provisions of the Comprehensive Plan, this chapter, or applicable requirements of the Florida Statutes, a certificate of concurrency shall be valid for so long as the underlying development order relating to the subject real property, or a subsequent development order issued during the good faith continuation of the development, is valid. 
    7.05.02.  Reservation of capacities. 
A.  Reservation process. The purpose of the public facility capacity reservation process is to afford property owners and developers the assurance that adequate capacity for requisite public facilities will be available when needed for a particular project, and to provide a higher degree of certainty during the construction financing process. The reservation process requires the applicant to reserve public facility capacity at the time of issuance of the certificate of concurrency. 
B.  Reservation fees. Unless the applicant provides other assurances acceptable to the City that adequate public facilities will be available concurrent with the impacts of development (such as, by way of example, a binding development agreement), all facility reservation fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of a certificate of concurrency and before authorization of any construction, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. For phased development, the binding development agreement shall include the number of phases, quantity of development associated with each phase, the timing of facility reservation fee payments, and provisions that ensure that development of each phase will not commence until the facility reservation fees have been paid. The applicant shall pay all facility reservation fees due at the time of, and as a condition precedent to, the issuance of a building permit relating to the project, with said fees being paid at the rate in effect at the time of building permit issuance. Each facility reservation fee shall be calculated on the same basis as the application for a certificate of concurrency. Said fees shall be paid as follows: 
1.  For each public facility, the facility reservation fee shall be an amount equivalent to the then applicable City impact fee. All impact fees shall be required to be assessed and paid as a condition of receiving a building permit pursuant to the impact fee rate schedules in effect at the time a building permit is issued. However, each facility reservation fee previously paid shall be credited towards the corresponding impact fee as a per unit fixed-dollar deduction from the applicable impact fees at the time of building permit issuance. 
2.  For reservation of roadway capacity, applicants may select to reserve capacity for a fixed period of time, the periods of time being from one year to three years with associated scaling based on amount of the reservation fees paid. The scaling amount to be paid to secure the reservation would be: 
33% of total impact fee amount for one-year reservation period; 
67% of total impact fee amount for two-year reservation period; 
100% of total impact fee amount for three-year reservation period. 
The Developer shall be required to pay the remainder of the required total impact fee amount due at the time of, and as a condition to, receiving a building permit. The scaled reservation fees paid previously shall be credited toward the impact fee in effect at the time of the building permit, and shall be on a dollar-for-dollar basis. 
3.  For water and sewer services, the facility reservation fee shall be an amount equivalent to the then applicable capacity fees and on the basis of the rates then in effect pursuant to the applicable rules, regulations, and requirements. 
C.  Refund of reservation fees. If a final development order is not issued, expires, or is surrendered pursuant to an amending development order issued by the City or an amending development agreement, an applicant may request in writing, and the City shall issue, a refund of facility reservation fees, excluding the processing fee, if the appropriate following conditions are met: 
1.  For all public facilities (i.e., transportation facilities, solid waste facilities, sanitary sewer, potable water, drainage facilities, schools, and parks and recreation facilities), capacity shall be surrendered and thereupon a refund shall be made by the City at the earlier of either of the following events occurring: 
a.  A determination has been made by the Land Use Administrator that such refund shall not require or result in the elimination, deferral, or delay of a project which is needed to maintain the adopted level of service of the Comprehensive Plan. 
b.  Another development is paying like facility reservation fees for the public facilities associated with the development for which the facility reservation fees are requested to be refunded. Like facility reservation fees shall be deemed those fees associated with and collected from another development paying the same impact fees relating to the same impacts on concurrency public facilities. 
D.  Subject to required permits. All water and sewer reservations of capacity shall be subject to the issuance of all required permits from the Florida Department of Environmental Protection and any other applicable agencies. 
E.  Vested developments. If a development is vested under this chapter, the requirements relating to the payment of impact fees and connection fees shall fully apply. If the payment of connection fees for water and sewer service is required to reserve capacity, such payment must occur. Vested status does not guarantee the availability of water or sewer capacity. 
    7.05.03.  Expiration. Reservations of a certificate of concurrency shall run with the life of the development order, unless otherwise noted in Subsection 7.05.02, Reservation of Capacities. 
    7.05.04.  Cease and continuance. If a public facility to be provided by an applicant is not available at the time of the development's impacts, further development shall cease until all required public facilities are constructed. If a public facility to be provided by an applicant is included in a binding contract, but the construction is behind schedule, development may continue, but no releases for final electrical service or certificates of occupancy shall be issued until the facility has been accepted or approved by the City. If, however, a public facility is to be provided by the City and is not completed on time, development may continue within the conditions in the development order; provided, however, that certificates of occupancy or releases for final electrical service shall not be issued until potable water, sanitary sewer, and solid waste capacities are available. 
Sec. 7.06. - Phasing of Vested Development. 
    A. Developments which have been granted development rights or have been determined to be vested shall be required by the Land Use Administrator to enter into a development agreement, if a similar agreement has not been previously entered, which development agreement sets forth a reasonable schedule for the completion of development and, accordingly, the impacts upon public facilities. 
    B. Development agreements for vested developments should be entered prior to the preconstruction conference being held. 
    C. Each development phase shall begin on the date the preconstruction conference is held and shall terminate upon the issuance of a certificate of completion relating to a defined part of the overall development plan. The preconstruction conference for a subsequent phase must occur within two years of the issuance of the certificate of completion of the prior phase in order to retain vested status. 
    D. No phased development, except for Development of Regional Impacts, may have a build-out schedule exceeding 20 years. 
Sec. 7.07. - Proportionate Fair-Share Program. 
    7.07.01.  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to establish a method to mitigate the impacts of development on transportation facilities by the cooperative efforts of the public and private sectors, and shall be known as the Proportionate Fair-Share Program. 
    7.07.02.  Applicability. The Proportionate Fair-Share Program shall apply to all developments in the City that impact a road segment or intersection in the Concurrency Management System, including transportation facilities maintained by Florida Department of Transportation or another jurisdiction that are relied upon for concurrency review, and that have been notified that a failure to achieve transportation concurrency on a roadway segment, segments, or intersection(s) exists. The Proportionate Fair-Share Program does not apply to developments meeting the de minimis standards under F.S. § 163.3180(6) or to developments exempted from concurrency. 
    7.07.03.  General requirements. 
A.  An applicant may propose satisfying the transportation concurrency requirements of the City by making a proportionate fair-share contribution, pursuant to the following requirements: 
1.  The proposed development is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and this Land Development Code. 
2.  The 5-year Capital Improvement Program includes transportation improvement(s) that, upon completion, will mitigate additional traffic generated by the proposed development, as determined by the Land Use Administrator, and in accordance with the proportionate fair-share statute. 
B.  The Land Use Administrator may determine to allow an applicant to satisfy transportation concurrency through the Proportionate Fair-Share Program by contributing to an improvement that, upon completion, will mitigate the impact of additional traffic generated by the proposed development, as projected by City staff, using best available data and methodologies, but is not contained in the Capital Improvement Program, where one of the following apply: 
1.  The City adopts, by resolution or ordinance, a commitment to add the improvements to the next 5-year Capital Improvement Program no later than the next regular update. To qualify for consideration under this section, the proposed improvement must be reviewed by the Land Use Administrator and must be determined to be financially feasible. "Financially feasible" means that additional developer contributions, payments, or other funding sources are anticipated during a period not to exceed ten years, to fully mitigate the specified impact(s) on the identified transportation facility or facilities and in accordance with the proportionate fair-share statute. 
2.  If the Land Use Administrator determines that the funds in the Capital Improvement Program are insufficient to fully fund construction of a transportation improvement required by the Concurrency Management System, then a proportionate fair-share payment may be required for another improvement which will, as determined by the Land Use Administrator, significantly benefit the impacted transportation system. The improvement or improvements funded by the proportionate fair-share component shall be adopted into the next 5-year Capital Improvement Program at the next annual Capital Improvement Element update. 
C.  Any improvement project proposed to meet the developer's fair-share obligation must meet generally accepted design standards applicable for the Florida Department of Transportation maintained roadways and/or City maintained roadways, whichever is applicable. 
    7.07.04.  Application process. 
A.  The Land Use Administrator shall notify an applicant in writing if a failure to satisfy transportation concurrency requirements occurs. Upon receipt of such notice, an applicant may submit a proposed proportionate fair-share calculation to the Land Use Administrator for review. 
B.  Pursuant to F.S. § 163.3180(16)(e), proposed proportionate fair-share mitigation for development impacts to facilities on the Strategic Intermodal System requires the concurrence of the Florida Department of Transportation. Improvements to non-Strategic Intermodal System Florida Department of Transportation maintained roadways shall likewise require Florida Department of Transportation review and approval. 
C.  The Land Use Administrator shall determine whether a proportionate fair-share calculation is sufficient and eligible and is consistent with professionally accepted engineering practices. Upon a finding of sufficiency, a proportionate-share agreement will be prepared between the City and the applicant. The agreement shall include, but not be limited to, the amount of payment, description of work, estimated construction costs using the projected future cost of the improvement and data, and the timing of payment. All proportionate-share agreements are subject to approval by the City Council. 
    7.07.05.  Determining proportionate fair-share obligation. 
A.  Proportionate fair-share mitigation for concurrency impacts may include, but are not limited to, separately or collectively, private funds, contributions of land, and construction or contribution of transportation improvements. 
B.  A development shall be required to pay only its proportionate fair-share. The calculated value of the proportionate fair-share mitigation for the impacted transportation facilities shall not differ regardless of the method of mitigation. 
C.  The methodology used to calculate an applicant's proportionate fair-share obligation shall be as provided for in F.S. § 163.3180(12), as follows: 
Proportionate Share = S[[(Development Trips;sub \sub;)/(SV Increase;sub \sub;)] x Cost;sub \sub;]-Impact Fee Credits 
Where: 
Development Trips = those trips from the development that are assigned to roadway segment i and have triggered a deficiency per the Concurrency Management System; 
SV Increase = Service volume increase provided by the eligible improvement to roadway segment i; 
Cost = Adjusted cost of the improvement to segment i. Cost shall be based on the most recent cost and market data and shall include all improvements and associated costs, such as design, right-of-way acquisition, planning, engineering, inspection, and physical development costs directly associated with construction at the anticipated cost in the year it will be incurred; 
Impact Fee Credits = Used where applicable. More specifically, impact fee credits for the proportionate fair-share obligation will be determined when the transportation impact fee obligation is calculated for the proposed development. Impact fees owed by the applicant will be reduced based on the Proportionate Fair-Share Agreement as they become due, according to this Code. If the applicant's proportionate fair-share obligation is less than the development's anticipated road impact fee for the specific stage or phase of the development under review, then the applicant or its successor must pay the remaining impact fee amount to the City pursuant to the requirements of the impact fee code. Any impact fee paid in excess of the impact fee obligation for the proposed development may be applied to the calculated proportionate-share amount. 
D.  For the purposes of determining proportionate-share obligations, the Land Use Administrator shall determine improvement costs based upon the projected future cost of the improvement, as obtained from the Capital Improvement Program or another method approved by the Land Use Administrator. Cost for Florida Department of Transportation facilities shall be based upon Florida Department of Transportation cost estimates. 
E.  The City may accept rights-of-way dedication for all, or a portion of, the proportionate fair-share payment. Credit for the dedication of the nonsite related right-of-way shall be assigned a value by Land Use Administrator or, at the option of the applicant, by fair market value established by an independent appraisal approved by the Land Use Administrator prepared at no expense to the City. 
1.  At the option of the applicant, the reimbursement is to be based on either the assessed value of the proffered land, based on the most recent appraisal by the Flagler County Property Appraiser, or the fair market value of the land, as determined by a certified property appraiser hired and paid for by the applicant. If the latter option is chosen and the City rejects the applicant's appraisal, the City may hire and pay for a second appraiser to appraise the property. If either party rejects the second appraisal, a third appraisal may be performed by an appraiser chosen by the first and second appraisers, the costs of which are to be shared equally by the City and the applicant. The third appraisal is binding to both parties. All appraisals must be consistent with generally accepted appraisal techniques, and the date of valuation must be the proposed date of transfer to the City. 
2.  The applicant shall supply to the City, a survey and legal description of the land and a certificate of title search of the land at no expense to the City. If the estimated value of the right-of-way dedication proposed by the applicant is less than the City estimated total proportionate fair-share obligation for that development, then the applicant shall also pay or provide for mitigation of the difference. 
    7.07.06.  Impact fee credit for proportionate fair-share mitigation. 
A.  Transportation impact fees shall be applied as a credit against proportionate fair-share mitigation only if the proposed improvement is on the list of approved projects in the current 5-year Capital Improvement Program, or as amended by the next regular update, or in the first five years of the current 10-year Capital Improvement Program and the City's impact fee program. Credits may also be given to proposed improvement that will be incorporated into the next, or following, 5-year Capital Improvement Program. Impact fee credits shall be calculated at the same time as the applicant's proportionate-share obligation is calculated. 
B.  Any transportation impact fee credit based upon proportionate fair-share contributions for a proposed development cannot be transferred to any other parcel or parcels of real property within the City. 
    7.07.07.  Appropriation of fair-share revenues. 
A.  Proportionate fair-share revenues shall be placed in the appropriate project account for funding of scheduled improvements in the Capital Improvement Program. 
B.  In the event a scheduled facility improvement is removed from the Capital Improvement Program, then the revenues collected for its construction may be applied toward the construction of another improvement within that same corridor that would mitigate the impacts of development. 
    7.07.08.  Additional programs. The City may utilize any program relating to concurrency as may be permitted by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, § 45, 12-15-09) 
Chapter 9 - ENGINEERING DESIGN AND UTILITIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-24 , § 2, adopted Nov. 6, 2018, repealed ch. 9 and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former ch. 9, §§ 9.01-9.07, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2009-26, §§ 46-48, adopted Dec. 15, 2009. 

Sec. 9.01. - General provisions. 
    9.01.01.  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to set forth engineering design regulations for residential and nonresidential uses as required in this Land Development Code. This section sets forth uniform regulations, requirements, and procedures to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens and to assure quality of life to the citizens of the City. The Land Use Administrator may adopt technical manuals that relate to technical requirements pertaining to the City's water, wastewater, reclaimed water, drainage, street, and other systems. 
    9.01.02.  Applicability. The design and construction requirements shall apply to: 
A.  Nonresidential and residential subdivision projects (applies to subdivisions with private or public roadway dedications); 
B.  Nonresidential and residential construction projects; and 
C.  City and other public agency owned projects. 
    9.01.03.  General requirements. 
A.  Utility lines. 
1.  Utility lines for all new development projects shall be installed underground. Switchgear, pumps, transformers, and other appurtenances shall be allowed aboveground, but shall be shielded with landscaping as required in this Land Development Code. Connections from distribution lines, mains, and collectors in the public or utility rights-of-way or easements shall be placed underground. 
2.  All redevelopment projects shall relocate existing on-site overhead utility lines underground, within project limits. The Land Use Administrator may allow exceptions to this requirement if it is determined that such relocation is not feasible based upon the unique configuration of the real property. 
3.  For all new private and public development projects, underground communications conduit(s) shall be installed in accordance with City standards. 
B.  Traffic control devices. All traffic control devices shall meet the more stringent requirements of all of the following: 1) the latest edition of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, 2) Florida Department of Transportation Design Standards Road and Bridge Technical Specifications, 3) Florida Highway Administration Standard Highway Signs, and 4) Florida Department of Transportation Traffic Engineering and Operations Manuals. 
    9.01.04.  Construction plans submittal requirements. 
A.  Construction Plans and Calculations shall be prepared, signed, and sealed by a Florida Licensed Professional Engineer or other Licensed Professional qualified in the appropriate field for which the Construction Plans and Calculations are prepared. Plans and calculations shall be submitted for review in accordance with the City's Development Review Process. 
B.  The City shall establish submittal checklists relating to the required contents of all Development Review submittals. The checklists shall establish minimum requirements for the contents of Construction Plan and Design Document submittals. Additional information may be requested if the City believes the information is reasonably necessary in support of drainage analysis; including maps, charts, tables, graphs, photographs, narrative descriptions, additional calculations, explanations, and citations to support references as deemed appropriate to communicate the required information for reasonable evaluation of the site. 
C.  Grading and drainage plans shall include existing and proposed contours at one-foot (min.) intervals with spot elevations as needed for clarity and to adequately depict drainage patterns. 
D.  Topographic survey for half of right-of-way adjacent to project for full length of frontage, including existing driveways and right-of-way intersections within 100 feet of site, showing drainage structures, signage, and utilities. 
E.  Section views of all proposed retention/detention ponds, swales, berms, etc. showing 25-year stormwater elevation and top of bank elevation. 
F.  Construction details for all proposed manholes, inlets, and other stormwater control structures. 
G.  Location, size, length, and elevations of all proposed piping systems and related control structures. 
H.  Erosion control plans shall be on a separate sheet with existing and proposed contours. 
I.  Legends shown with all abbreviations and symbols identified. 
J.  Copies of permits from all regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the project (prior to commencement of construction). 
K.  Phasing of development. The phasing of development is allowed as part of approval of a site plan or a Subdivision Preliminary Plat in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  Phasing of approved development shall be in keeping with an approved phasing plat that shows phase boundaries and describes included development and improvements. 
2.  Each phase shall be designed and constructed to include all improvements and other aspects of development necessary to meet all requirements of the Code and all other applicable regulations. 
( Ord. No. 2018-24 , § 2, 11-6-18) 
Sec. 9.02. - Platting requirements. 
    9.02.01.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish requirements for the subdivision of land in the City and to ensure compliance with F.S. ch. 177. 
    9.02.02.  Subdivision design standards. In addition to the requirements stated in other sections of this Code, subdivisions shall be designed according to the following: 
A.  Lots. All lots shall conform to the dimensional, yard, and building setback requirements of the applicable zoning district development standards. In addition, the following requirements shall apply: 
1.  Width. All lots shall have a minimum street frontage of 20 feet, and those fronting on a curve shall meet the minimum lot width measured at the front setback line. Corner lots shall be 15 percent greater in width than the minimum required width of interior lots. 
2.  Depth. 
a.  Lots along arterial streets shall be deep enough to accommodate the two required front yard setbacks. 
b.  Flag lots are prohibited unless approved as part of a Master Planned Development. 
3.  Orientation. Residential lots shall be designed so vehicular ingress and egress to/from those individual lots is not provided from abutting limited access roadways or arterials. 
B.  Permanent reference markers. A registered land surveyor shall install permanent reference monuments, permanent control points, and state plane coordinates in accordance with State laws and professional standards. These must be inspected by the second party surveyor to certify they have been set in the field prior to final plat approval or recording of the mylar. 
    9.02.03.  Easements. 
A.  Drainage easements. 
1.  Drainage easements of a width required for conveying and maintaining an adequate storm drainage system shall be provided. Minimum width for piped systems shall be 15 feet plus the pipe diameter, and 15 feet for open channels plus channel width, measured from top of bank to top of bank. Where deemed necessary by the Land Use Administrator, additional easements and increased width may be required along waterways, natural watercourses, canals, and drainage ways. 
2.  Whenever a subdivision lies wholly or partly in any area for which the City has adopted a drainage plan, and is traversed by a natural or designed watercourse for which such plan requires a drainage easement or right-of-way, such easement or right-of-way shall be set forth on the preliminary and final plat and shall be dedicated to the City for public use. 
B.  [ Stormwater storage facilities. ] Stormwater storage facilities shall be constructed to provide adequate access for maintenance. An access and maintenance easement of ten feet around the perimeter of wet ponds and five feet around the perimeter of dry ponds, measured from top of bank, shall be provided for detention facilities. Maximum grade for maintenance easement shall be ten percent. 
C.  [ Stormwater management systems. ] Stormwater management systems must be designed to accommodate maintenance equipment access and to facilitate regular operational maintenance (such as underdrain replacement, unclogging filters, sediment removal, mowing, and vegetation control). 
D.  Utility easements. Utility easements for both underground and aboveground facilities shall be provided where required by the Land Use Administrator. Such easements shall have a minimum width of ten feet and shall normally be laid out on property lines. In all cases, such easements shall be dedicated to the perpetual use of the public. Where lots abut along a common property line, the easement may be centered along said common property line. 
E.  Pedestrian paths and sidewalk easements. Pedestrian easements or walkways shall be provided through the interior of lots where such easements are required by the Land Use Administrator. Pedestrian easements shall be at least eight feet wide, or walkway width plus two feet, whichever is greater, and shall be laid out along the side or rear property lines. In all cases, such easements shall be dedicated to the perpetual use of the public. 
F.  Private easements. Private easements (or spite strips) between the road and the subdivision boundary or between subdivision boundaries shall not be permitted unless conditions are established under which the adjacent parcel can be connected to the road or adjacent property. 
G.  Easements and right-of-way maintenance. The City will maintain only those easements, rights-of-way, and public sites which it accepts for maintenance. 
H.  Vacation of easements. An easement may be vacated by a replat of the plat in which the easement was dedicated, or via a resolution of the City Council, based on the best interests of the public. The only easements eligible for vacation by resolution are easements which have been previously dedicated and accepted, such as with the approval of a plat. The applicant must submit recommendation letters from utility companies; and a survey and legal description of the area to be vacated; and must show that the easement should be vacated due to utility reroute, non-use of the easement, or that the easement is no longer needed for public purposes. The City can vacate only "public" easements located within the City which are dedicated to the City or to the public. Upon receipt of a vacation request, the City Clerk will publish a notice of public hearing, and shall notify property owners within the block where the easement is located of the public hearing by certified mail, return receipt requested. In addition, the applicant must post the notice at each end of the easement to be vacated, not less than 14 days prior to the public hearing. An affidavit of proof of posting must be submitted to the City Clerk not less than seven days prior to the hearing. 
    9.02.04.  Plat approval. Prior to the City Council hearing for approval of a plat, the developer must submit all required documents, recording costs and fees, and: 
A.  If infrastructure improvements have not been commenced, a surety bond guaranteeing funds to construct all subdivision public improvements must be provided for City Council approval. After approval, the mylar can be processed for recording; or 
B.  If infrastructure improvements have commenced and are continuing in good faith, the final plat can go to City Council without a bond but the mylar will not be processed for recording until all infrastructure is complete, based on City approval of all final inspections in the site development permit, and the submittal of a maintenance bond. 
    9.02.05.  Performance surety for subdivisions and site plan construction projects. At such time as the City agrees to accept the dedication of any public improvements, a performance guarantee in accordance with the standards in this section shall be required. To ensure completion of public infrastructure improvements that are required as part of an approved site plan or final plat (E.g., streets, sidewalks, stormwater management facilities, potable water facilities, wastewater facilities, and streetlights), the developer shall execute performance and maintenance sureties that guarantee the required improvements against all defects in workmanship and materials, including failure to construct or to continue to construct in accordance with approved plans and specifications. 
A.  Performance surety. 
1.  Plat and site plan performance surety amount. A plat or site plan surety must be in the form of a cash bond, performance bond, or letter of credit. The cost estimate amount of the surety shall be based on 120 percent of the sum of the following costs, as certified under seal by the project engineer of record: 
a.  Required subdivision public infrastructure improvements costs. 
b.  Costs of all required improvements relating to public road right-of-way. 
c.  Costs of all required off-site public infrastructure improvements. 
The amount of surety is subject to approval by the Land Use Administrator. 
2.  Performance surety release. Upon completion of all performance surety guaranteed improvements, applicable inspections, and acceptance by the City, performance sureties shall be released by the Land Use Administrator. 
B.  Maintenance surety. 
1.  Plats and site plans with public improvements maintenance surety. A maintenance surety for public improvements shall be submitted upon release of the performance surety. The maintenance surety provides a guarantee that the required improvements were completed without defects in workmanship and materials. The term of this guarantee shall be one year from the date of acceptance, unless the Land Use Administrator specifies a longer time frame. 
2.  Maintenance surety amount. The amount of the maintenance surety shall be based on 20 percent of the entire actual/present day costs of construction, including the costs of materials and labor for installing the required public infrastructure improvements. Actual costs for installing required public infrastructure improvements shall be itemized by improvement type as certified under seal by the project engineer of record, and subject to approval by the Land Use Administrator. 
3.  Maintenance surety release. The maintenance surety may be released no earlier than one year from the date of acceptance of the required improvements by the Land Use Administrator. This action must be initiated, in writing, by the developer. 
    9.02.06.  Compliance with design requirements. All land development improvements shall comply with all the requirements of this Land Development Code, including those which contain design and construction information for the following: 
A.  Horizontal and vertical dimensional design requirements. 
B.  Roadway, parking, and vehicle access ways. 
C.  Pedestrian pathways, sidewalks, and recreational trails. 
D.  Storm drainage, potable water, reclaimed water, and sanitary sewer infrastructure improvements. 
E.  Clearing, earthwork, and grading. 
( Ord. No. 2018-24 , § 2, 11-6-18) 
Sec. 9.03. - Construction and inspection requirements. 
    9.03.01.  Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this section is to establish requirements for the inspection of the construction of all site development improvements on both residential and non-residential projects. The construction inspection procedures set forth in this chapter and in the City Technical Standards Manual ensure conformity of construction with approved development orders, this Land Development Code, and any conditions of approval. 
B.  Separate construction inspection requirements for water and sewer improvements are established in Part II of this chapter. Inspections shall be performed as required by the Land Use Administrator. 
    9.03.02.  Commencement of construction. Commencement of construction or disturbance of land of any type is prohibited unless: 
A.  A final development order is issued in conjunction with a site development permit or applicable building permits; 
B.  All requisite federal, state, county, and City site work permits for the project are obtained. Certification by the engineer of record, along with copies of all required permits, may be required by the Land Use Administrator. 
C.  A preconstruction meeting for the project is scheduled and held with the City, unless deemed unnecessary by the Land Use Administrator. 
    9.03.03.  Types of inspections. 
A.  The following construction inspections shall be held during the course of the construction of the project infrastructure: 
1.  Scheduled mandatory key checkpoint inspections. 
2.  Scheduled or requested minor inspections and field conferences. 
3.  Unscheduled site visits and inspections. 
4.  Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) Inspections. 
5.  All other inspections required by the governing contract for a specific project. 
6.  Scheduled final inspection for punch list work. 
7.  Scheduled re-inspection of punch list work. 
8.  Scheduled final inspection walkthrough, as required prior to the developer submitting a request for the following: 
a.  Release of surety and acceptance by City of a maintenance bond. 
b.  Acknowledgement of completion of required subdivision improvements to allow final plat recordation. 
c.  Acceptance of roadways dedicated to the City. 
    9.03.04.  Privately owned bridges. Privately owned bridges shall meet the design, construction, inspection, maintenance, and reporting criteria in accordance with the Florida Department of Transportation and federal standards. 
( Ord. No. 2018-24 , § 2, 11-6-18) 
Sec. 9.04. - Stormwater management requirements. 
    9.04.01.  Purpose. The purposes of the stormwater management requirements are: 
A.  To provide for design criteria and construction requirements to achieve effective stormwater management. 
B.  To minimize adverse impacts of land development and related construction activities to property, environmentally sensitive areas, water bodies, and other natural resources. 
C.  To improve the public health, safety, and welfare by providing for the safe and efficient capture and conveyance of stormwater runoff. 
D.  To encourage and facilitate urban water resources management techniques including, but not limited to, the retention/detention of stormwater runoff and the enhancement of the environment. 
E.  To promote low impact development alternative designs and prevent loss of life and/or property due to flooding. 
    9.04.02.  Activities requiring a permit. A St. Johns River Water Management District Environmental Resource Permit (ERP) is required for construction, operation, and maintenance of a stormwater management system that serves a project meeting any of the following thresholds: 
A.  Any project in, on, or over wetlands or other surface waters; 
B.  A total of more than 4,000 square feet of impervious or semi-impervious surface area subject to vehicular traffic; 
C.  A total of more than 9,000 square feet of impervious and semi-impervious surface area; 
D.  A total project area of more than five acres; 
E.  A capability of impounding more than 40-acre-feet of water; 
F.  Any dam having a height of more than ten feet, as measured from the lowest elevation of the downstream toe to the dam crest; 
G.  Any project that is part of a larger common plan of development or sale; 
H.  Any dry storage facility storing ten or more vessels that is functionally associated with a boat launching area; and 
I.  Any modification or alteration of a project previously permitted under pt. IV of ch. 373, F.S. 
    9.04.03.  Minimum design standards and performance criteria. 
A.  Design and Performance Criteria for Stormwater Management Systems shall meet the requirements as outlined in St. Johns River Water Management District (SJRWMD) Regulations, contained in the Applicant's Handbook Volume II (AH Vol II). 
B.  The Stormwater Management Plan shall, at a minimum, address the following: 
1.  Impacts to adjacent and downstream stormwater collection, conveyance, and storage systems resulting from increased runoff rate and/or volume from the project site. 
2.  Impacts to adjacent and upstream runoff contributing areas that may be hydrologically or hydraulically connected to the project. 
3.  Impacts to adjacent and downstream areas resulting from sediments and other pollutants that may be carried by stormwater runoff during and after construction. 
4.  Impacts to "Special Flood Hazard Areas" or "Volume Sensitive" areas associated with the project. 
C.  Stormwater Treatment and Attenuation. 
1.  Projects that discharge runoff to downstream areas that are not volume sensitive and have adequate capacity to accept and convey stormwater runoff from the project site without increasing flood levels shall limit developed peak runoff rates to pre-developed runoff rates for the five-year, 24-hour and 25-year, 24-hour design storm events. 
2.  Projects that discharge runoff to downstream areas that are volume sensitive or do not have adequate capacity to accept and convey stormwater runoff from the project site without increasing flood elevations shall provide detention for the 25-year, 96-hour discharge volume for developed conditions, such that the volume released from the project during the critical time period is not greater than the volume released during pre-developed conditions. 
3.  Projects that contribute to the City of Palm Coast Master Stormwater Management System, as defined in the Palm Coast Comprehensive Land Use Plan (CLUP) Volume 3, shall also be designed and constructed to limit developed runoff rates to pre-developed rates for the 100-year, 24-hour design storm event. 
4.  Projects that are constructed in phases shall meet the minimum design standards for each phase. No phase shall be dependent upon the construction of a future phase in order to meet these requirements. 
5.  Pond top of bank elevation shall be a minimum of six inches above the maximum design storm elevation. 
6.  The Land Use Administrator (LUA) shall have the right to exempt any project from Section 9.04.03.C.1. and 2. above that discharges directly into the Intracoastal Waterway or Atlantic Ocean. 
7.  Stormwater system analysis shall include Pre-Development and Post-Development runoff hydrographs; routing the Post-Development runoff hydrographs through the stormwater storage system; and sizing of the storage system and discharge control structure(s) to meet the minimum requirements of this section. Stormwater discharge computations shall include storm frequency, storm duration, rainfall amount, rainfall distribution, hydrologic soil conditions, runoff coefficients, pond stage, storage, and discharge, changes in land use cover and slope conditions, off-site runoff contributing areas, time of concentration, tailwater conditions, and any other changes in hydraulic, hydrologic, and topographic characteristics associated with the development. 
8.  Control devices that are designed to contain more than two-foot depth of water within the structure during the design storm and have openings greater than one-foot minimum dimension shall be restricted from public access. 
9.  All stormwater basin side slopes shall be stabilized by either vegetation or other biodegradable materials to minimize erosion and sedimentation of the basins. 
10.  Wet detention stormwater management systems shall provide a littoral zone in accordance with AH Vol II. 
D.  Soils Investigations. 
1.  A geotechnical report, prepared by a licensed engineer or other professional authorized to perform such work under Florida Statutes, shall be submitted for stormwater storage facilities, systems, or open channels used as a dry retention/detention facility designed to contain standing water for less than 72 hours after the occurrence of a rainfall event, or using infiltration to meet the requirements of this Code. The report shall contain a soil boring log, boring locations, and any parameters that may affect the design or recovery of the facility including, but not limited to: estimated seasonal high water table, hydraulic conductivity, and locations of confining layers. 
2.  For dry retention systems, soil borings shall be of sufficient depth to determine the wet season high water table and the permeability of the soils. 
E.  Water shall not be diverted into a natural buffer area for retention purposes where such water level change will adversely affect the health or survivability of retained trees. 
F.  It is presumed that the lowering of the water table for the purpose of constructing detention/retention basins and for the purpose of permanently protecting road construction does not conflict with this Land Development Code if all of the following are met: 
1.  The development is permitted by the St. Johns River Water Management District and the City; 
2.  The lowering of the water table has no adverse effect on wetlands and surface waters as defined in 62-340, F.A.C.; and 
3.  The lowering of the water table does not increase flows to the detriment of neighboring lands. 
G.  Where stormwater and other waters drain from lands outside the City, facilities within the City shall be designed in accordance with this Land Development Code, as if the entire area being drained was within the City. 
    9.04.04.  Limiting conditions. 
A.  Before any offsite discharge from the stormwater management system occurs, the retention and detention storage must be excavated to rough grade prior to building construction or placement of impervious surface within the area served by those systems. Adequate measures must be taken to prevent siltation of these treatment systems, and control structures during construction or siltation must be removed prior to final grading and stabilization. 
B.  Prior to and during construction, the permittee shall implement and maintain all erosion and sediment control measures (best management practices) required to retain sediment on-site and to prevent violations of state water quality standards. All practices must be in accordance with Section 9.04.06. If site specific conditions require additional measures during any phase of construction or operation to prevent erosion or control sediment beyond those specified in the erosion and sediment control plan, the permittee shall implement additional best management practices as necessary, in accordance with Section 9.04.06. The permittee shall correct any erosion or shoaling that causes adverse impacts to the water resources. 
C.  The stormwater management system must be completed in accordance with the permitted plans and permit conditions prior to the initiation of the permitted use of the site infrastructure. The system must be completed in accordance with the permitted plans and permit conditions prior to transfer of responsibility for operation and maintenance of the stormwater management system to another responsible entity. 
D.  If the permitted stormwater management system was designed by a registered professional, within 15 days of providing the required as-built certification to the St. Johns River Water Management District, or 45 days after completion of the stormwater system (whichever occurs first), the permittee must submit to the City a copy of Water Management District Form No. 62-330.310 (1) (As Built Certification By a Registered Professional), signed and sealed by an appropriate professional registered in the State of Florida. 
E.  Activities approved by this permit shall be conducted in a manner which do not cause violations of state water quality standards. 
    9.04.05.  Collection and conveyance. 
A.  Stormwater collection and conveyance systems shall be designed, as a minimum, to convey runoff resulting from the five-year, 24-hour storm event. Collector roadway cross drains shall be designed to convey the ten-year, 24-hour storm event. 
B.  Temporary roadway flooding shall not exceed an elevation that would permit flood water encroachment of more than one-half of a travel lane at the lowest elevation on the centerline profile of a roadway for the 25-year, 24-hour storm. Full recovery and use of the roadway must be available at the end of the design storm event. 
C.  Stormwater systems serving parking lots, or other non-residential property, shall be designed to collect and convey all stormwater flows into and through the system without creating adverse impacts to adjacent properties. The system shall recover from temporary ponding such that use of the parking area is available at the end of the storm event. 
D.  Minimum allowable pipe size for stormwater systems located within the City of Palm Coast right-of-way shall be 15 inches. 
E.  Design storm frequency for open channels shall be as follows: 
1.  Local roadway swales and ditches; five-year storm event. 
2.  Collector roadway swales and ditches; ten-year storm event. 
3.  Outfall ditches and canals; 25-year storm event. 
    9.04.06.  Erosion and sediment control. 
A.  Erosion and sediment control Best Management Practices (BMPs) shall be used as necessary during construction to retain sediment and turbidity on-site. These management practices shall be designed and certified by an appropriate licensed professional experienced in the fields of soil conservation or sediment/turbidity control according to specific site conditions, and shall be shown on the plans for the stormwater management system. The Permittee shall have a licensed professional provide the contractor, as part of the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan or Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP), information pertaining to the construction, operation, and maintenance of the erosion and sediment/turbidity control BMPs. 
B.  Best Management Practices shall be designed in accordance with the State of Florida Erosion and Sediment Control Designer and Reviewer Manual (June 2007), and the Florida Stormwater, Erosion, and Sedimentation Control Inspector's Manual (FDEP July 2008), as both are amended, and shall be shown on the "Grading and Drainage Plan" or on a separate "Erosion Control Plan". 
C.  Any sedimentation leaving the site or impacting adjacent areas shall be halted immediately and the adjacent areas restored to pre-existing conditions. Restoration efforts shall be coordinated with FDEP or SJRWMD, as appropriate, to ensure that the restorative activities are consistent with the Statewide Environmental Resource Permitting (SWERP) rules. 
D.  All areas disturbed by authorized construction activities shall be sodded, hydro-seeded and mulched, or protected by other appropriate erosion control measures. Banks or berms having a 3:1 slope or steeper shall be sodded. 
E.  Stabilization measures shall be initiated for erosion and sediment control on disturbed areas as soon as practicable in portions of the site where construction activities have temporarily or permanently ceased, but in no case more than seven days after the construction activity in that portion of the site has temporarily or permanently ceased. 
F.  Damage to private land, public rights-of-way, or other property shall be repaired prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. In case of damage to private property or to public rights-of-way, it shall be the joint and severable responsibilities of the permittee and contractor to make repairs as directed by the Land Use Administrator. 
    9.04.07.  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Stormwater Program. 
A.  The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Program regulates construction activities that disturb one or more acres of land and discharge stormwater to surface waters of the state or into a Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4). An MS4 is a conveyance or system of conveyances such as roads with stormwater systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed channels, or storm drains. If a project is less than one acre, but part of a larger common plan of development or sale that will ultimately disturb one or more acres, permit coverage is also required. 
B.  NPDES Construction Generic Permit (CGP). 
1.  The operator is ultimately responsible for obtaining permit coverage and implementing appropriate pollution prevention techniques to minimize erosion and sedimentation from stormwater discharges during construction. The operator is the entity with sufficient authority to ensure compliance with the permit requirements. Typically, the operator is the owner, developer, or general contractor. 
2.  For construction projects where the operator changes, the new operator should obtain permit coverage at least two days before assuming control of the project, and the previous operator should file an NPDES Stormwater Notice of Termination (FDEP Form 62-621.300[6]) within 14 days of relinquishing control of the project to a new operator. The previous operator must meet the conditions to terminate coverage in accordance with Part VIII of the CGP. 
C.  Obtaining Coverage under the CGP. 
1.  Obtain and carefully read the CGP (available online at the Florida Department of Environmental Protection Website). 
2.  Develop a site specific SWPPP. 
3.  Complete in its entirety the application or Notice of Intent (NOI) (FDEP Form 62-621.300[4][b]). 
4.  Submit the NOI with the appropriate processing fee to the NPDES Stormwater Notices Center (Do not submit plans or a copy of the SWPPP when applying for coverage). 
5.  Provide a copy of the SWPPP to the City of Palm Coast (MS4 Operator). 
6.  Operators seeking coverage under the CGP must apply for permit coverage at least two days before construction begins. 
D.  SWPPP contents. 
1.  The SWPPP must identify potential sources of pollution that may reasonably be expected to affect the quality of stormwater discharge associated with construction activity. In addition, the plan shall describe and ensure the implementation of BMPs that will be used to reduce the pollutants in stormwater discharge associated with construction activity and ensure compliance with the terms and conditions of the permit. 
2.  The SWPPP must be developed before an NOI is filed in order to receive CGP coverage, and must meet or exceed FDEP requirements. Also, beginning on the first day of construction activities, the SWPPP must be available at the location identified in the NOI. 
3.  A SWPPP should consist of a narrative and a site map. The CGP also requires a certification statement to be signed by the operator. The SWPPP must be developed and implemented for each construction site covered by the generic permit and must be prepared in accordance with good engineering practices. 
4.  The narrative report shall include a site description and, at a minimum, the following information about the site: 
a.  Description of the construction activity; 
b.  Intended sequence of major soil-disturbing activities; 
c.  Total area of the site and total disturbance area; 
d.  Description of the soils and estimate of the size of the drainage area for each discharge point; 
e.  Latitude and longitude of each discharge point and the name of the receiving water for each discharge point; and 
f.  Site map indicating drainage patterns and slopes, areas of soil disturbance, undisturbed areas, locations of BMPs, stabilization areas, surface waters/wetlands, and discharge points. 
5.  Each plan must include a description of the appropriate controls, BMPs, and measures that will be implemented at the construction site. The plan must clearly describe for each major soil-disturbing activity the appropriate control measures and the timing for implementing these measures. 
6.  The plan shall also identify and ensure the implementation of appropriate pollution prevention and treatment measures for non-stormwater components of the discharge. 
7.  The preparer of the SWPPP or responsible authority must sign and date the following certification statement as part of the SWPPP: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gathered and evaluated the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information. These include the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
8.  Contractor Certification Requirement: All contractors and subcontractors identified in the SWPPP, or those selected at a later date, must sign and date the following certification statement before conducting land disturbing activities on the site: 
"I certify under penalty of law that I understand, and shall comply with, the terms and conditions of the State of Florida Generic Permit for Stormwater Discharge from Large and Small Construction Activities and this Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan prepared there under." 
9.  A copy of the NOI or acknowledgment letter from FDEP confirming coverage must be posted at the construction site in a prominent place for viewing (such as alongside the building permit). 
E.  Retention of records. The permittee shall retain copies of the SWPPP and all reports required by the CGP, and records of all data used to complete the NOI to be covered by the CGP, for at least three years from the date that the site is finally stabilized. The permittee shall retain a copy of the SWPPP and all reports, records, and documentation required by the CGP at the construction site, or an appropriate alternative location as specified in the NOI, from the date of project initiation to the date of final stabilization. 
F.  Notice of termination (N.O.T.). Upon completion of the project and final stabilization, the permittee should submit a completed N.O.T. to the NPDES Stormwater Notices Center and the City of Palm Coast. The elimination of stormwater discharges associated with construction activity means that all disturbed soils at the site have been finally stabilized and temporary erosion and sediment control have been removed, or will be removed at an appropriate time. 
( Ord. No. 2018-24 , § 2, 11-6-18) 
Sec. 9.05. - Stormwater discharge pollutant control. 
    9.05.01.  Enforcement. 
A.  All persons in violation of this regulation shall remedy such violations immediately. All persons in violation shall, in addition to all other required remedial actions, upon detection or written notification by the City, provide a written response outlining the temporary and permanent measures that will be taken to correct the violation and a proposed schedule for completion of the corrective measures. All such proposals for corrective action are subject to the approval of the Land Use Administrator. 
B.  The Land Use Administrator is authorized to issue cease and desist orders in the form of written official notices hand delivered or sent by certified mail to the person(s) believed to be responsible for the violation or the owner of the property from, or on which, the violation is believed to be occurring. Specific activities and operations may be ordered to cease based upon the following conditions: 
1.  In a situation that may have a serious effect on the health, safety or welfare of the public or the environment, including the quality of stormwater in the City's MS4; or 
2.  When irreversible or irreparable harm may result, in the reasonable opinion of the Land Use Administrator, and immediate cessation of the activity is necessary to protect the quality of the stormwater in the City's MS4, or to protect the public or the environment. 
C.  Should any person responsible for a violation of this regulation fail to take the remedial action as required by the City, the City may take such remedial action, and all costs incurred by the City shall be the responsibility of the person or persons responsible for the violation, and the City may record a lien against the personal and real property of the violator to recover said costs and to collect all fines and penalties imposed. 
D.  In addition to the remedies provided herein, the City may make application to a court of competent jurisdiction for injunctive relief to restrain any person from violating or continuing to violate the provisions of this regulation. In addition, the City may also seek entry of a court order requiring restoration and mitigation of any impacted facilities, land or waters, and may request any other appropriate legal remedy, including reimbursement of court costs. The City shall be entitled to an award of attorney's fees in prosecuting such actions, together with all attorney's fees and costs on appeal. 
E.  Any fines or other funds received as a result of enforcement action under this regulation and which are not used for the specific purposes enumerated herein shall be deposited into the stormwater utility fund. 
F.  The City may also use the City's Code Enforcement process to enforce violations. 
( Ord. No. 2018-24 , § 2, 11-6-18) 
Sec. 9.06. - Land modification of platted residential lots. 
    9.06.01.  Clearing and earthwork. 
A.  With proper permits, the City allows the modification of land for purposes such as grading, filling, excavation, unsuitable soils removal, and certain tree removal on vacant residential lots as set forth in Chapter 11, prior to the issuance of a building permit. The only exception is for vacant single-family residential property, where "vacant" is defined as land that is in a natural vegetated state, or land that has been cleared of such vegetation but contains no impervious area. Persons desiring to modify a residential lot prior to the issuance of a building permit must apply for and obtain a Right-of-Way Access and Lot Grading Permit, and shall be subject to the following general permit conditions: 
1.  The lot, if vacant of any structures, must be directly adjacent to a lot with a permitted structure and both lots shall be under the same ownership. 
2.  Prior to performing any work, a copy of the permit shall be posted on the site. 
3.  If wetlands or endangered species are discovered, additional requirements may be imposed by the City to protect natural resources. 
4.  A time limit of four months shall be allowed from the date the permit was issued until the work is completed. When the work is completed, a final inspection shall be requested by the applicant. If the work is not completed within four months, the City will monitor the site and may initiate code enforcement procedures. Passing the final inspection shall mean that the work is complete. 
5.  The owner shall preserve trees and vegetation in accordance with the tree preservation requirements set forth in Chapter 11. 
6.  After completion of the work, the owner of the property shall request a final inspection from the City, which will confirm if the clearing was completed in accordance with the permits. 
7.  Prior to the final inspection the following shall be completed: 
a.  Swales shall be graded to the proper grade and cross section. 
b.  After the swale has been graded and prior to sodding, a swale elevation survey shall be prepared by a Florida licensed land surveyor to verify the swale elevations are correct. 
c.  All disturbed areas of the site and public road right-of-way shall be stabilized with vegetation. All rights-of-way and any areas subject to erosion shall be sodded in accordance with the Florida Department of Transportation Design Standards. 
d.  All tree barricades, silt fences, and construction debris shall be removed from the site or adjacent sites, if present. 
e.  Repair of all road damage associated with permitted work shall be jointly and severally the responsibility of the property owner and permittee, and shall be completed prior to the completion or expiration of the permit. 
f.  Replacement trees, if required, shall be planted. 
B.  Vacant lots are exempt from this permit if the lot is only to be cleared by hand cutting of non-protected trees and removal of existing vegetation. This includes mitigation type mowing for wildfire control/mitigation. This exemption only pertains to platted single-family residential lots and not adjacent reserve parcels, unplatted lands, or stand-alone lots of any type. 
    9.06.02.  Construction on platted residential lots. 
A.  Residential dwelling units, other structures, and surrounding site work on platted single-family residential lots, shall be designed and constructed in conformance with this Land Development Code. Property owners or their agents shall obtain a building permit from the City prior to the construction of any aboveground or underground structure. 
B.  In addition to a building permit, a Right-of-Way Access Permit shall be obtained from the City. 
( Ord. No. 2018-24 , § 2, 11-6-18) 
Sec. 9.07. - Utilities. 
    9.07.01.  Purpose. The requirements and regulations contained in this section are established to ensure the adequate provision of potable water (water), fire protection/suppression, sanitary sewer (wastewater), and reclaimed water facilities necessary to: 
A.  Meet City level of service requirements; 
B.  Provide adequate service capacities for individual projects; and 
C.  Meet the requirements of other related codes and standards adopted by the federal, state, City, or regional agencies. 
    9.07.02.  General requirements. 
A.  Connection to the City utility system. Unless specifically allowed otherwise herein, all water, fire protection/suppression, sanitary sewer, and reclaimed water improvements shall be designed to connect to the City's central utility systems. 
B.  Construction standards. The design and construction of facilities for providing water, fire protection/suppression, sanitary sewer, and reclaimed water shall comply with City standards and state regulations. 
C.  Private potable wells. The City will allow the use of individual potable water wells if approved by the St. Johns River Water Management District. However, for all new development that requires site plan or subdivision approval that is within one mile of central service, the development shall be required to connect to the central service. For development that does not require site plan or subdivision approval, the development shall be required to connect to the potable water system if central service is available within 150 feet of the lot line. In the event that central service is not available in either instance, the development shall be required to connect within one year from the date that central service becomes available. 
D.  Private non-potable wells. Irrigation systems and swimming pools may be served by a separate private water supply system provided that no interconnection of any kind occurs between the private system and the public utility system, its water mains, the utility's water service line, the customer's water service line, a building's potable water plumbing pipes, or any pipe or line connection or extension, and then only if reclaimed water service is not available. If and when available on the property, reclaimed water shall be used for all appropriate uses. The design, permitting, construction, and use of this type of well shall comply with the most current regulations of the Flagler County Health Department, the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, and the St. Johns River Water Management District, as appropriate. 
    9.07.03.  Potable water system. 
A.  Conditions precedent to water services. 
1.  Water service may be activated if all permit conditions of the Florida Department of Environmental Protection are completed and the water distribution system has been approved and accepted by the City. 
2.  Except where otherwise permitted, all new development shall connect to the City's potable water system. New development shall pay all impact, installation, and line extension fees prior to the issuance of building permits or the initiation of service. 
B.  Required meters. 
1.  All residential facilities shall have individual meters for each dwelling unit unless a master meter installation is approved by the City in a utility agreement. 
2.  The property owner shall keep meter sites readily accessible with a minimum four feet of clearance around the meter/backflow assembly for meter reading and maintenance. 
C.  Water mains location/sizing. 
1.  Trunk lines shall have a pipe diameter meeting minimum requirements for fire flow and user consumption based on Florida Department of Environmental Protection regulations and standard engineering practices. Water mains shall be located within a public right-of-way or within a corridor (private rights-of-way) approved by the Land Use Administrator. All mains to which fire hydrants are connected shall be a minimum of six inches in diameter and in conformance with National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) standards. In no case shall a water main be smaller than four inches. To the maximum extent feasible, distribution lines shall be located parallel to and behind the back of the curb or edge of the pavement. Water mains shall be located to minimize conflicts with other utilities and existing or proposed structures. 
2.  All new development service lines and appurtenances thereto shall be installed and all costs shall be paid by the applicant. Upon construction completion and acceptance of the system, it shall be the design engineer's responsibility to ensure that the system is properly certified and accepted by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, and that certified "as-built" drawings, consisting of one signed and sealed set of plans plus a CD (compact disc) containing electronic files are provided to the City in accordance with City standards. Under no circumstance shall the system be activated by anyone other than the Land Use Administrator. 
D.  Booster pumps/fire protection systems. It is prohibited and unlawful to modify or connect any booster pump or fire protection system to the City's potable water distribution system or to any water distribution system to which the City supplies water, except for consecutive public water systems, without the express written permission of the Land Use Administrator. 
1.  Any person planning to connect or modify any booster pump or fire protection system shall submit a detailed plan prepared by a Florida professional engineer to the Land Use Administrator for review and approval. 
2.  After submission of a detailed plan for connection or modification, the Land Use Administrator may approve the plan, with or without specified conditions or modifications, or reject the plan. 
E.  Potable water backflow prevention devices. All new construction shall have installed, on all potable water and fire prevention system lines, a backflow prevention device acceptable to Florida Department of Environmental Protection and of a size and design determined to be appropriate by the Land Use Administrator. All residential construction shall have a double-check device that shall be supplied and installed by the City at the owner's expense. All commercial lines two inches or smaller shall have a reduced pressure zone backflow preventer installed by the City at the owner's expense. All commercial or industrial construction lines larger than two inches shall have a reduced pressure zone backflow preventer or double-check detector/device (fire line only). The City approved device shall be installed at the owner's expense by a licensed contractor, inspected by the City, and certified by a licensed and certified backflow prevention technician or a certified City backflow prevention technician. All backflow prevention devices shall be installed and maintained in accordance with City standards. 
F.  Fire line devices. All fire line devices shall be installed and certified by a licensed fire protection contractor. The device shall be installed at a location determined by the Land Use Administrator. Where the device must be installed on private property, the location is subject to approval by the property owner. Backflow prevention devices on fire lines must be UL (Underwriters Laboratories) listed for fire protection systems. Backflow preventers shall be installed and maintained in accordance with City standards. 
G.  Cross connections and interconnections. It is unlawful for any person to cause a cross connection with the City's potable water system, reclaimed water system, wastewater system, or raw water system. All service connections shall comply with the City standards. 
H.  Connection/temporary connection. 
1.  The owner of each lot or parcel of land within the City proposed for occupancy for any use shall cause such building, structure, or use to be connected to the public water distribution system of the City, and shall use such facilities at the same time as a certificate of occupancy is issued, or sooner, with prior approval by the City. 
2.  For temporary connection to the City water system for construction not involving new lines, a metered connection to a fire hydrant may be permitted. The meter and backflow preventer shall be supplied by the City and the user must comply with City standards. 
I.  Utility line extensions-Service line extensions. Service line extension requests shall be submitted to the Land Use Administrator for approval. If approved, the applicant may proceed with the installation of the service line extension after coordinating installation with the Land Use Administrator. All costs associated with the utility line or service line extension shall be the applicant's responsibility. All work and connections shall be performed by a Florida licensed contractor licensed to perform underground utility work. 
J.  Utility main extension reimbursement policy. 
1.  Procedure for the utility main extension reimbursement policy. In the event that any person or developer is required by the City to extend water, sewer, or reclaimed water lines or increase line size to a size larger than the minimum line size required for that development's needs, that person or developer may request reimbursement for the additional cost of such extension or increased line size in accordance with the following procedures: 
a.  Engineering drawings and design calculations shall be submitted to the Land Use Administrator indicating the size and location of the proposed lines or the appurtenances thereto. The submittal shall also include preliminary cost estimates showing the cost difference for construction of the proposed oversize main versus the cost for the minimum size main that would be required to serve the parcel or development in accordance with the City's design standards. 
b.  The Land Use Administrator shall review the entire submittal and shall make a determination of the eligibility of the proposal for reimbursement, based on the conformity of the proposed improvements with City standards and with the criteria established in Section 9.06.03.C. 
c.  The City may enter into an agreement for reimbursement with the person making the submittal based on a finding that the trunk line(s) and appurtenances thereto comply with City standards. The agreement between the City and the person or developer will, at a minimum, include timeframes and conditions of reimbursement. The trunk line(s) and appurtenances are required to be appropriately sized and located. Adequate water and sewer treatment plant capacity must exist for the area anticipated to be served. 
    9.07.04.  Sanitary sewer systems, industrial wastes, and low pressure effluent pumping system. 
A.  Conditions precedent to wastewater service. Wastewater service will be available only after all permit conditions of the Florida Department of Environmental Protection are complied with and the wastewater collection system has been approved and accepted by the City. 
B.  Wastewater connection required. 
1.  Except where otherwise permitted, all new development shall connect to the City's sewer system, as required by state law. New development shall pay all impact, installation, and line extension fees prior to the issuance of building permits or the initiation of service. 
2.  If the City sewer system is available as defined by law, all existing development is required to connect within one year from the date of notice of system availability. The owner of the property shall pay for all connection impact, installation and line extension fees. 
3.  Upon agreement by the City, and approval of the Department of Health, connection to the City sewer system may be deferred until it is deemed in the public interest to make connection mandatory due to financial or public health considerations. 
4.  The City may refuse wastewater from any lot or parcel of land upon which there is located any institutional, commercial, or industrial plant, building, or premises that does not comply fully with City standards; or that does not utilize City water; or that does not supply proper metering of its wastewater. 
5.  The discharge of wastewater into the City sanitary sewer system from air conditioning/heating units is prohibited. 
C.  Wastewater design and inspection. 
1.  The developer shall install house or site service connections. Each property connected to the sanitary sewer system shall have a cleanout or manhole located at the property line for cleaning the service from the cleanout to the sanitary main. 
2.  It is prohibited and unlawful to enter the City sewer system or appurtenance thereto, or make any connections thereto without the approval of the Land Use Administrator. It is unlawful for any person to tap, cut, or in any way use any line, branch, or part of the City sewer collection or sewage treatment facilities without such approval. 
3.  The Land Use Administrator, as a condition of the City providing utility service, shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observations, measurement, sampling, and testing. 
D.  Lift (pumping) stations. All lift stations to be dedicated to the City for ownership and maintenance shall conform to the requirements of this section and City standards and shall be designed as submersible stations. 
1.  Prior to the construction of a lift station, the applicant's engineer shall submit construction drawings and design calculations for review and approval by the City. 
2.  All lift stations shall be dedicated by a fee simple interest conveyance to the City for ownership and maintenance responsibility, unless otherwise approved by the Land Use Administrator. 
3.  Lift station sites shall have unimpeded access for emergency maintenance vehicles and shall restrict access to the wet well, valve vault, and electric control panel to prevent entry by unauthorized individuals. 
E.  Industrial waste pretreatment and disposal. 
1.  Generators of industrial waste that are deposited into the City sanitary sewer shall comply with the pretreatment and disposal requirements of the City. 
2.  All users shall comply with Florida Department of Environmental Protection permit conditions and any other applicable federal and state regulations to which the Publicly Owned Treatment Works are subject. 
3.  All pretreatment and disposal systems and appurtenances shall be designed to meet all applicable requirements of the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, Flagler County Health Department, and the City, to prevent the introduction of pollutants into the sanitary sewer system which will interfere with the proper functioning of the system or cause or contribute to the contamination of receiving waters or the atmosphere. 
    9.07.05.  On-site wastewater treatment/disposal systems. On-site wastewater treatment may be permitted by the City only in the EST-1, EST-2, and AGR Districts and in conformity to this section. 
A.  Permit required. A septic tank permit shall be obtained from the Flagler County Health Department prior to the issuance of a building permit. However, a building permit shall not be issued for the construction of such facility unless consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and this Land Development Code. 
B.  Design and performance standards. 
1.  A copy of the permit received from the Flagler County Health Department and all related information or documentation shall be submitted to the City. 
2.  Individual wastewater treatment/disposal systems, such as septic tanks, shall be located in an area that can be incorporated into a central sewer system when available. Systems shall be constructed and operated to ensure that they, either on an individual or cumulative basis, will not adversely impact public health or natural resources or cause undue expense to the City. 
3.  On-site wastewater treatment is prohibited in areas served by centralized wastewater treatment. Where septic tank use is permitted, septic tank systems shall be installed in conformance with the Flagler County Health Department requirements. Development shall be prohibited unless an alternative on-site disposal system (e.g., package-type wastewater treatment plant) is determined by the Land Use Administrator to be sufficiently effective to prevent degradation of adjacent surface waters or groundwater by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, Flagler County Health Department, and the City, and provisions for the plant's eventual retirement and connection of the development to the central sanitary sewer system are adequate and binding. 
4.  The installation of on-site sewage disposal and treatment systems on sites one acre or less is prohibited. Sites greater than one acre of contiguous upland area in areas designated as Greenbelt on the City's Future Land Use Map that are served by municipal potable water service may be served by on-site sewage disposal systems if site environmental factors are appropriately addressed and the systems are installed in accordance with all applicable state and local regulations. If public potable water supply service is not available, the minimum site for the installation of on-site sewage disposal systems shall be two acres. 
    9.07.06.  Interim "package-type" wastewater treatment facilities. The use of interim or package-type wastewater treatment facilities shall be subject to approval by the City Council based on an agreement that specifically provides for the eventual transition to City facilities. These facilities shall meet the following design and performance standards. 
A.  Small package-type wastewater treatment plants, as defined below, shall not be permitted in areas where improper levels of treatment and/or inadequate effluent disposal may result in adverse impacts on water or other natural resources (e.g., groundwater aquifers and surface water systems), unless the plant's owner provides sufficient financial resources or surety for the City to assume responsibility for operating and maintaining the collection, treatment, and effluent disposal components in compliance with regulatory requirements and standards. The following minimum criteria and procedures shall be adhered to in the implementation of this Code: 
1.  Small package-type wastewater treatment plants are defined as prefabricated and component assembled plants of 100,000 gallons or less per day of treatment capacity, or any plant which is considered or identified to be of an interim nature. 
2.  The location and siting of such facilities shall be limited to areas where improperly treated effluent shall not adversely impact the quality of regional water resources by lateral surface/subsurface flow or by percolation. 
3.  Existing package-type or interim wastewater treatment plants currently meeting treatment and effluent quality standards may continue to be operated if the facility is being properly operated and maintained and wastewater treatment and effluent standards are continually being met. 
4.  Measures shall be undertaken to assure the provision of financial resources by wastewater treatment plant owners to adequately cover the costs of rehabilitating, operating, and maintaining each wastewater treatment and disposal facility, and of connection to regional facilities, if applicable, at the appropriate time. 
B.  Interim or package-type wastewater treatment facilities shall connect to the municipal sanitary sewer system when the access to the system becomes available. The following criteria and procedures shall be adhered to in the implementation of this standard: 
1.  Package-type or interim wastewater treatment plants currently meeting treatment and effluent quality standards may continue to operate if: 
a.  The facility is properly operated and maintained and wastewater treatment and effluent standards are satisfactorily met; and 
b.  The facility is phased out at the option of the City, without cost to the City, and connected to the City system when sufficient capacity is available. 
2.  When a private facility is phased out and connected to the City sewer system, all costs of connection to the central system and discontinuing the interim use is the obligation of the owner of the private facility. 
C.  Where soil conditions permit, an interim package treatment plant may be permitted if: 
1.  Sewer lines and lift stations are constructed to City standards; 
2.  Impact fees for future connections to the City system are paid or a surety is provided; and 
3.  The developer agrees to discontinue operation of the package plant and connect to the City system, when available. 
D.  Existing development with central wastewater treatment shall connect to the City system as soon as possible after the City system is available or if the existing system is found to have deficiencies that are likely to create a serious health or pollution problem. Property owners shall pay the impact fee and connection fee then in effect. 
    9.07.07.  Reclaimed water systems. Reclaimed water system construction and materials shall comply with City standards. 
A.  Conditions precedent to reclaimed water services. Reclaimed water service shall be activated only after all permit conditions of the Florida Department of Environmental Protection are completed and the reclaimed water distribution system has been approved and accepted by the City. 
B.  Compliance with state regulations. In the operation and use of the City's reclaimed water system, the City and all users shall at all times comply with all applicable regulations of the Florida Department of Environmental Protection relative to the reuse of reclaimed water. 
C.  Design and performance standards. All reclaimed water systems shall meet applicable requirements of the Florida Department of Environmental Protection and the City. 
D.  Connection permit required. It is prohibited and unlawful to connect to any public reclaimed water main or appurtenance without prior approval from the Land Use Administrator and the acquisition of all required state and local permits. 
E.  Reclaimed water lines. All new developments shall provide a reclaimed water system for irrigation purposes, unless otherwise approved by the Land Use Administrator. If reclaimed water is not available at the time of construction, a connection shall be provided with backflow prevention to the potable water system until the reclaimed water is available. 
( Ord. No. 2018-24 , § 2, 11-6-18) 
Sec. 9.08. - Outdoor lighting requirements. 
    9.08.01.  Purpose. This section provides specific development requirements to regulate outdoor lighting in order to provide for sufficient lighting levels to meet use needs, but to reduce or prevent light pollution and light disturbance. Reducing or preventing light pollution means, to the extent reasonably possible, ensuring the reduction or prevention of glare and light trespass, the conservation of energy and the promotion of safety and security, in general conformity with the "dark sky" goals and recommendations. 
    9.08.02.  Approved materials and methods of installation. The provisions of this section are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of installation not specifically proscribed by this section, if any such alternate has been specifically approved. The Land Use Administrator may approve any such alternate if the proposed design, material, or method: 
A.  Provides approximate equivalence to the specific requirements of this section; or 
B.  Is otherwise satisfactory and complies with the intent of this section. 
    9.08.03.  Shielding and filtering. All outdoor light fixtures shall be fully shielded as required in this section. All outdoor light fixtures required to be filtered by this section shall have glass, acrylic, or translucent enclosures (quartz glass does not meet this requirement). 
    9.08.04.  Requirements for shielding and filtering. The requirements for shielding and filtering light emissions from outdoor light fixtures are set forth in the following table: 
Table 9-1: Requirements for Shielding and Filtering 
Fixture Lamp Type Shielded Filtered Low Pressure Sodium None None High Pressure Sodium Fully None Metal Halide Fully Yes Fluorescent Fully Yes Quartz Fully None Incandescent Greater than 160 W Fully None Incandescent 160 W or less None None Mercury Vapor Not permitted Not permitted Glass Tubes filled with Neon, Argon, Krypton None None  
    9.08.05.  Parking lot lighting. General exterior lighting shall provide adequate illumination to safely guide vehicles and pedestrians into, out of, and within a site, and deter vandalism. Exterior lighting sources shall render colors faithfully so that pedestrians and vehicle operators are able to distinguish colors and differentiate objects within their field of vision and be arranged so as to eliminate on-site glare and spillover onto adjacent properties, public streets, and highways. 
A.  Plan required. An illumination plan prepared by a Florida licensed professional engineer with expertise in the field of illumination shall be submitted for each parking facility. Each parking facility shall meet the pedestrian security requirements as set forth in Section 14 of IESNA - RP-20-98 Lighting for Parking Facilities, 1998 or current edition. Such plan shall comply with all requirements as outlined in this section. 
B.  Full cutoff light fixtures. Luminaires shall be designed to ensure that no candela occurs at or above an angle of 90 degrees above the horizontal plane (nadir). This applies to all lateral angles around the luminaire. Such candela information shall be determined by a photometric test report (plan) from the lighting contractor. Any structural part of the luminary for all types of lighting providing cutoff angle shielding shall be permanently attached, except that accent uplighting for trees and building walls may be allowed to exceed the 90-degree angle plane, subject to review and approval by the Land Use Administrator if determined to provide an equivalent public benefit. 
C.  Shielding requirement. Lighting shall be designed to prevent direct glare, light spillage, and hazardous interference with automotive, aircraft, and pedestrian traffic on adjacent streets and on all adjacent properties. 
D.  Design requirement. 
1.  The maximum height of light poles in areas other than pedestrian areas shall be 35 feet, including the base. Light poles exceeding 35 feet in height shall not be allowed unless approved through a special exception use order or development agreement. For pedestrian areas, the maximum height of a light pole shall be 16 feet, including the base. 
2.  Fixtures shall be designed as integral design elements that complement the design of a development through style or by blending into the landscape material. Bright colors such as primary and secondary colors including, but not limited to, white, are prohibited for light pole uses. 
3.  Light poles shall not be placed in required parking lot landscape islands of less than 500 square feet or anywhere else on the site where they will conflict with existing or proposed shade trees. Light pole locations shall be depicted on all sets of site plans to ensure no conflicts between utilities and landscaping. 
4.  Full lighting details shall be supplied for light fixtures (to include lumens and wattage), poles, and photometric plans. 
    9.08.06.  Roadways. All new development abutting or containing public or private roadways shall provide street lighting within those roadways meeting the following requirements: 
A.  Installation. All infrastructure associated with lighting shall be installed; including, but not limited to, pole boxes, conduits, etc.; concurrent with the development. 
B.  Plan required. An illumination plan prepared by an expert in the field of illumination shall be submitted for each roadway segment that is adjacent to the proposed development and required by the Land Use Administrator to be illuminated. The illumination requirements for roadway facilities shall meet the more stringent standards set forth in American National Standards Institute, Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (ANSI/IESNA) RP-8-00 (R2005) and Florida Department of Transportation Standards (latest editions). Such plan shall comply with all requirements as outlined in this section. 
C.  Full cutoff light fixtures. Luminaires shall be designed to ensure that no candela occurs at or above an angle of 90 degrees above the horizontal plane (nadir). This applies to all lateral angles around the luminaire. Such candela information shall be determined by a photometric test report (plan) from the lighting contractor. Any structural part of the luminary for all types of lighting providing cutoff angle shielding shall be permanently attached, except that accent uplighting for trees and building walls may be allowed to exceed the 90-degree angle plane, subject to review and approval by the Land Use Administrator if the lighting is determined to provide an equivalent public benefit. All light fixtures shall be standard fixture types as determined by the City. 
D.  Shielding requirements. Lighting shall be designed to prevent direct glare, light spillage, and hazardous interference with automotive, aircraft, and pedestrian traffic on adjacent streets and on all adjacent properties. 
E.  Design requirements. 
1.  Light pole locations shall be depicted on all sets of the plans to ensure that no conflicts exist between proposed utilities and proposed landscaping. 
2.  Full lighting details shall be supplied for light fixtures (to include lumens and wattage), poles, and photometric plans. 
    9.08.07.  Prohibitions. 
A.  Outdoor building, landscaping, and signs. The unshielded outdoor illumination of any building or landscaping is prohibited except for incandescent fixtures with lamps of 100 watts or less. 
B.  Mercury vapor. The installation of mercury vapor fixtures is prohibited. 
    9.08.08.  Exemptions. 
A.  Nonconforming fixtures. Outdoor light fixtures installed prior to August 19, 2008 are exempt from the provisions of this section; provided, however, that no change in use, replacement, structural alteration, or restoration of outdoor light fixtures may be made unless it thereafter conforms to the provisions of this section. 
B.  Ornamental lighting. Ornamental street lighting is exempt from the provisions of this section and is a permitted lighting installation. 
C.  Construction and emergency lighting. Lighting necessary for construction or emergencies is exempt from the provisions of this section if temporary and discontinued immediately upon the completion of the construction work or abatement of the emergency necessitating said lighting. 
D.  Searchlights. The use of searchlights is prohibited unless a permit specifying conditions is issued by the Land Use Administrator. 
E.  Request for exemption. Any person may submit a written request for an exemption from the requirements of this section. The request for exemption shall be submitted in writing to the Land Use Administrator and shall contain the following information: 
1.  Specific exemption requested. 
2.  Type and use of exterior light involved. 
3.  Duration of time for requested exemption. 
4.  Type of lamp and calculated lumens. 
5.  Total wattage of lamp or lamps. 
6.  Sketch to scale showing location of proposed exterior light. 
7.  Previous exemptions granted, if any. 
8.  Physical size of exterior light and type of shielding provided. 
9.  Any additional information required to make a reasonable evaluation of the request for exemption. 
( Ord. No. 2018-24 , § 2, 11-6-18) 
Chapter 10 - ENVIRONMENTAL AND CULTURAL RESOURCE PROTECTION 

Sec. 10.01. - Wetland Resources. 
    10.01.01.  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to ensure the protection of high quality wetland systems in a manner consistent with the resource protection guidelines adopted in the City's Comprehensive Plan and existing state regulatory standards. In addition, it is the City's intent to maintain the sustainability of high quality wetland systems. 
    10.01.02.  Exempt activities. The following activities or uses within wetlands or required upland buffers adjacent to wetlands are exempt from the provisions of this section: 
A.  Construction of single-family residential units within existing, recorded subdivisions where adjoining street and drainage improvements have been constructed. 
B.  Construction of hiking trails, walking paths, observation decks, and other similar facilities related to passive recreational activities. 
C.  Manual clearing with hand tools of vegetation from an area of less than ten percent of a wetland or required upland buffers adjacent to a wetland located on a single parcel. Utilizing this exemption does not relieve the applicant from meeting all applicable regulations listed in Chapter 11. 
D.  Bona fide agricultural uses that follow best management practices established by the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services. 
E.  Bona fide fire line control activities that follow best management practices established by the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services. 
F.  Silviculture activities, which follow the best management practices, outlined in the publication entitled, "Silviculture Best Management Practices Manual", Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, Division of Forestry. 
G.  Bona fide, approved, mosquito control activities conducted by a government-approved agency provided it is in strict conformity with the requirements as set forth in F.S. chs. 482 and 487, and Rules 5E-2 and 5E-9, Florida Administrative Code. 
H.  Utility facilities including crossings, easements, or rights-of-way that are related to generation, distribution, collection, transmission, or conveyance of the utility service to its customers. 
I.  Custodial maintenance activities of stormwater management systems. 
J.  Authorized activities with approved Florida Department of Environmental Protection, St. Johns River Water Management District, or US Army Corps of Engineers permit(s) for wetland restoration, enhancement, monitoring, or mitigation activities. 
K.  The installation of driveways to single-family residential units within existing recorded subdivisions where wetland crossings provide the only physical or legal access point, and provided that the wetland crossing maintains the existing wetland hydrologic connections and that best management practices are in place during construction activities to minimize wetland impacts. 
L.  Activities qualifying for and obtaining a Notice of General Permit through the joint environmental resource permitting application are considered de minimis alterations and not subject to the permitting or buffering requirements of this LDC. 
M.  Wetland impacts associated with access to a permissible use or a linear project if an alternative analysis for avoidance and minimization has been approved. This exemption also applies to Florida Department of Transportation public transportation projects. 
N.  Activities that qualify for and obtain a State Programmatic General Permit (federal authorization delegated to the state) are considered de minimis alterations and not subject to the permitting or buffering requirements of this LDC. 
O.  Activities determined to be de minimis under the Florida Statutes. 
    10.01.03.  Wetland identification. 
A.  Methodology. Wetlands shall be identified pursuant to the methodology contained in the Florida Administrative Code or the Pre-Henderson Wetland Delineation Methodology (F.S. § 373.421(7)). Wetlands may consist of, but are not limited to, forested swamps, sloughs, freshwater and tidal marshes, and wet prairies. 
B.  Exempt from regulation. This section shall not be construed to regulate roadside ditches, conveyance swales, utility related drainage features, or stormwater management systems. 
C.  Qualifications for wetland delineation. All state jurisdictional wetlands shall be field delineated by a Florida qualified environmental professional and surveyed by a Florida registered land surveyor for illustration on all plans submitted to the City for subdivision, site plan review, or rezoning applications. 
    10.01.04.  Measures to avoid or minimize wetland impacts. The applicant must consider practicable design modifications that will reduce or eliminate adverse impacts to wetlands and other surface waters. The term "modification" shall not be construed as including the alternative of failing to implement the stormwater management system in some form, nor shall it be construed as requiring a project that is significantly different in type or function. A proposed modification that is not technically capable of being constructed, or is not economically viable, or which adversely affects public safety through endangerment of lives or property is not considered "practicable." To receive City approval, a stormwater management system cannot cause a net adverse impact on wetland functions and other surface water functions, unless it is offset by mitigation in accordance with the requirements established by state law. 
    10.01.05.  Wetland impact report required. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided herein, the applicant shall demonstrate consistency with the category requirements in Table 10-1 as follows: 
Table 10-1: Wetland Impact Analysis Report Requirements 
Requirement in Application Package Optimal

Wetland Moderate

Wetland (1) Minimal

Wetland (1) Wetland Impact Analysis YES YES YES Alternatives analysis for avoidance and minimization YES YES NO Assurance of 'no net loss of wetland functions' for the wetland system(s) located on the project site YES NO NO Compensatory mitigation within the City's geographic boundary is preferred. However, mitigation shall occur within the same hydrologic basin per St. Johns River Water Management District, or as consistent with the Florida Administrative 
Code (2) YES YES YES A copy of all requisite federal and/or state wetland permits YES YES YES  
(1) Wetland Impacts regulated by St. Johns River Water Management District or the Florida Department of Environmental Protection 
(2) In accordance with F.S. § 373.4135, as amended, the City shall not deny the use of a mitigation bank or off-site regional mitigation due to its location outside of City jurisdiction. 
B.  Category wetlands are described as follows: 
1.  Optimal wetlands- Named wetland systems associated with surface water bodies and/or a wetland quality assessment methodology score between 0.71 and 1.0. 
2.  Moderate wetlands- Wetland quality assessment methodology score between 0.41 and 0.70 
3.  Minimal wetlands- Wetland quality assessment methodology score between 0.0 and 0.40 
    10.01.06.  Submittal requirements for wetland impact analysis report. The City shall require a wetland impact analysis report for projects that are proposed to impact state jurisdictional wetlands. The wetland impact analysis report shall be submitted during the subdivision and site plan process for evaluation. The wetland impact analysis report shall be completed by a Florida qualified environmental professional and shall include, but not be limited to: 
A.  A description of all waterbodies, watercourses, and wetlands on-site and a general description of wetlands immediately adjacent to the site to allow an assessment of wetland impacts. 
B.  A map of the entire contiguous natural systems including the on-site wetland systems, based on the Florida Land Use Cover Classification System. 
C.  The existing environmental, soil, and hydrologic conditions of the site. 
D.  The proposed wetland impact site to be evaluated pursuant to the City's wetland quality assessment methodology. If the results of the wetland quality assessment methodology are deemed unsatisfactory by City staff, the City may require, at the applicant's expense, an additional wetland quality assessment methodology from another qualified environmental professional. 
E.  A map or site plan depicting on-site wetlands, wetlands proposed for impacts, roads, easements, stormwater facilities, buffers, building location, and other on-site facilities or structures. 
F.  An alternative site plan analysis consistent with City standards for avoidance and minimization of wetland impacts, where applicable, which illustrates that wetland impacts have been avoided and/or minimized to the greatest extent practicable through project design modifications. 
G.  A demonstration that the level of function provided to fish and wildlife and listed species by the subject wetland(s), including water quality of the receiving waters, will not be adversely affected. 
    10.01.07.  Permitted activities and requirements. Once the requirements of this section have been met, wetland impacts for moderate and minimal quality wetlands and associated mitigation activities shall be governed by the St. Johns River Water Management District or the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, as applicable. A St. Johns River Water Management District and/or Florida Department of Environmental Protection permit shall be prima facie evidence of compliance with this section. No net loss of wetland function shall be permitted for each optimal wetland system located in the City. 
    10.01.08.  Buffers. 
A.  Natural upland buffers. A natural upland buffer, with an average width of 50 feet, but no less than 25 feet, shall be provided adjacent to and surrounding optimal wetlands; and a buffer with an average width of 25 feet, but no less than 15 feet, shall be provided adjacent to moderate and minimal wetlands. 
1.  Upland buffers adjacent to wetlands shall consist of natural upland habitats that can provide for the various life functions of wetland dependent wildlife. 
2.  Upland buffers adjacent to wetlands shall not be altered except as exempted by Subsection 10.01.02. Wetland buffers shall be protected from erosion and sedimentation during construction activities. 
B.  Activities permitted within a buffer. Activities or construction, which does not have an adverse effect on the natural function of the wetland buffer, may be permitted within the buffer. The activities or construction include, but are not limited to, pruning, planting of suitable native vegetation, removal of exotic and nuisance plant species, construction of minor drainage structures such as swales, outfall pipes, or berms, construction of elevated boardwalks, docks, piers, passive recreation, or at grade hiking trails. 
Sec. 10.02 - Floodplain Management. 
    10.02.01  Administration. 
A.  General. These regulations shall be known as the Floodplain Management Ordinance of the City of Palm Coast, hereinafter referred to as "this article." 
B.  Scope. The provisions of this article shall apply to all development that is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area, including but not limited to the subdivision of land; filling, grading, and other site improvements and utility installations; construction, alteration, remodeling, enlargement, improvement, replacement, repair, relocation or demolition of buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code; placement, installation, or replacement of manufactured homes and manufactured buildings; installation or replacement of tanks; placement of recreational vehicles; installation of swimming pools; and any other development. 
    10.02.02  Reserved. 
    10.02.03  Intent. 
A.  [Purposes.] The purposes of this article and the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code are to establish minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flooding through regulation of development in flood hazard areas to: 
1.  Minimize unnecessary disruption of commerce, access and public service during times of flooding; 
2.  Require the use of appropriate construction practices in order to prevent or minimize future flood damage; 
3.  Manage filling, grading, dredging, mining, paving, excavation, drilling operations, storage of equipment or materials, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion potential; 
4.  Manage the alteration of flood hazard areas, watercourses, and shorelines to minimize the impact of development on the natural and beneficial functions of the floodplain; 
5.  Minimize damage to public and private facilities and utilities; 
6.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood hazard areas; 
7.  Minimize the need for future expenditure of public funds for flood control projects and response to and recovery from flood events; and 
8.  Meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program for community participation as set forth in the Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Section 59.22. 
B.  Coordination with the Florida Building Code. This article is intended to be administered and enforced in conjunction with the Florida Building Code. Where cited, ASCE 24 refers to the edition of the standard that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. 
C.  Warning. The degree of flood protection required by this article and the Florida Building Code, as amended by this community, is considered the minimum reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside of mapped special flood hazard areas, or that uses permitted within such flood hazard areas, will be free from flooding or flood damage. The flood hazard areas and base flood elevations contained in the Flood Insurance Study and shown on Flood Insurance Rate Maps and the requirements of Title 44 Code of Federal Regulations, Sections 59 and 60 may be revised by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, requiring this community to revise these regulations to remain eligible for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. No guarantee of vested use, existing use, or future use is implied or expressed by compliance with this article. 
D.  Disclaimer of liability. This article shall not create liability on the part of City Council of the City of Palm Coast or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
    10.02.04  Applicability. 
A.  General. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
B.  Areas to which this article applies. This article shall apply to all flood hazard areas within the City of Palm Coast as established in Section 10.02.04.C of this article. 
C.  Basis for establishing flood hazard areas. The Flood Insurance Study for Flagler County, Florida and Incorporated Areas dated June 6, 2018 and any subsequent revisions, and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), are adopted by reference as a part of this article and shall serve as the minimum basis for establishing flood hazard areas. Studies and maps that establish flood hazard areas are on file at the City of Palm Coast Community Development Department, 160 Lake Avenue, Palm Coast, Florida 32164. 
D.  Submission of additional data to establish flood hazard areas. To establish flood hazard areas and base flood elevations, pursuant to Section 10.02.07 of this article the Floodplain Administrator may require submission of additional data. Where field surveyed topography prepared by a Florida licensed professional surveyor or digital topography accepted by the Floodplain Administrator indicates that ground elevations: 
1.  Are below the closest applicable base flood elevation, even in areas not delineated as a special flood hazard area on a FIRM, the area shall be considered as a flood hazard area and subject to the requirements of this article and, as applicable, the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
2.  Are above the closest applicable base flood elevation, the area shall be regulated as special flood hazard area unless the applicant obtains a Letter of Map Change that removes the area from the special flood hazard area. 
E.  Other laws. The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. 
F.  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article supersedes any article in effect for management and development in flood hazard areas. However, it is not intended to repeal or abrogate any other provisions of existing ordinances including but not limited to land development regulations, zoning ordinances, stormwater management regulations, or the Florida Building Code. In the event of a conflict between these regulations and any other regulation, the more restrictive shall govern. This article shall not impair any deed restriction, covenant or easement, but any land that is subject to such interests shall also be governed by this article. 
G.  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
1.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
2.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
3.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
    10.02.05  Duties and powers of the Floodplain Administrator. 
A.  Designation. The Land Use Administrator is designated the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator may delegate performance of certain duties to other employees. 
B.  General. The Floodplain Administrator is authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. The Floodplain Administrator shall have the authority to render interpretations of this article consistent with the intent and purpose of this article and may establish policies, and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided in this article without the granting of a variance pursuant to Section 10.02.09 of this article. 
C.  Applications and permits. The Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with other pertinent offices of the community, shall: 
1.  Review applications and plans to determine whether proposed development will be located in flood hazard areas; 
2.  Review applications for modifications of any existing development in flood hazard areas for compliance with the requirements of this article; 
3.  Interpret flood hazard area boundaries where such interpretation is necessary to determine the exact location of boundaries; a person contesting the determination shall have the opportunity to appeal the interpretation; 
4.  Provide available flood elevation and flood hazard information; 
5.  Determine whether additional flood hazard data shall be obtained from other sources which shall be developed by an applicant; 
6.  Review applications to determine whether proposed development will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
7.  Issue floodplain development permits or approvals for development other than buildings and structures that are subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, when compliance with this article is demonstrated, or disapprove the same in the event of noncompliance; and 
8.  Coordinate with and provide comments to the Building Official to assure that applications, plan reviews, and inspections for buildings and structures in flood hazard areas comply with the applicable provisions of this article. 
D.  Substantial improvements and substantial damage determinations. For applications for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy, additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and structures, the Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with the Building Official, shall: 
1.  Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before the repairs are made; 
2.  Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or structure; 
3.  Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes substantial improvements or repair of substantial damage; the determination requires evaluation of previous permits issued for improvements and repairs as specified in the definition of "substantial improvement"; for proposed work to repair damage caused by flooding, the determination requires evaluation of previous permits issued to repair flood-related damage as specified in the definition of "substantial damage"; 
4.  Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance with the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code and this article is required. 
E.  Modifications of the strict application of the requirements of the Florida Building Code. The Floodplain Administrator shall review requests submitted to the Building Official that seek approval to modify the strict application of the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code to determine whether such requests require the granting of a variance pursuant to Section 10.02.09 of this article. 
F.  Notices and orders. The Floodplain Administrator shall coordinate with appropriate local agencies for the issuance of all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this article. 
G.  Inspections. The Floodplain Administrator shall make the required inspections as specified in Section 10.02.08 of this article for development that is not subject to the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The Floodplain Administrator shall inspect flood hazard areas to determine if development is undertaken without issuance of a permit. 
H.  Other duties of the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator shall have other duties, including but not limited to: 
1.  In coordination with the Building Official, review all permits for construction within the Special Flood Hazard Areas to ensure that the proposed project meets the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, including elevation requirements; 
2.  Establish, in coordination with the Building Official, procedures for administering and documenting determinations of substantial improvement and substantial damage made pursuant to Section 10.02.05.D of this article; 
3.  Require that applicants proposing alteration of a watercourse notify adjacent communities and the Florida Division of Emergency Management, State Floodplain Management Office, and submit copies of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
4.  Require applicants, who submit hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses to support permit applications, to submit to FEMA the data and information necessary to maintain the Flood Insurance Rate Maps if the analyses propose to change base flood elevations, flood hazard area boundaries, or floodway designations; such submissions shall be made within six months of such data becoming available; 
5.  Review required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by this article and the Florida Building Code to determine that such certifications and documentations are complete. Elevation certificates shall be provided at three stages, 1) construction drawings, 2) building under construction, and 3) finished construction; 
6.  Notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) when the corporate boundaries of the City of Palm Coast are modified; and 
7.  Advise applicants for new buildings and structures, including substantial improvements, that are located in any unit of the Coastal Barrier Resources System established by the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348) and the Coastal Barrier Improvement Act of 1990 (Pub. L. 101-591) that federal flood insurance is not available on such construction; areas subject to this limitation are identified on Flood Insurance Rate Maps as "Coastal Barrier Resource System Areas" and "Otherwise Protected Areas." 
I.  Floodplain management records. Regardless of any limitation on the period required for retention of public records, the Floodplain Administrator shall maintain and permanently keep and make available for public inspection all records that are necessary for the administration of this article and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, including Flood Insurance Rate Maps; Letters of Map Change; records of issuance of permits and denial of permits; determinations of whether proposed work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; required design certifications and documentation of elevations specified by the Florida Building Code and this article; notifications to adjacent communities, FEMA, and the state related to alterations of watercourses; assurances that the flood carrying capacity of altered watercourses will be maintained; documentation related to appeals and variances, including justification for issuance or denial; and records of enforcement actions taken pursuant to this article and the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. These records shall be available for public inspection at City of Palm Coast. 
    10.02.06  Permits. 
A.  Permits required. Any owner or owner's authorized agent (hereinafter "applicant") who intends to undertake any development activity within the scope of this article, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, which is wholly within or partially within any flood hazard area shall first make application to the Floodplain Administrator, and the Building Official if applicable, and shall obtain the required permit(s) and approval(s). No such permit or approval shall be issued until compliance with the requirements of this article and all other applicable codes and regulations has been satisfied. 
B.  Floodplain development permits or approvals. Floodplain development permits or approvals shall be issued pursuant to this article for any development activities not subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, including buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Depending on the nature and extent of proposed development that includes a building or structure, the Floodplain Administrator may determine that a floodplain development permit or approval is required in addition to a building permit. 
C.  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. Pursuant to the requirements of federal regulation for participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (44 C.F.R. Sections 59 and 60), floodplain development permits or approvals shall be required for the following buildings, structures and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code and any further exemptions provided by law, which are subject to the requirements of this article: 
1.  Railroads and ancillary facilities associated with the railroad. 
2.  Nonresidential farm buildings on farms, as provided in F.S. § 604.50. 
3.  Temporary buildings or sheds used exclusively for construction purposes. 
4.  Mobile or modular structures used as temporary offices. 
5.  Those structures or facilities of electric utilities, as defined in F.S. § 366.02, which are directly involved in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity. 
6.  Chickees constructed by the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida or the Seminole Tribe of Florida. As used in this paragraph, the term "chickee" means an open-sided wooden hut that has a thatched roof of palm or palmetto or other traditional materials, and that does not incorporate any electrical, plumbing, or other non-wood features. 
7.  Family mausoleums not exceeding 250 square feet in area which are prefabricated and assembled on site or preassembled and delivered on site, and have walls, roofs, and a floor constructed of granite, marble, or reinforced concrete. 
8.  Temporary housing provided by the Department of Corrections to any prisoner in the state correctional system. 
9.  Structures identified in F.S. § 553.73(10)(k), are not exempt from the Florida Building Code if such structures are located in flood hazard areas established on Flood Insurance Rate Maps. 
D.  Application for a permit or approval. To obtain a floodplain development permit or approval the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished by the City of Palm Coast. The information provided shall: 
1.  Identify and describe the development to be covered by the permit or approval. 
2.  Describe the land on which the proposed development is to be conducted by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitively locate the site. 
3.  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed development is intended. 
4.  Be accompanied by a site plan or construction documents as specified in Section 10.04.07. 
5.  State the valuation of the proposed work. 
6.  Be signed by the applicant or the applicant's authorized agent. 
7.  Give such other data and information as required by the Floodplain Administrator. 
E.  Validity of permit or approval. The issuance of a floodplain development permit or approval pursuant to this article shall not be construed to be a permit for, or approval of, any violation of this article, the Florida Building Codes, or any other ordinance of this community. The issuance shall not prevent the Floodplain Administrator from requiring the correction of errors and omissions. 
F.  Expiration. A floodplain development permit or approval shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work authorized is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the work commences. Extensions for periods of not more than 180 days each shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause shall be demonstrated. 
G.  Suspension or revocation. The Floodplain Administrator is authorized to suspend or revoke a floodplain development permit or approval if the permit was issued in error, on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of this article or any other ordinance, regulation or requirement of the City. 
H.  Other permits. Floodplain development permits and building permits shall include a condition or disclaimer that all other applicable state or federal permits be obtained by the applicant before commencement of the permitted development. Such permits may include but not limited to the following: 
1.  The St. Johns Water Management District; F.S. § 373.036. 
2.  Florida Department of Health for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems; F.S. § 381.0065, and Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. 
3.  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities subject to the Joint Coastal Permit; F.S. § 161.055. 
4.  Florida Department of Environmental Protection for activities that affect wetlands and alter surface water flows, in conjunction with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
5.  Federal permits and approvals. 
    10.02.07  Site plans and construction documents. 
A.  Information for development in flood hazard areas. The site plan or construction documents for any development subject to the requirements of this article shall be drawn to scale and shall include, as applicable to the proposed development: 
1.  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries, 25-foot floodway setback, flood zone(s), base flood elevation(s), and ground elevations if necessary for review of the proposed development. 
2.  Where base flood elevations or floodway data are not included on the FIRM or in the Flood Insurance Study, they shall be established in accordance with Section 10.02.07.B.2 or Section 10.02.07.B.3 of this article. 
3.  Where the parcel on which the proposed development will take place will have more than 50 lots or is larger than five acres and the base flood elevations are not included on the FIRM or in the Flood Insurance Study, such elevations shall be established in accordance with Section 10.02.07.B.1 of this article. 
4.  Location of the proposed activity and proposed structures, and locations of existing buildings and structures; in coastal high hazard areas, new buildings shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide. 
5.  Location, extent, amount, and proposed final grades of any filling, grading, or excavation. 
6.  Where the placement of fill is proposed, the amount, type, and source of fill material; compaction specifications; a description of the intended purpose of the fill areas; and evidence that the proposed fill areas are the minimum necessary to achieve the intended purpose. 
7.  Existing and proposed alignment of any proposed alteration of a watercourse. 
B.  Information in flood hazard areas without base flood elevations (approximate Zone A). Where flood hazard areas are delineated on the FIRM and base flood elevation data have not been provided, the Floodplain Administrator shall: 
1.  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices. 
2.  Obtain, review, and provide to applicants base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source, or require the applicant to obtain and use base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency or other source. 
3.  Where base flood elevation data and floodway data are not available from another source, where the available data are deemed by the Floodplain Administrator to not reasonably reflect flooding conditions, or where the available data are known to be scientifically or technically incorrect or otherwise inadequate: 
a.  Require the applicant to include base flood elevation data prepared in accordance with currently accepted engineering practices; or 
b.  Specify that the base flood elevation is two feet above the highest adjacent grade at the location of the development, provided there is no evidence indicating flood depths have been or may be greater than two feet. 
4.  Where the base flood elevation data are to be used to support a Letter of Map Change from FEMA, advise the applicant that the analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA, and that it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to satisfy the submittal requirements and pay the processing fees. 
C.  Additional analyses and certifications. As applicable to the location and nature of the proposed development activity, and in addition to the requirements of this section, the applicant shall have the following analyses signed and sealed by a Florida licensed engineer for submission with the site plan and construction documents: 
1.  For development activities proposed to be located in a regulatory floodway or within the 25-foot floodway setback, a floodway encroachment analysis that demonstrates that the encroachment of the proposed development will not cause any increase in base flood elevations; where the applicant proposes to undertake development activities that do increase base flood elevations, the applicant shall submit such analyses to FEMA as specified in Section 10.02.07.D of this article and shall submit the Conditional Letter of Map Revision, if issued by FEMA, with the site plan and construction documents. 
2.  For development activities proposed to be located in a riverine flood hazard area for which base flood elevations are included in the Flood Insurance Study on the FIRM and floodways have not been designated, hydrologic and hydraulic analyses that demonstrate that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated flood hazard area encroachments, will not increase the base flood elevation at any point within the community. This requirement does not apply in isolated flood hazard areas not connected to a riverine flood hazard area or in flood hazard areas identified as Zone "O" or Zone "AH". 
3.  For alteration of a watercourse, an engineering analysis prepared in accordance with standard engineering practices which demonstrates that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse will not be decreased, and certification that the altered watercourse shall be maintained in a manner which preserves the channel's flood-carrying capacity; the applicant shall submit the analysis to FEMA as specified in Section 10.02.07.D of this article. 
D.  Submission of additional data. When additional hydrologic, hydraulic or other engineering data, studies, and additional analyses are submitted to support an application, the applicant shall seek a Letter of Map Change from FEMA to change the base flood elevations, change floodway boundaries, or change boundaries of flood hazard areas shown on FIRMs, and to submit such data to FEMA for such purposes. The analyses shall be prepared by a Florida licensed engineer in a format required by FEMA. Submittal requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
    10.02.08  Inspections. 
A.  General. Development for which a floodplain development permit or approval is required shall be subject to inspection. 
B.  Development other than buildings and structures. The Floodplain Administrator shall inspect all development to determine compliance with the requirements of this article and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
C.  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. The Floodplain Administrator shall inspect buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code to determine compliance with the requirements of this article and the conditions of issued floodplain development permits or approvals. 
D.  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, lowest floor inspection. Upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the owner of a building, structure or facility exempt from the Florida Building Code, or the owner's authorized agent, shall submit to the Floodplain Administrator: 
1.  If a design flood elevation was used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor, certification of elevation of the lowest floor prepared and sealed by a Florida licensed professional surveyor; or 
2.  If the elevation used to determine the required elevation of the lowest floor was determined in accordance with Section 10.02.07.B.3.b of this article, the documentation of height of the lowest floor above highest adjacent grade, prepared by the owner or the owner's authorized agent. 
E.  Buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code, final inspection. As part of the final inspection, the owner or owner's authorized agent shall submit to the Floodplain Administrator a final certification of elevation of the lowest floor or final documentation of the height of the lowest floor above the highest adjacent grade; such certifications and documentations shall be prepared as specified in Section 10.02.08.D of this article. 
F.  Manufactured homes. The Building Official shall inspect manufactured homes that are installed or replaced in flood hazard areas to determine compliance with the requirements of this article and the conditions of the issued permit. Upon placement of a manufactured home, certification of the elevation of the lowest floor shall be submitted to the Building Official. 
    10.02.09  Variances and appeals. 
A.  General. The Land Use Administrator and the City of Palm Coast Planning and Land Development Regulation Board shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board shall hear requests for variances from the strict application of this article. Pursuant to F.S. § 553.73(5), the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board shall hear and decide on requests for appeals and requests for variances from the strict application of the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. This section does not apply to Section 3109 of the Florida Building Code, Building. 
B.  Appeals. Same process as set out in Section 2.16, of the Land Development Code. 
C.  Limitations on authority to grant variances. The Planning and Land Development Regulation Board shall base its decisions on variances on technical justifications submitted by applicants, the considerations for issuance in Section 10.02.09.H of this article, the conditions of issuance set forth in Section 10.02.09.I of this article, and the comments and recommendations of the Land Use Administrator, Floodplain Administrator and the Building Official. The Planning and Land Development Regulation Board has the right to attach such conditions as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this article. 
D.  Restrictions in floodways. A variance shall not be issued for any proposed development in a floodway if any increase in base flood elevations would result, as evidenced by the applicable analyses and certifications required in Section 10.02.07.C of this article. 
E.  Historic buildings. A variance is authorized to be issued for the repair, improvement, or rehabilitation of a historic building that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building Chapter 12 Historic Buildings, upon a determination that the proposed repair, improvement, or rehabilitation will not preclude the building's continued designation as a historic building and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the building. If the work precludes the building's continued designation as a historic building, a variance shall not be granted and the building and any repair, improvement, and rehabilitation shall be subject to the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
F.  Functionally dependent uses. A variance is authorized to be issued for the construction or substantial improvement necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, as defined in this article, provided the variance meets the requirements of Section 10.02.09.D, is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, and all due consideration has been given to use of methods and materials that minimize flood damage during occurrence of the base flood. 
G.  Alteration of sand dunes or mangrove stands in coastal high hazard areas. A variance shall not be issued for any proposed alteration of sand dunes or mangrove stands in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V) unless the applicant submits, and the City approves, an engineering analysis that demonstrates the proposed alteration will not increase the potential for flood damage or the potential for erosion. Any such variance shall not be issued unless the proposed alteration is approved by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection. This limitation shall not apply to mangrove stands within City canals. 
H.  Considerations for issuance of variances. In reviewing requests for variances, the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all other applicable provisions of the Florida Building Code, Land Development Code and this article, and the following: 
1.  The danger that materials and debris may be swept onto other lands resulting in further injury or damage; 
2.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
3.  The susceptibility of the proposed development, including contents, to flood damage and the effect of such damage on current and future owners; 
4.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed development with existing and anticipated development; 
5.  The availability of alternate locations for the proposed development that are subject to lower risk of flooding or erosion; 
6.  The compatibility of the proposed development with existing and anticipated development; 
7.  The relationship of the proposed development to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for the area; 
8.  The safety of access to the property in times of flooding for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
9.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and debris and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
10.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, streets, and bridges. 
I.  Conditions for issuance of variances. Variances shall be issued only upon: 
1.  Submission by the applicant of a showing of good and sufficient cause that the unique characteristics of the size, configuration, or topography of the site limit compliance with any provision of this article or the required elevation standards. 
2.  Determination by the Planning and Land Development Regulation that: 
a.  Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the land that render the lot undevelopable; increased costs to satisfy the requirements or inconvenience do not constitute hardship; 
b.  Literal interpretation of the provision of this Land Development Code would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same zoning district under the terms of this Land Development Code and would result in unnecessary and undue hardship on the applicant; 
c.  The granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nor create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws and ordinances; 
d.  The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; 
e.  The special conditions and circumstances are not self-imposed and do not result from the actions of the applicant; and 
f.  Receipt of a signed statement by the applicant that the variance, if granted, shall be recorded in the Office of the Clerk of Court in such a manner that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land; 
g.  If the request is for a variance to allow construction of the lowest floor of a new building, or substantial improvement of a building, below the required elevation, a copy in the record of a written notice from the Floodplain Administrator to the applicant for the variance, specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the proposed elevation of the lowest floor, stating that the cost of federal flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced floor elevation (up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage), and stating that construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property; 
h.  The proposed development must not be in conflict with or contrary to the public interest; 
i.  The proposed development must be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and the provisions of this Land Development Code; 
j.  The proposed development must not impose a significant financial liability or hardship for the City; 
k.  The proposed development must not create an unreasonable hazard, or nuisance, or constitute a threat to the general health, welfare, or safety of the City's inhabitants; and 
l.  The proposed development must comply with all other applicable local, state, and federal laws, statutes, ordinances, regulators, or codes. 
    10.02.10  Violations. 
A.  Violations. Any development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this article that is performed without an issued permit, that is in conflict with an issued permit, or that does not fully comply with this article, shall be deemed a violation of this article. A building or structure without the documentation of elevation of the lowest floor, other required design certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article or the Florida Building Code is presumed to be a violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
B.  Authority. For development that is not within the scope of the Florida Building Code but that is regulated by this article and that is determined to be a violation, the Floodplain Administrator is authorized to serve notices of violation or stop work orders to owners of the property involved, to the owner's agent, or to the person or persons performing the work. 
C.  Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a notice of violation of a stop work order, except such work as that a person is directed to perform to remove or remedy a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
    10.02.11  Flood Resistant Development Design and construction of buildings, structures and facilities exempt from the Florida Building Code. 
A.  Pursuant to Section 10.02.06.C of this article, buildings, structures, and facilities that are exempt from the Florida Building Code, including substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage of such buildings, structures and facilities, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the flood load and flood resistant construction requirements of ASCE 24. Structures exempt from the Florida Building Code that are not walled and roofed buildings shall comply with the requirements of Section 10.02.17 of this article. 
    10.02.12  Subdivisions. 
A.  Minimum requirements. Subdivision proposals, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be reviewed to determine that: 
1.  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
2.  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
3.  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
B.  Subdivision plats. Where any portion of proposed subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, lies within a flood hazard area, the following shall be required: 
1.  Delineation of flood hazard areas, floodway boundaries, 25-foot floodway setback, flood zones, and design flood elevations, as appropriate, shall be shown on preliminary plats; 
2.  All subdivisions where the base flood elevation is not included on the FIRM, the base elevations are determined in accordance with Section 10.02.07.B.1. of this article; and 
3.  Compliance with the site improvement and utilities requirements of Section 10.02.13 of this article. 
4.  Any reduction in the water-holding capacity of the flood hazard area caused by development, structures, and site improvements shall be compensated such that no increase in water surface elevations, peak discharges, or velocities occurs either upstream, downstream, or in the vicinity of the site during occurrence of flood events up to and including the base flood. The compensatory storage shall be located within the same defined floodplain's hydrologic sub basin as the placement of the fill. Technical data providing evidence of the equivalency of the compensatory storage shall be submitted to the City. 
5.  Applicant shall ensure that technical data reflecting base flood elevation changes or flood hazard area boundary changes are submitted to Federal Emergency Management Agency, with the City's endorsement, for a conditional Flood Insurance Rate Map revision. Prior to approval of final plat, an issued Letter of Map Change determination from FEMA is required. 
    10.02.13  Site improvements, utilities and limitations. 
A.  Minimum requirements. All proposed new development shall be reviewed to determine that: 
1.  Such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
2.  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric, communications, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
3.  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; in Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
B.  Sanitary sewage facilities. All new and replacement sanitary sewage facilities, private sewage treatment plants (including all pumping stations and collector systems), and on-site waste disposal systems shall be designed in accordance with the standards for onsite sewage treatment and disposal systems in Chapter 64E-6, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the facilities and discharge from the facilities into floodwaters, and impairment of the facilities and systems. 
C.  Water supply facilities. All new and replacement water supply facilities shall be designed in accordance with the water well construction standards in Chapter 62-532.500, F.A.C. and ASCE 24 Chapter 7 to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. 
D.  Compensatory storage. Any reduction in the water-holding capacity of the flood hazard area caused by development, structures, and site improvements shall be compensated such that no increase in water surface elevations, peak discharges, or velocities occurs either upstream, downstream, or in the vicinity of the site during occurrence of flood events up to and including the base flood. The compensatory storage shall be located within the same defined floodplain's hydrologic sub basin as the placement of the fill. Technical data providing evidence of the equivalency of the compensatory storage shall be submitted to the City. 
E.  Limitations on sites in regulatory floodways and 25-foot floodway setback. No development, including but not limited to site improvements, and land disturbing activity involving fill or regrading, shall be authorized in the regulatory floodway or 25-foot floodway setback unless the floodway encroachment analysis required in Section 10.02.07.C.1 of this article demonstrates that the proposed development or land disturbing activity will not result in any increase in the base flood elevation. 
F.  Limitations on placement of fill. Subject to the limitations of this article, fill shall be designed to be stable under conditions of flooding including rapid rise and rapid drawdown of floodwaters, prolonged inundation, and protection against flood-related erosion and scour. In addition to these requirements, if intended to support buildings and structures (Zone A only), fill shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
G.  Limitations on sites in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). In coastal high hazard areas, alteration of sand dunes and mangrove stands shall not be permitted. Construction or restoration of dunes under or around elevated buildings and structures shall comply with Section 10.02.17.I.3 of this article. 
    10.02.14  Manufactured homes. 
A.  General. Manufactured homes shall not be installed in floodways and 25-foot floodway setback except in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. All manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed by an installer that is licensed pursuant to F.S. § 320.8249, and shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 15C-1, F. A. C. and the requirements of this article. 
B.  Foundations. All manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes installed in flood hazard areas shall be installed on permanent, reinforced foundations that: 
1.  In flood hazard areas (Zone A) other than coastal high hazard areas, are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code Residential Section R322.2 and this article. Foundations for manufactured homes subject to Section 10.02.14.F of this article are permitted to be reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equal strength. 
2.  In coastal high hazard areas (Zone V), are designed in accordance with the foundation requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322.3 and this article. 
C.  Anchoring. All new manufactured homes and replacement manufactured homes shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring include, but are not limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This anchoring requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for wind resistance. 
D.  Elevation. Manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved shall comply with Section 10.02.14.E or Section 10.02.14.F of this article, as applicable. 
E.  General elevation requirement. Unless subject to the requirements of Section 10.02.14.F of this article, all manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located: 
1.  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
2.  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
3.  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
4.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall be elevated such that the bottom of the frame is at or above the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida Building Code Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A) or Section R322.3 (Zone V). 
F.  Elevation requirement for certain existing manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Manufactured homes that are not subject to Section 10.02.14.E of this article, including manufactured homes that are placed, replaced, or substantially improved on sites located in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, unless on a site where substantial damage as result of flooding has occurred, shall be elevated such that either the: 
1.  Bottom of the frame of the manufactured home is at or above the elevation required, as applicable to the flood hazard area, in the Florida Building Code Residential Section R322.2 (Zone A) or Section R322.3 (Zone V); or 
2.  Bottom of frame is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are not less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
G.  Enclosures. Enclosed areas below elevated manufactured shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code Residential Section R322.2 or Section R322.3 for such enclosed areas, as applicable to the flood hazard area. 
H.  Utility equipment. Utility equipment that serves manufactured homes, including electric, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities, shall comply with the requirements of the Florida Building Code, Residential Section R322. 
    10.02.15  Recreational vehicles and trailer parks. 
A.  Temporary placement. Recreational vehicles and park trailers placed temporarily in flood hazard areas shall: 
1.  Be prohibited to park or store a recreational vehicle for more than a total of three days, or any part thereof in any consecutive seven-day period on a residential driveway; or 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, which means the recreational vehicle or park model is on wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanent attachments such as additions, rooms, stairs, decks and porches. 
B.  Permanent placement. Recreational vehicles and park trailers that do not meet the limitations in Section 10.02.15.A of this article for temporary placement shall meet the requirements of Section 10.02.14 of this article for manufactured homes. 
    10.02.16  Tanks. 
A.  Underground tanks. Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty. 
B.  Above-ground tanks, not elevated. Above-ground tanks that do not meet the elevation requirements of Section 10.02.16.C of this article shall: 
1.  Be permitted in flood hazard areas (Zone A) other than coastal high hazard areas, provided the tanks are anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy, assuming the tank is empty, and the effects of flood-borne debris. 
2.  Not be permitted in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). 
C.  Above-ground tanks, elevated. Above-ground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be attached to and elevated to or above the design flood elevation on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement during conditions of the design flood. Tank-supporting structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood hazard area. 
D.  Tank inlets and vents. Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents shall be: 
1.  At or above the design flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the tanks during conditions of the design flood; and 
2.  Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood. 
    10.02.17  Other development. 
A.  General requirements for other development. All development, including man-made changes to improved or unimproved real estate for which specific provisions are not specified in this article or the Florida Building Code, shall: 
1.  Be located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
2.  Meet the limitations of Section 10.02.13.E of this article if located in a regulated floodway; 
3.  Be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design flood; 
4.  Be constructed of flood damage-resistant materials; and 
5.  Have mechanical, plumbing, and electrical systems above the design flood elevation or meet the requirements of ASCE 24, except that minimum electric service required to address life safety and electric code requirements is permitted below the design flood elevation provided it conforms to the provisions of the electrical part of building code for wet locations. 
B.  Fences in regulated floodways. Fences in regulated floodways that have the potential to block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences, shall meet the limitations of Section 10.02.13.E of this article. 
C.  Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways in regulated floodways. Retaining walls and sidewalks and driveways that involve the placement of fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of Section 10.02.13.E of this article. 
D.  Roads and watercourse crossings in regulated floodways. Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water crossings and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel from one side of a watercourse to the other side, that encroach into regulated floodways, shall meet the limitations of Section 10.02.13.E of this article. Alteration of a watercourse that is part of a road or watercourse crossing shall meet the requirements of Section 10.02.07.C.3 of this article. 
E.  Concrete slabs used as parking pads, enclosure floors, landings, decks, walkways, patios and similar nonstructural uses in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). In coastal high hazard areas, concrete slabs used as parking pads, enclosure floors, landings, decks, walkways, patios and similar nonstructural uses are permitted beneath or adjacent to buildings and structures provided the concrete slabs are designed and constructed to be: 
1.  Structurally independent of the foundation system of the building or structure; 
2.  Frangible and not reinforced, so as to minimize debris during flooding that is capable of causing significant damage to any structure; and 
3.  Have a maximum slab thickness of not more than four inches. 
F.  Decks and patios in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). In addition to the requirements of the Florida Building Code, in coastal high hazard areas decks and patios shall be located, designed, and constructed in compliance with the following: 
1.  A deck that is structurally attached to a building or structure shall have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member at or above the design flood elevation and any supporting members that extend below the design flood elevation shall comply with the foundation requirements that apply to the building or structure, which shall be designed to accommodate any increased loads resulting from the attached deck. 
2.  A deck or patio that is located below the design flood elevation shall be structurally independent from buildings or structures and their foundation systems, and shall be designed and constructed either to remain intact and in place during design flood conditions or to break apart into small pieces to minimize debris during flooding that is capable of causing structural damage to the building or structure or to adjacent buildings and structures. 
3.  A deck or patio that has a vertical thickness of more than 12 inches or that is constructed with more than the minimum amount of fill necessary for site drainage shall not be approved unless an analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional demonstrates no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase damage to the building or structure or to adjacent buildings and structures. 
4.  A deck or patio that has a vertical thickness of 12 inches or less and that is at natural grade or on nonstructural fill material that is similar to and compatible with local soils and is the minimum amount necessary for site drainage may be approved without requiring analysis of the impact on diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection. 
G.  Other development in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). In coastal high hazard areas, development activities other than buildings and structures shall be permitted only if also authorized by the appropriate federal, state or local authority; if located outside the footprint of, and not structurally attached to, buildings and structures; and if analyses prepared by qualified registered design professionals demonstrate no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase damage to adjacent buildings and structures. Such other development activities include but are not limited to: 
1.  Bulkheads, seawalls, retaining walls, revetments, and similar erosion control structures; 
2.  Solid fences and privacy walls, and fences prone to trapping debris, unless designed and constructed to fail under flood conditions less than the design flood or otherwise function to avoid obstruction of floodwaters; and 
3.  On-site sewage treatment and disposal systems defined in 64E-6.002, F.A.C., as filled systems or mound systems. 
H.  Nonstructural fill in coastal high hazard areas (Zone V). In coastal high hazard areas: 
1.  Minor grading and the placement of minor quantities of nonstructural fill shall be permitted for landscaping and for drainage purposes under and around buildings. 
2.  Nonstructural fill with finished slopes that are steeper than one unit vertical to five units horizontal shall be permitted only if an analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional demonstrates no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase damage to adjacent buildings and structures. 
3.  Where authorized by the Florida Department of Environmental Protection or applicable local approval, sand dune construction and restoration of sand dunes under or around elevated buildings are permitted without additional engineering analysis or certification of the diversion of floodwater or wave runup and wave reflection if the scale and location of the dune work is consistent with local beach-dune morphology and the vertical clearance is maintained between the top of the sand dune and the lowest horizontal structural member of the building. 
    10.02.18  Critical facilities. 
A.  New critical facilities shall be directed and sited away from special flood hazard areas. A critical facility shall have at least one access road connected to land outside the special flood hazard area that is capable of supporting a 4,000-pound vehicle. The top of the road shall be no lower than six inches below base flood elevation. 
B.  New critical facilities constructed within a Special Flood Hazard Area without a determined base flood elevation shall not be constructed unless base flood elevations are determined and certified data is provided from a Florida licensed professional engineer. The technical data shall be submitted to the Federal Emergency Agency with the City's endorsement for a Letter of Map Change to remove the entire project area from the Special Flood Hazard Area. Prior to close out of the permit, a Letter of Map Change determination shall be submitted to the Floodplain Administrator. 
( Ord. No. 2018-13 , § 2, 4-17-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-13 , § 2, adopted April 17, 2018, changed the title of § 10.02 from "Flood Damage Protection" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 10.03. - Wellfield Protection. 
    10.03.01.  Purpose and intent. There is a need to protect existing and future public water supply wells within the City from the irreversible and adverse effects of groundwater contamination. It is the intent and purpose of this section to safeguard the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City by protecting groundwater resources. Therefore, it is the City's intent to provide minimum standards to regulate land use activities, storage, handling, use, or production of regulated substances within zones of protection surrounding public water supply wells. Nothing herein supersedes more stringent setback or permitting requirements contained in other applicable federal and state wellhead protection regulations. 
    10.03.02.  Wellhead protection zones and interpretation. The regulations set forth in this section shall apply to all lands surrounding an existing public water supply well designated as the primary and secondary protection zone(s) as defined in this section. This regulation shall apply to all proposed public water supply wells if the specific location has been identified and the public or private entity owns the well site. 
A.  Wellhead location map. 
1.  The Land Use Administrator shall maintain wellhead protection zone maps that designate and geographically depict the primary and secondary wellhead protection zones. 
2.  The Land Use Administrator shall review the wellhead protection zone maps and amend them as necessary. The basis for amending such maps may include, but is not limited to, the following: 
a.  Changes in technical knowledge regarding the intermediate and Floridan aquifer system; 
b.  Changes in well pumping rates; and 
c.  Reconfiguration of or the addition of a well within the City's boundary. 
B.  Protection zones. 
1.  Primary wellhead protection zone. Shall be circular with a fixed 500-foot radial setback distance around the wellhead and shall include the surface and subsurface area surrounding the wellhead. 
2.  Secondary wellhead protection zone. Shall be an area delineated around the favorable potable water production areas for the Floridan and intermediate aquifer as depicted on the "Wellhead Protection Zone Map" on file at the office of the City Clerk. 
C.  Interpretation of zone designation. To determine applicable protection measures for properties and buildings within the primary or secondary wellhead protection zone, the following rules shall apply: 
1.  Properties located wholly or partially within a wellhead protection zone shall be governed by the restrictions applicable to that zone. 
2.  Where the boundary of a wellhead protection zone passes through a building, the entire building shall be considered to be in the most restrictive zone. 
    10.03.03.  Exemptions and provisional exemptions. 
A.  Exemptions. Except as provided herein, the following activities or uses are exempt from the provisions of this section: 
1.  Fire, police, emergency medical services, emergency, and management facilities. 
2.  Essential utility services and facilities provided that wellhead setback requirements are in accordance with applicable federal and state law. 
3.  The transportation of any hazardous substance if the transporting vehicle is in continuous transit and meets all applicable federal, state, and City requirements. 
4.  Retail/wholesale establishments that store or handle an unlimited amount of regulated substances for resale provided: 
a.  The regulated substances are handled, stored, and sold indoors. 
b.  The regulated substances are stored and sold in their original unopened containers. 
5.  Residential activities including the use of commonly used regulated substances for cleaning, maintenance, pool service, pest control, or any other lawful residential use activity except for underground storage of regulated substances. 
6.  Commercial products used at a facility solely for janitorial or minor maintenance purposes. 
7.  Outdoor recreational activities and facilities including nature and bike paths, conservation areas, and passive and recreational parks that do not involve the storage of regulated substances. 
B.  Provisional exemptions. The following activities are exempt, if in compliance with requirements as stated: 
1.  The use of any hazardous substance or lubricants in lawn maintenance equipment, if extreme care is taken to prevent spillage or discharging fuels and lubricants onto soils, groundwater, or surface water. 
2.  Agricultural uses, except that said uses shall comply with the latest version of the Florida Department of Agricultural and Consumer Services and Florida Department of Environmental Protection Best Management Practices for Agrichemical Handling and Farm Equipment Maintenance. In addition, silviculture operations shall conform to the Florida Department of Agricultural and Consumer Services Silviculture Best Management Practices, 1993, as amended from time to time. Alternative best management practices may be substituted with prior written approval by the City. 
3.  Construction activities, if all contractors, subcontractors, laborers, and their employees, when using, handling, storing, or producing regulated substances, adhere to the City's applicable best management practices. 
4.  The application of pesticides, herbicides, fungicides, and rodenticides in recreation, agriculture, pest control and aquatic weed control activities if: 
a.  The application is in strict conformity with the use requirement as is indicated on the containers in which the substances are sold; 
b.  The application is in strict conformity with the requirements as set forth in the Florida Statutes and the Florida Administrative Code; and 
c.  The City is notified at least 48 hours prior to the application within the primary wellhead protection zone. 
5.  New golf courses, if compliance is demonstrated by submitting to the City a written best management practices plan subject to approval by the Land Use Administrator and, which at a minimum, conforms with the Florida Department of Environmental Protection May, 1995 Best Management Practices for Golf Course Maintenance Departments and the City's groundwater protection prevention measures for secondary wellhead protection zones. New and existing golf courses shall comply with Subsection 10.03.06 herein. 
    10.03.04.  Regulated substances and facilities. 
A.  Regulated substances. The following substances are regulated by this section: 
1.  Any substance, including petroleum or derivatives thereof, or combination of substances which because of their quantity, concentration, physical, chemical, infectious, flammable, combustible, radioactive, or toxic characteristics, may cause or significantly contribute to a present or potential risk to human health, safety, or welfare, to the groundwater resources, or to the natural environment; or 
2.  Those substances set forth in the lists, as amended from time to time, entitled: Lists of Hazardous Waste, 40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 261, Subpart D, and waste characterized in 40 Code of Federal Regulations 261 Subpart C; Hazardous Constituents-Appendix VIII, (40 CFR Part 261); Environmental Protection Agency Designation Reportable Quantities, List of Hazardous Substances and Notification Requirements for Hazardous Substances under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (40 CFR 302); Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986, Section 302 Extremely Hazardous Substances List (40 CFR. 300, App. A and B); known hazardous and toxic properties as listed in 40 CFR 302; and substances that are restricted-use pesticides according to the Florida Statutes and the Florida Administrative Code. 
B.  Regulated facilities. 
1.  Any new nonresidential use, handling, production, or storage of regulated substances found in quantities greater than the following shall be considered a regulated facility: 
a.  When the aggregate sum or a single regulated substance present on a single parcel or building exceeds 110 gallons underground; and 
b.  Five hundred fifty gallons aboveground if the substance is a liquid or 1,100 pounds if a solid. 
2.  Any existing nonresidential use, handling, production, or storage of regulated substances is lawful and shall be considered a nonconforming activity: 
a.  When the aggregate sum or a single regulated substance present on a single parcel or building exceeds 110 gallons underground; and 
b.  Five hundred fifty gallons aboveground if the substance is a liquid or 1,100 pounds if a solid. 
3.  Facilities listed in Subsection 10.03.05 herein are regulated facilities. 
    10.03.05.  Restrictions within wellhead protection zones. In addition to the requirements set forth in this section, applicable facilities shall comply with the Florida Department of Environmental Protection wellhead protection standards in accordance with the Florida Administrative Code and the City's Groundwater Protection Preventative Measures and comply with Best Management Practices to prevent adverse impacts to groundwater resources. 
A.  Secondary wellhead protection zone. The following regulated uses and activities proposed within the secondary wellhead protection zone are prohibited; however, if existing as a legal use on November 16, 2008, may be allowed provided they comply with the requirements of Subsection 10.03.07: 
1.  New Class I, II, and V underground injection control wells, as regulated in the Florida Administrative Code, except for aquifer storage and recovery system wells or other necessary potable water drinking facilities injection wells as permitted by the appropriate state agency. 
2.  New or expanded landfills, as defined by the Florida Administrative Code. 
3.  New discharges to groundwater of industrial wastewater as regulated under the Florida Administrative Code. 
4.  New septic tank systems. 
5.  Prohibitions as specified under the City's Groundwater Protection Preventative Measures. 
B.  Primary wellhead protection zone. Regulated uses and activities proposed within the primary wellhead protection zone shall comply with requirements in Subsections 10.03.06 and 10.03.07 to protect potable water wells and to prevent the need for their replacement or restoration due to contamination. 
The following regulated uses are prohibited within the primary wellhead protection as a new use; however, if existing as a legal use on November 16, 2008, may be allowable provided they comply with the provisions of Subsection 10.03.07: 
1.  New underground storage of regulated substances. 
2.  Existing small quantity generators and conditionally exempt small quantity generator of hazardous waste, as regulated under the Florida Administrative Code, shall comply with the secondary containment requirements of 40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 264 Subpart I (1994), as amended, hereby incorporated by reference. New small quantity generator and conditionally exempt small quantity generator activities shall be prohibited within a 500-foot radial setback from any well. 
3.  New large quantity generators of hazardous waste as regulated under the Florida Administrative Code. 
4.  New hazardous waste, treatment, storage, disposal, and transfer facilities requiring permits under the Florida Administrative Code. 
5.  New soil treatment facilities as regulated under the Florida Administrative Code. 
6.  New above ground storage tanks regulated under the Florida Administrative Code. Replacement of an existing above ground storage tank of the same or less capacity is exempt from this provision if the replacement tank system is installed with secondary containment and maintained as required in the Florida Administrative Code. 
7.  New underground storage tanks regulated under the Florida Administrative Code. Replacement of an existing underground storage tank of the same or less capacity is exempt from this provision if the replacement tank system is installed and maintained as required in the Florida Administrative Code. 
8.  New mineral acid above ground storage tanks as regulated under the Florida Administrative Code. 
9.  New industrial wastewater treatment facilities. 
10.  Vehicular and washing facilities provided the facility establishes reclaimed and reuse practices for the water supply. 
11.  Motor vehicle repair facilities. 
12.  Outside storage of equipment, tools, or other possessions that may have the potential to discharge regulated substances or adequate best management practices are utilized to prevent such discharges. 
13.  New cemeteries. 
14.  Parking areas, unless: 
a.  Impervious with adequate stormwater design to a location outside of the zone. 
b.  Florida Department of Transportation Standard Type D raised curb is used. 
c.  Other means of advanced water quality treatment are provided. 
    10.03.06.  Permits, applications, and administrative process. 
A.  Permit requirements. 
1.  No permit or license for any land use activity will be issued that would allow development or land use activities in the wellhead protection zones that is contrary to the restrictions and provisions provided herein. 
2.  Proposed land use or activities that involve property located wholly or partially within a protection zone shall be reviewed by the Land Use Administrator. The Land Use Administrator shall issue a notice as to whether or not the proposed land use or activity meets the applicable requirements of this section. A preliminary evaluation shall be conducted for all applicants to determine if proposed land use activities are exempt or do not apply to this section. 
B.  Application procedure. Prior to the Land Use Administrator issuing an approval notice for property or land use activities located in a wellhead protection zone, an application shall be filed on a form and containing such information as the Land Use Administrator shall require by administrative rule. 
C.  Permit conditions. The City may place conditions on any development order or permit or license to ensure compliance with all of the prohibitions, restrictions and requirements set forth in this section. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, facility inspections, groundwater monitoring, and compliance reporting. 
D.  Alterations and expansion. The Land Use Administrator shall be notified in writing prior to the expansion, alteration, or modification of any existing structure or land use activity. Any such expansion, alteration, or modification shall conform to this section. 
    10.03.07.  Facility inspections. The Land Use Administrator is hereby authorized to make inspections during normal operational hours of all facilities or activities regulated by this section, including nonresidential buildings, structures, and land in the City in order to determine compliance with provisions contained in this section. 
A.  Administrative inspection warrant. In the event a person who has common authority over a building, structure, or land does not permit an inspection, the City may seek an administrative inspection warrant. 
B.  Vacant or abandoned properties. In the event a building, structure, or land appears to be vacant or abandoned and the property owner cannot be readily contacted in order to obtain consent for an inspection, the Land Use Administrator may enter into or upon any open or unsecured portion of the site in order to conduct an inspection. 
    10.03.08.  Variances. 
A.  Variance criteria. A property owner may request a variance from the requirements of this section. Upon City staff recommendation, the Utility Advisory Committee may perform a complete technical review for all variance applications and provide a recommendation to the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board. The Planning and Land Development Regulation Board shall have the authority to approve or deny issuance of a variance. In order to obtain a variance, the applicant must demonstrate by a preponderance of substantial, competent evidence that special or unusual circumstances and adequate technology exist to isolate the facility or activity from contaminating groundwater resources in the event of a spill. In granting or denying a variance, the City shall evaluate the following factors: 
1.  Substances or chemicals utilized that may impact groundwater resources if not properly managed; 
2.  Proposed containment/management of substances or chemicals; 
3.  Spill prevention and emergency response plans; 
4.  Emergency collection devices and equipment maintenance programs; 
5.  Monitoring plans and inspection procedures; 
6.  Spill reporting procedures; 
7.  Groundwater and/or soil monitoring programs; 
8.  Hydrological data that may include, upon City request, capture zone analysis, groundwater flow contours, and other hydraulic characteristics of the aquifer; 
9.  Distance from public supply well(s) and applicable wellhead protection zone(s); 
10.  Other factors, as applicable to groundwater protection issues. 
B.  Variance application requirements. In addition to the requirements stated in Chapter 2 for variance applications and review procedures, the following additional requirements shall apply to variances from this section: 
1.  The application shall be signed by the applicant and a licensed professional engineer or professional geologist licensed in the state of Florida; 
2.  The application shall include: 
a.  A hydrogeologic assessment of the site, which shall address, at a minimum, soil characteristics, groundwater levels, groundwater directional flow, distance from wellhead, and existing groundwater quality; 
b.  A technical report to demonstrate that adequate technology, practices, or other controls exist to isolate the facility or activity from the potable water supply in the event of a spill; 
c.  A discussion and documentation, such as published reports, technical articles, substantiating sufficient performance, and reliability of a proposed technology or system. Include discussion of maintenance and procedures to be utilized if system fails; and 
d.  Site-specific applicable groundwater protection best management practices procedures to ensure the protection of groundwater resources. 
3.  The Land Use Administrator may require additional information based on the type of land use activity proposed, chemicals utilized, distance from wellheads, or other applicable information needed to evaluate the application. 
4.  The City may add any appropriate conditions and safeguards necessary to protect groundwater resources pursuant to such special exemptions. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, § 49, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 10.04. - Endangered and Threatened Species and Species of Special Concern. 
    10.04.01.  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to protect the natural resources of the City for the benefit of its citizens by preventing the destruction of listed plant and animal species in the City. The City shall take all reasonable steps to ensure that all development related activities do not result in the harming, pursuit, or harassment of wildlife species classified as endangered, threatened, or a species of special concern listed by the federal or state government. Those endangered and threatened wildlife species and wildlife species of special concern with the potential to exist within the City are determined by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission, the Florida Natural Areas Inventory, and Florida Committee on Rare and Endangered Plants and Animals publications. The City shall protect endangered and threatened species through the regulatory authority of Florida Department of Environmental Protection, St. Johns River Water Management District, Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission, and the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, as mandated by the Federal Endangered Species Act of 1973 and the Florida Endangered and Threatened Species Act of 1977, and other applicable laws, rules, and regulations. 
    10.04.02.  Applicability. All development, regardless of size and location, shall comply with federal and state regulations regarding listed species that may be located on a development site, as well as regulatory policies related to management requirements for species that may occur off-site (e.g. American bald eagle nests and associated protection zones, Florida scrub jay nest sites/territories). Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall obtain all necessary federal and state permit authorizations, as appropriate. 
    10.04.03.  Listed species protection application and study. Listed species likely to be found within the City are determined by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission, Florida Natural Areas Inventory, and Florida Committee on Rare and Endangered Plants and Animals publications. 
A.  Applicability. All applications for preliminary plats or site plans shall include a listed species study. The listed species study shall be completed by a qualified environmental professional. The listed species study, after deemed complete by the Land Use Administrator, shall be acceptable for one year for the property that was investigated. The listed species study shall include appropriate field investigation and associated exhibits prepared in accordance with an application form adopted by administrative rule issued by the Land Use Administrator. 
B.  Management plan. Where listed species evidence is found, the listed species study shall include a management plan. The management plan shall address the approach to be used in protecting the species or shall include an authorized permit from the appropriate federal or state agency. The adequacy of this approach shall be evaluated based on the following: 
1.  The specific guidelines and regulations of the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission or the United States Fish and Wildlife Service for species. 
2.  The dedication as a conservation easement of any approved areas preserved for listed species protection. 
3.  The connection of conservation easements on the subject development property to any such conservation easements on adjoining properties and/or to any designated wildlife corridor unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Land Use Administrator that such connection is impractical in the use of the subject property. 
4.  The property owner shall be responsible for relocating gopher tortoises on site or other suitable locations as approved by the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission. 
    10.04.04.  Listed species protection during construction activities. In the absence of an appropriate listed species permit(s), development related activities shall not cause the harming, pursuit, or harassment of wildlife species classified as endangered, threatened, or a species of special concern by either the federal or state governments in contravention of applicable federal and state laws, rules, or regulations. Should listed species reside on, or otherwise be significantly dependent upon the subject property, all development activities that might negatively affect that individual or population shall cease. The applicant shall notify the City, the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission, and the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, to the extent required by law, if such species are determined to be residing on, or are otherwise significantly dependent upon, the project site. Property shall be developed in full compliance with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Proper protection to the satisfaction of all agencies with jurisdiction over the matter shall be provided. Where appropriate, the City shall require a preliminary gopher tortoise survey for existing single-family platted lots prior to the initiation of construction activities. The preliminary gopher tortoise survey shall be conducted by a qualified environmental professional and results of said survey shall be submitted to the City for review. Should gopher tortoises be present on the subject property, all necessary permits shall be submitted to the City prior to the commencement of construction activities. Gopher tortoises shall be located to suitable habitats in accordance with permit requirements. 
Sec. 10.05. - Cultural and Historic Resources. 
    10.05.01.  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to protect the significant historic and archaeological resources of the City to the maximum extent feasible, by providing procedures for the review of plans and development projects as well as standards for the protection of these important resources. 
    10.05.02.  Lands not subject to cultural resource survey. A cultural resource field survey and assessment report is not required for parcels that have undergone a cultural resource investigation, and the assessment concludes that the land does not contain cultural resources that are considered by the Florida Department of Historical Resources State Historic Preservation Officer to be significant or potentially significant. A copy of correspondence from the state historic preservation officer shall be submitted to the City, verifying that the subject property does not contain significant or potentially significant cultural resources. 
    10.05.03.  Lands subject to cultural resource investigation. A cultural resource investigation shall be accomplished before the issuance of a development order or permit or prior to the commencement of construction activities, or any other physical disturbance of land that: 
A.  Takes place within a parcel that has not been previously investigated for cultural resources. 
B.  Takes place within a parcel that contains a site that is listed in the Florida Master Site File as "significant" or as "potentially significant" requiring further investigation. 
C.  Takes place within a recently discovered site that has not yet been entered into the Florida Master Site File. 
    10.05.04.  Professional qualifications and survey requirements. 
A.  Professional qualification. Cultural resource professionals are certified archaeologists that meet the qualification in "The Secretary of the Interior's Historic Preservation Professional Qualification Standards" (Federal Register Vol. 62, No. 119, p. 33707). 
B.  Cultural resources survey and assessment. Cultural resource assessment surveys and related reports shall follow the guidelines of the Florida Division of Historical Resources, Department of State, and the requirements of all applicable Florida Statutes. Prior to the issuance of a development order or permit, or prior to the commencement of construction activities, a copy of a survey clearance letter issued by the Compliance Review Section, Division of Historical Resources, or other documentation of authorization by the State Historic Preservation Officer, shall be submitted to the City. Management recommendations regarding the protection, preservation, or mitigation of impact of historical or archaeological sites, in concurrence with the Division of Historical Resources should be followed. In addition, copies of Florida Master Site File forms generated during the cultural resource assessment study for the Division of Historical Resources shall be submitted to the City for their records. An initial site investigation may be utilized to determine cultural resource site probability for lands requiring a cultural resource investigation as approved by a certified archaeologist utilizing necessary criteria in accordance with state law to determine cultural recourse site probabilities. Said criteria include, but are not limited to, historical data, soil types, and site elevations. The following may substitute for a cultural resource site survey and assessment if certified by a certified archaeologist in writing to the Land Use Administrator: 
1.  A determination that subject property has a low probability of yielding cultural resources. 
2.  A determination that proposed development activities will have no effect on cultural resources listed or eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places. 
3.  A determination that proposed development activities will have no effect on cultural resource value under federal and state requirements. 
    10.05.05.  Property containing potential and significant cultural resource sites. If property is determined to have a potentially significant or a significant cultural resource in areas proposed for development, the City shall adhere to the recommendations of the state historic preservation officer and shall require the applicant to do one or more of the following prior to the issuance of a development order or permit: 
A.  Preserve cultural resources within the open space of the development. 
B.  Redesign the development to accommodate preservation of all or a portion of the site containing the cultural resource. 
C.  The property owner may voluntarily fund or seek funding for excavation of the resource, if agreed to by the Florida Department of Historical Resources. 
    10.05.06.  Fortuitous finds and unmarked human burials. The following requirements apply to all building construction or alteration, or land alteration activities: 
A.  Evidence of the existence of cultural resources. If evidence of the existence of cultural resources is discovered or observed at development sites or during development activities after final approval, permits, or issuances of development orders, all work shall cease in the area of effect. The developer, owner, contractor, or agent thereof shall immediately notify a professional archaeologist and the City. Examples of such evidence include whole or fragmentary stone tools, shell tools, aboriginal or historic pottery, bone tools, historic building foundations, shell mounds, shell middens, or sand mounds. A professional archaeologist selected and hired by the applicant, shall assess the significance of the finds and, if warranted, notify the Florida Department of Historical Resources in accordance with federal and state requirements. A report or letter shall be submitted to the City from a professional archaeologist and, if warranted, a copy of a clearance letter from the state historic preservation officer indicating that the proposed development will have no effect on cultural resources listed or eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places, or otherwise of historical, architectural, or archaeological value. 
B.  Discovery of human skeletal remains. In accordance with the Florida Statutes, if any human skeletal remains or unmarked human burial is discovered, other than during a cultural resource excavation authorized by the state or an educational institution, all activity that may disturb the unmarked human burial shall cease immediately and the district medical examiner shall be notified. Such activity shall not resume unless specifically authorized by the district medical examiner or the state archaeologist. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, § 50, 12-15-09) 
Chapter 11 - TREE PROTECTION, LANDSCAPING, BUFFERS, AND IRRIGATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-6 , § 2, adopted Nov. 1, 2016, repealed ch. 11 in its entirety, and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former ch. 11, §§ 11.01-11.04 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the original codification and Ord. No. 2009-26, §§ 51-58, adopted Dec. 15, 2009. 

Sec. 11.01. - General Provisions. 
    11.01.01.  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the general welfare of City residents and visitors and to promote energy and water conservation; reduce air pollution and noise; enhance property values; reduce erosion; improve surface water quality and groundwater recharge; moderate temperatures by providing shade; improve compatibility between various land uses; and enhance the City's appearance. The intent of the chapter is to establish procedures and practices governing the protection, installation and long term maintenance of trees, vegetation, and other landscaping elements within the City. The criteria in this chapter are intended to institute landscape and irrigation design principles that will result in creative solutions and provide alternative means to achieve an environmentally friendly and aesthetic community. 
    11.01.02.  Applicability. The removal of trees or fill, and the excavation or dredging of any parcel of land shall be prohibited prior to issuance of all required permits (including tree removal permits), unless stated otherwise in this chapter. 
A.  Design of new development. Developments shall be designed to the greatest extent possible to protect existing trees and their tree protection zones from stormwater facilities, drainage lines, utilities, grade changes, building footprints, parking areas, drives, and walkways. Subdivision plats shall shift lot lines to minimize placing specimen or historic trees in the buildable area of the lot, if practical. 
B.  Alteration of existing development. No building or parking lot existing on August 19, 2008 shall be required to be altered or moved in order to comply with this chapter, except that the following activities shall require compliance with this LDC to the maximum extent possible. (Exceptions may be granted by the Land Use Administrator when development conflicts with pedestrian and traffic safety, interferes with the protection of specimen or historic trees or natural resources, removes required parking, or similar situations.) 
1.  When a structure is destroyed by fire or other calamity and is proposed to undergo substantial improvement, as defined in this LDC. 
2.  When an existing non-residential building is expanded, the required building foundation plantings and their planting areas shall be provided for the new building area. 
3.  When a parking/vehicular use area is expanded but not the building, the new pavement area is required to be brought into compliance with this chapter. At a minimum temporary irrigation shall be required. 
4.  Any expansion project shall include replacing previously planted required landscaping that has been damaged or has died. 
    11.01.03.  Measurement of trees. For the purposes of this chapter, the size of existing trees shall be calculated by the measurement of the diameter of the trunk in caliper inches, taken at breast height (four feet six inches). The size of new landscape trees shall be calculated by measurement of the diameter of the trunk at six inches above grade, up to and including trees four inches in diameter. The size of new trees over four inches in diameter shall be calculated by measurement of the diameter of the trunk at 12 inches above grade. 
    11.01.04.  Classification of developments. For the purpose of applying landscaping and irrigation requirements, developments are classified as follows: 
A.  MFR/COM: Townhouse, condominium, and multifamily residential development and institutional, office and commercial uses; 
B.  IND: Industrial and warehousing development; 
C.  SUBD: Subdivisions in any zoning district; and 
D.  SFR/DPX: Single-family detached and duplex development on individual lots. 
( Ord. No. 2016-6 , § 2, 11-1-16) 
Sec. 11.02. - Tree Preservation, Protection, and Replacement. 
    11.02.01.  Protected trees defined. All trees that meet the following criteria are protected, with the exception of invasive species (see Section 11.02.05.C.1) and/or species not suited to this area per the United States Department of Agriculture hardiness list: 
A.  The trunk is six inches or greater diameter. 
B.  Trees with a trunk four inches or greater diameter, if surveyed for credit. 
C.  Specimen trees, which are any protected trees with a trunk of 24 inches or greater diameter except for sand pines; however the following species are considered specimen trees when they reach one of the following: 
1.  Twelve inches or greater diameter: Cypress, Magnolia, Loblolly Bay, Red Bay, Scrub Oak, and Red Cedar; 
2.  Eighteen inches or greater diameter: Elm, Hickory, Oak, Green Ash, Sycamore, Date Palm, and Maple. 
D.  Historic trees, which are any protected trees with a trunk of 36 inches or larger diameter. 
E.  For SFR/DPX development, any tree 11/2 to six inches in diameter that was planted to meet the minimum tree density requirements or an existing tree that was previously credited towards meeting the requirements of this chapter. 
    11.02.02.  Tree survey requirements. 
A.  Tree survey. The required survey shall be accomplished within the last 24 months and shall identify all protected trees by species name and the size of the trunk measured at the diameter at breast height. 
B.  Monument signs. Where monument signs are proposed to be located on an existing development, all protected trees that are located within 50 feet of the proposed sign shall be shown on the tree survey. 
C.  Protected, specimen, and historic trees. 
1.  MFR/COM and IND developments. 
a.  The tree survey shall show all protected trees six inches in diameter and greater from the property lines to five feet past the required buffer area width, except as provided in Section 11.02.02.D. Protected trees within any adjacent rights-of-way extending to the nearest street pavement shall be included in the survey. 
b.  All specimen and historic trees shall be individually located and identified over the entire site as to species and size except as provided in Section 11.02.02.D. 
2.  SUBD developments. All specimen and historic trees shall be individually located and identified over the entire site as to its species and size except as provided in Section 11.02.02.D. 
3.  SFR/DPX developments. 
a.  Protected trees six inches or greater diameter within all front, rear, and street side building setback areas shall be surveyed and shown on the tree survey if the trees are going to be used for credit. 
b.  Specimen and historic trees shall be surveyed over the entire lot except as provided in Section 11.02.02.D. 
D.  Survey of individual trees not required. Under the following circumstances, the Land Use Administrator may determine that a survey identifying each individual protected tree is not warranted and a count of all protected trees including species and diameter size is acceptable: 
1.  When existing vegetated areas are to remain undisturbed; or 
2.  Where some or all of a development site or a proposed subdivision must be filled to such an extent, in order for permitted development to occur, that there is no feasible means to save protected trees. 
3.  When the trees are located in wetland preservation or conservation areas that will not be impacted. 
    11.02.03.  Tree preservation. 
A.  Specimen and historic tree preservation requirements. Specimen and historic trees are select protected trees that due to their size and contribution to the overall tree canopy of the City are granted an extra level of significance and protection. Building footprints, drives, stormwater management facilities, and similar activities on all sites shall be designed to save the maximum practicable number of specimen and historic trees. During the subdivision platting process, lot lines shall be shifted for the same purpose. Table 11-1 shows the minimum percentage of specimen and historic trees that shall be preserved on a site. Owners of lots assigned the SFR, DPX, and EST zoning districts may remove any specimen or historic tree that is within the buildable area of the lot with no mitigation, if all reasonable efforts to shift or flip the building footprint cannot save the tree(s). 
Table 11-1: Minimum Specimen and Historic Trees to be Preserved 
Number of Specimen/
Historic Trees on a Site Percentage of trees to be Preserved MFR/COM, SUBD IND Less than 3 per acre, or a portion thereof 75% 50% 3.0 to 5.0 per acre 67% 40% 5.1 to 8.0 per acre 50% 25% More than 8.0 per acre 4 per acre 2 per acre  
B.  Tree preservation credits. The following credits apply only within the COM, IND, MFR, OFC, P&G, and PSP zoning districts: 
1.  Trees saved in wetlands or their associated upland buffers are eligible for preservation credits; however, preservation of trees in wetlands for preservation credits may not also be used as criteria for preserved wetlands and imperiled upland habitats density bonuses established in Chapter 3. 
2.  A stormwater retention/detention area may be credited toward meeting the tree density requirement provided the area contains tree species that will survive periodic flooding. 
3.  The total diameter of preserved protected, specimen, and historic trees on the site may be applied to satisfy the tree density requirements. A preserved palm tree shall be credited on a one-to-one basis for any palm tree removed. 
4.  Existing pine trees (other than sand pine) in good health may be used as buffer shade tree credits if they are a minimum of six inches diameter and comprise no more than 50 percent of the buffer tree requirement. If pines meeting these criteria are of good quality and spacing such that planting of new shade trees for some or all of the remaining required buffer shade trees is impractical, then existing pines may count for more than the 50 percent maximum requirement. 
    11.02.04.  Tree protection measures. 
A.  Canopy road, specimen, and historic tree protection. In order to protect the existing tree canopy over portions of roadways within the City, the following roadway segments have an extra level of significance and protection: Colbert Lane (from the south right-of-way line of Palm Coast Parkway SE to 2,200 feet to the south), Palm Coast Parkway east of 1-95, and Palm Harbor Parkway south of the Hammock Dunes Bridge. 
Roadway projects and modifications to these roadway systems necessitated by development shall preserve and protect any specimen or historic tree within the right-of-way and within 35 feet of the right-of-way line along Colbert Lane (from the south right-of-way line of Palm Coast Parkway SE to 2,200 feet to the south), Palm Coast Parkway east of I-95, and along Palm Harbor Parkway south of the Hammock Dunes Bridge. The applicant may meet this requirement by utilizing an average protected width of 35 and a minimum width of 25 feet and maximum width of 45 feet. Within these protected tree areas, the specimen and historic trees shall not be removed except for the minimal number necessary to allow for site access, sidewalks, necessary utilities, and signage. Preservation methods are to include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Reduction of the length of turn, deceleration, or acceleration lanes subject to public safety needs and the approval of the Land Use Administrator. 
2.  Consideration of alternatives to widening such as alternate service roads. 
3.  Root protection/aeration construction methods such as retaining walls with guardrails. 
4.  Where no practical alternative for preservation is possible, such as traffic safety conflicts, the total diameter of the protected tree being removed shall be replaced with replacement trees having no less than four-inch caliper. 
B.  Tree protection during clearing or tree trimming activities. Protected trees, including their tree protection zones, in front buffer areas shall be preserved if trees are in good condition and do not impede access or visibility into or out of the site. 
C.  Tree protection during construction. 
1.  During any development activity, appropriate protective measures, per City standards, shall be taken to prevent the destruction or damage of all trees to be retained on the site. The preservation of existing vegetation within the tree protection zones of all trees to be retained is required, unless the vegetation is hand cleared. 
2.  Protection methods, including trimming/pruning of trees and tree barricades, shall conform to ANSI A-300 standards. 
    11.02.05.  Tree removal. 
A.  Prohibitions. Unless exempted herein, it is prohibited and unlawful for a person or entity, agent, or representative thereof, directly or indirectly, to perform or authorize the following: 
1.  Cut down, remove, damage, or destroy any protected tree as defined in Section 11.02.01 on any parcel without first obtaining a tree removal permit (for required mitigation standards on MFR/COM and IND properties refer to Section 11.04.02 and on SFR/DPX properties refer to Table 11-4); 
2.  Commit any act or authorize the commission of any act that physically or effectively removes a protected tree or causes a tree to die, such as damage inflicted upon the root system by heavy machinery, chemicals, or paving, any pruning or tree work inconsistent with ANSI A-300 standards, or changing the natural grade above the root system (removal or effective removal of any protected, specimen or historic tree on MFR/COM and IND properties shall be mitigated per Section 11.04.02 and on SFR/DPX properties refer to Table 11-4); 
3.  Root raking the area within the tree protection zone or adding fill over the tree protection zone, which may cause damage and permit infection or pest infestation to a protected tree; or 
4.  Perform tree removal, land clearing, grubbing, grading, excavation, construction, or make or install any improvement upon any site or parcel, regardless of the existence of valid permits or approvals for the given activity, unless all protected trees and protected vegetative areas established pursuant to this chapter have been surrounded by a protective barrier. 
B.  Land clearing. During the subdivision infrastructure construction stage, clearing of trees and existing vegetation shall be limited to the minimum necessary to construct roadway and utility rights-of-way and stormwater facilities. Trees may only be cleared from individual lots upon review and approval of the tree survey and/or fire hazard considerations at the time of building permit application. However, in order to accommodate development within a subdivision where fill is required to such a depth that it would preclude the survival of existing trees, lots may also be cleared provided: 
1.  A clearing and grading plan shall be submitted showing vegetation and tree areas to be preserved, the amount of fill needed for lot development based on existing grades, proposed roadway and building elevations, and drainage plans. 
2.  Replacement of these trees may be allowed in common areas of the subdivision (i.e., street trees, detention or retention ponds, buffer areas, etc.). 
C.  Tree removal activities exempt from permit/replacement requirements. The following activities shall be lawful without application or issuance of a tree permit and do not require tree replacement: 
1.  The removal of any invasive plant species as determined by the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services' "Noxious Weeds" rule set forth in the Florida Administrative Code. 
2.  The removal or alteration of any tree or vegetation in or about an existing City or utility easement or right-of-way provided such work is done by, or under the control of, the operating utility company, and said company has received all necessary licenses or permits to provide utility service within the easement. 
3.  Removal or effective removal of trees severely cut by a utility company on SFR and DPX zoned platted lots. 
4.  Any activity conducted by a lawfully operating and bona fide commercial nursery, tree farm, agricultural operation, silvicultural operation, ranch, or similar operation when the activity occurs on property owned or lawfully occupied by the person conducting said activity and is done in pursuit of said activity. This exemption shall include the purposeful removal of a tree or trees for their permanent relocation at another site undergoing development. 
5.  Trees located within a City drainage easement, City drainage rights-of-way, or City access rights-of-way that need to be removed to allow for access to or maintenance or clearing and construction of the City's drainage ditches and drainage related facilities. 
D.  Permit requirements. 
1.  A permit is required for land clearing/filling. It is prohibited and unlawful to clear trees, fill land, excavate, or dredge any parcel of land prior to the issuance of a single-family building permit or a site development permit, unless otherwise stated in this LDC, or authorized by the Land Use Administrator. The building permit shall act as the tree removal permit. 
a.  Vacant properties may be partially cleared to enable the construction of seawalls prior to a permit being issued for a principal structure. Refer to Section 4.01 for requirements. 
b.  Vacant properties may be partially cleared for the purpose of removal of unsuitable debris or muck within the buildable area of a site. Refer to Chapter 9 for permitting requirements. 
c.  Vacant single-family residential properties that are under common ownership with any developed adjacent residential lot may be cleared of all pines, vegetation, and any trees less than six inches in diameter if the minimum tree densities are maintained or replaced. Refer to Chapter 9 for permitting requirements. 
2.  Prior to the removal of any protected tree, an application for tree removal shall be submitted to the City. If the requested removal is in conjunction with an approved building permit, grade and fill permit, or a site development permit, a separate permit need not be obtained, but tree removal shall be addressed during the development order review process. The following types of tree removals require a permit but mitigation is not required. 
a.  Trees within clusters if there is a need to relieve thinning or overcrowding of trees, as part of an approved fire mitigation plan. 
b.  Protected trees, exclusive of specimen and historic trees, that would not drop the lot below the minimum tree density requirements on SFR/DPX platted lots, as outlined in Section 11.03.01.A. 
E.  Removal of protected trees. Protected trees removed under this section shall require replacement on MFR/COM and IND properties per Table 11-2 and on SFR/DPX properties per Table 11-4 if the tree was originally preserved or planted to meet a requirement of this Chapter or the tree removal would cause the property to no longer meet the minimum tree density standards outlined in Section 11.03.01.A. Upon receipt of a completed application and verification on-site by a certified arborist or the Land Use Administrator, the Land Use Administrator may permit the removal of the following protected trees: 
1.  Dead, severely diseased, or severely injured trees, as determined by a certified arborist or the Land Use Administrator. 
2.  Trees that pose imminent danger to the health, safety, and welfare of the public and cannot be corrected through standard arboricultural procedures, as determined by a certified arborist. 
3.  Trees that pose a sight distance visibility problem along any public right-of-way. 
4.  Any pine tree within 30 feet of a structure or within a distance from a structure less than the tree's height may be removed as a safety precaution provided the property owner where the tree is located agrees to the removal and applies for the permit. 
5.  Trees causing structural damage to a foundation, driveway, parking lot, patio, wall, water or sewer line, or which interfere with the construction or repair of public infrastructure or facilities that cannot be corrected by standard arboricultural means. 
F.  Tree removal on developed residential lots. On developed lots zoned SFR, DPX, or EST all provisions of Section 11.02.05.D.2. and Section 11.02.05.E. would apply as well as the requirements to maintain the minimum tree density as outlined in Section 11.03.01.A. The following additional requirements also apply: 
1.  Protected trees, exclusive of specimen and historic trees that are in excess of the minimum tree density for the lot, can be removed without mitigation, but those not in excess of the minimum tree density require replacement per Table 11-4. 
2.  Removal of a specimen or a historic tree shall be mitigated as follows: 
a.  A specimen tree-One shade tree per Table 11-4. 
b.  A historic tree-Two trees meeting the standards of Table 11-4 with at least one tree being a shade tree. 
G.  Tree thinning on MFR/COM and IND developments. On properties where the landscaping has been planted for a minimum of ten years or where the property owner has retained or planted more trees than required by this chapter and meets all of the standards of this chapter; tree thinning of overcrowded trees may be requested by the property owner or designated agent upon submittal of a report by a certified arborist to the City. After review, the Land Use Administrator may approve or conditionally approve a thinning of the overcrowded trees when the intent of the original landscape plan and this chapter would still be met by the removal of such trees, and where: 
1.  Required trees have matured and grown to such a size and density that tree thinning would be the most prudent methodology for maintaining the health and vibrancy of the trees; or 
2.  Trees in excess of the required minimum have matured and grown to such a size and density that tree thinning would only have an insignificant impact on the overall landscaping of the site. 
Preference for removal shall be given to trees having poor structure, root issues, or in declining health. Tree replacement and mitigation are not required after tree thinning. 
H.  Requirements suspended. During a declared emergency, the Land Use Administrator may suspend the requirements of this subsection. 
    11.02.06.  Tree mitigation standards. Applicants are strongly encouraged to preserve as much of the existing vegetation as possible. Therefore, existing protected trees are counted toward meeting the landscaping requirements for a site. By saving protected trees, rather than planting new ones, applicants can achieve the minimum planting requirements in a more efficient and economical manner. 
    Tree mitigation for all protected, specimen, and historic trees for MFR/COM and IND developments shall be provided as shown in Table 11-2 and for SFR/DPX properties shall be provided per Table 11-4. The property owner shall be responsible for the cost of mitigating the trees removed from the property. 
Table 11-2: Tree Mitigation Requirements for New MFR/COM and IND Development 
Protected Trees Specimen Trees Historic Trees Palm Trees 70% of the predevelopment tree inches removed from the required perimeter buffer areas of the site. Minimum replacement tree size shall be 21/2" caliper. 70% of the tree inches removed from the site. Minimum replacement tree size shall be 3" caliper. 100% of the tree inches removed from the site. Minimum replacement tree size shall be 31/2? caliper. 40% of palms removed from the site. Minimum replacement shall be 8' clear trunk palms (preferably Sabal Palms).  
    11.02.07.  Tree bank fund established. 
A.  If due to site conditions or configuration, it is impossible or impracticable for the property owner, applicant, or developer to meet the requirements for tree density and/or replacement on-site, the property owner, applicant, or developer shall pay fees of equivalent value into the tree bank fund or plant the trees off-site upon approval of a suitable site or sites by the City. The tree bank fund shall be a separate account set up and shown in City financial records in which all receipts are detailed. All monetary contributions paid to the tree bank fund pursuant to this section shall be used exclusively for the design, planting, or replacement of trees on public lands. Funds may also be used for relocating trees onto public lands. Funds may also be used for the design and installation of irrigation systems, mulching, and staking for these trees. 
B.  Valuation of contributions to the tree bank fund shall be based on the caliper size and height, if applicable, of the required hardwood tree replacement and quantity of the required palm trees in accordance with City standards. The valuation of cost shall include the current market value of similar type trees and include the following costs: tree cost, delivery, labor to install, mulching and staking. 
( Ord. No. 2016-6 , § 2, 11-1-16) 
Sec. 11.03. - Landscaping, Buffers, and Irrigation Requirements. 
    11.03.01.  General landscaping requirements. 
A.  Tree density requirements. All developments shall be required to provide one tree for every 2,500 square feet, or major fraction thereof, of property area, excluding ponds, lakes and canals. 
B.  Preserved trees. Preserved trees, including those within wetland or associated upland buffer areas, may be counted towards the tree density requirements as long as they are, at a minimum, the same size as the required new trees (refer to Table 11-3). The trees must be in good structural condition and health and the root zone shall be protected during the construction phase of the project. 
C.  Protected trees and plants. The use of protected trees, understory trees, shade trees, accent plants, shrubs, and groundcovers is required to partially or totally satisfy the planting requirements of this chapter. MFR/COM, IND and SUBD developments may use existing pine trees, six inches diameter and over to meet the minimum tree requirements; however, no more than 50 percent of the pine trees may be credited. The Land Use Administrator may approve alternate plantings if the purpose and intent of this Chapter are met and a nuisance or environmental hazard is not created. 
D.  Native vegetation. Use of native plants and plant species that conserve water, adapt to local conditions, and are drought tolerant are required for all new landscaping. MFR/COM, IND and SUBD developments are required to use reuse water if available or plant at least 50 percent of the pervious area of the site with native plants or plants and sod that conserve water, adapt to local conditions, and are drought tolerant. 
E.  Alternative landscape betterment plan. Where an applicant with a unique or difficult site to develop based on the shape of the lot or its developable area, as determined by the PLDRB or City Council, is unable to meet some of the specific landscaping standards in Chapter 11, the applicant may propose an alternative landscape betterment plan with at least the same quality of required plants and the same amount of landscaped area, but in a revised location or design layout. The applicant must also provide at least two landscape hardscape features not otherwise required that are pedestrian friendly, such as fountains, benches or art work. The PLDRB or City Council may approve or conditionally approve the alternative landscape betterment plan if the proposed changes will provide at least as much public benefit, screening from rights-of-way and adjacent properties, and aesthetic appeal as if the landscaping standards were strictly followed. All Tier 1 Technical Site Plans having a landscape betterment plan shall be reviewed by the PLDRB. 
F.  Freestanding sign landscaping. 
1.  All monument signs shall have shrubbery or flowers planted around the perimeter of the sign. Signs shall be located so as to provide both adequate visibility from the public rights-of-way, meet the Florida Department of Transportation Standards for Sight Triangles and Sight Distances, and preserve protected trees. 
2.  If freestanding signage cannot be shifted within the buffer to allow the required room for screen plantings between the sign and the outside parking envelope area without obscuring visibility to the sign, then the City shall allow a ten-foot radius from the base of the freestanding sign in which lower accent plantings are allowed in lieu of the screen plantings. 
G.  Retention and detention ponds. Stormwater retention/detention ponds shall be naturally shaped with rounded corners, having a minimum radius of seven feet for ponds between 2,500 and 10,000 square feet, and a minimum radius of least a 12 feet for ponds greater than 10,000 square feet, and without geometric straight sides where possible. All wet ponds shall incorporate a combination of aquatic and non-aquatic native plants around the perimeter of the pond to filter runoff of fertilizers, herbicides, and pesticides. This wet pond planting area shall have a minimum area equal to 15 percent of the perimeter of the pond multiplied by 71/2 feet. (For example, a pond with a 200-foot-long perimeter would have a wet pond planting area of 225 square feet that could be planted as a five-foot-wide strip 45 feet long.) Alternatively, the applicant may plant some or all of the wet pond planting area within the pond as littoral zone plantings. 
H.  Screening plantings. Above ground structures such as: dumpster enclosures, mechanical equipment, backflow preventers, wells, pumps, tanks, ground-mounted HVAC units, transformers, generators, storage sheds, lift stations, utility cabinets, electrical panels, or ground-mounted cable/satellite television equipment; shall have a medium screen planting, as described in Table 11-4. If the structures are in areas that are visible from an improved public rights-of-way, a medium screen planting as described in Table 11-4 shall be provided between the structures and the rights-of-way. If the structures are in areas that are visible from a parking lot or abutting property without an intervening buffer, fence, or wall, then a medium screen planting, as described in Table 11-4, shall be provided between the structures and the parking lot or abutting property. On transformers, lattice may be used for screening instead. Where vegetation is planted, it shall be setback sufficiently so that at maturity it still meets the Florida Power and Light minimum setbacks from the transformers. 
I.  Plan submittal requirements. Landscape and irrigation plans shall be submitted for all MFR/COM, IND and SUBD developments and shall be prepared by a Florida registered landscape architect or other licensed professional authorized by state law to prepare such plans. SFR/DPX development landscape plans shall also be required, but do not need to be prepared by a landscape architect. 
J.  Street trees and median planting. 
1.  In all subdivisions, exclusive of those for SFR/DPX lots, and other developments involving the creation of new streets or shared private access roads, street trees shall be planted in the rights-of-way or a median, unless the Land Use Administrator determines that a conflict exists between trees and utilities located in the rights-of-way, or that sight distances or recovery zones are not in compliance with sound and generally accepted engineering practices and principles. In such cases, the street trees shall be planted outside of the rights-of-way. 
2.  If street trees are to be located outside of the rights-of-way, trees shall be planted no farther than ten feet outside of the right-of-way line or abutting utility easement, and shall be perpetually maintained. All property owners' associations' covenants and restrictions shall include this requirement, and all property owners shall comply with this paragraph. Street tree plantings shall be in accordance with City standards. 
3.  Street trees may be included to satisfy the minimum requirements for tree density and buffers. 
K.  Utility lines. Shade trees shall not be planted under or within 15 feet horizontally of overhead power lines. Underground power lines, cable TV, and phone line clearance to trees shall be as specified by the utility providing the lines. Water mains shall be separated a minimum distance of ten feet from shade trees. Distances less than ten feet shall be reviewed and approved by the City. Understory trees that do not attain a height of no more than 14 feet, or that can be maintained below that height by pruning, may be planted under utility lines. 
L.  Sight triangles. 
1.  Where landscaping is proposed within a sight triangle at an intersection, landscaping shall be planted and maintained so that an unobstructed cross-vision is provided at a vertical level between two feet and seven feet, as measured from the centerline of the adjoining road. Trees may be permitted within the sight triangle, at the discretion of the Land Use Administrator, if the trees have a single trunk and foliage is kept trimmed between two feet and seven feet. 
2.  The dimensions of the sight triangle shall be as shown in Table 11-3, unless the Land Use Administrator determines other standards in the Florida Department of Transportation Standards for Sight Triangles and Sight Distances are more appropriate, based upon specific traffic or site conditions. The first distance in the table is for the leg along the proposed roadway, and the second distance is for the leg along the existing roadway that the new roadway will intersect. For example, if a proposed driveway will be located along an arterial roadway, choose "Driveway" in the second column and follow it to the right under "Arterial". In this case the leg distance would be 15 feet along the proposed driveway and 50 feet along the arterial roadway. 
Table 11-3: Sight Triangle Dimensions Along Driveways and Roadways 
Leg Distance on Existing Driveway or Roadway 
(see the four columns below) Leg Distance on Proposed Driveway or Roadway (see column to the right) Driveway Local Road Collector Arterial Driveway 15'/15' 15'/15' 15'/15' 15'/50' Local Road 15'/15' 15'/15' 15'/35' 15'/50' Collector 35'/15' 35'/15' 35'/35' 35'/50' Arterial 50'/15' 50'/15' 50'/35' 50'/50'  
Note: The first leg distance listed is the leg along the curb line of the proposed driveway or roadway and the second distance listed is along the curb line of the existing driveway or roadway where the proposed driveway or roadway will intersect. The third leg of the triangle would be a line connecting the furthest points of the two legs. There will be two sight triangles for "T" intersections and four sight triangles for full intersections. 
M.  Landscape review for single-family subdivisions by certified HOAs. A Homeowners Association, or Property Owners Association (HOA) may apply to the City for annual certification to allow deferral of City review of single family home landscape plans and landscape inspections to a certified HOA for the construction of new single-family homes, additions and accessory structures within a subdivision. 
HOA certification will be valid for one calendar year from date of certification, and certified HOAs may apply for recertification annually. In order to be certified or recertified, a HOA must provide the following to the City: 
1.  Covenants and Restrictions or deed restrictions with landscaping requirements that meet or exceed the City's minimum landscape requirements for single-family homes. 
2.  Proof that the HOA has an Architectural Review Committee or its equivalent that will review landscaping plans for all new single-family homes within its subdivision. 
3.  Proof that HOA inspects and enforces its landscape requirements. 
Approval of certification or recertification does not preclude the City, at its discretion, from conducting evaluation audits which may include landscape inspections, landscape plan review or other applicable evaluations to ensure City Landscape requirements are being enforced. Certification may revoked at any time for non-complying HOAs. Certification does not include the review and inspection for tree removal, fire mitigation, perpetual care, and landscaping and irrigation systems in common areas. The City reserves the right to enforce all provisions of City Codes, including this section. Every certified HOA must provide every ARC approved landscape plan to the City. 
    11.03.02.  Specific landscaping requirements for developments. 
A.  MFR/COM developments. 
1.  Foundation plantings. Foundation plantings are intended to soften buildings and improve their aesthetics. Planting beds with a minimum width of four feet shall surround a minimum of 70 percent of the building elevation excluding areas adjacent to building entry doors, fountains, benches and sculptures. Bed lines, where practicable, shall be curvilinear and wrap the corners of the structure with shrubbery plantings no closer than three feet from the building. Screening that is at least four feet wide around loading areas, dumpsters, and mechanical equipment running parallel to the adjacent building elevation may be counted towards these requirements. On sites located along specially designated road segments or roads, as listed in Table 11-5, an average minimum foundation planting bed width of eight feet shall be provided. In this area, a minimum of two different heights of plant material shall be used along with understory trees at the rate of one tree per 50 lineal feet of building wall length. These planting beds shall be located in the most visible areas. The following may be used in order to provide some alternatives to foundation plantings: 
a.  Architectural design. Foundation planting requirements for multifamily and nonresidential buildings may be reduced by the Land Use Administrator, when it is determined that building façade massing techniques, beyond the minimum architectural standards described in Chapter 13, provide a benefit similar to foundation plantings. 
b.  Landscape design. Alternative foundation plantings may be permitted (e.g., architectural planter, pots, etc.) or allowed to be relocated along an alternative building elevation by the Land Use Administrator and applied as a credit towards meeting the foundation planting requirement, if demonstrated and determined that the methodology is of equal benefit to the general public and appropriate automatic irrigation facilities are provided. 
2.  Wildfire hazard assessment. The development may be required, at the determination of the Land Use Administrator based on a Forest Resource Assessment and Strategy Map, to include a wildfire hazard assessment for the site prepared and certified by a forester, wildfire mitigation expert, or landscape architect. If the site is determined to be in a medium or higher wildfire hazard area, certain measures must be implemented prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy of the building. Wildfire mitigation shall be in accordance with City standards. 
B.  IND developments. 
1.  Foundation plantings. Planting beds at least four feet wide shall be planted adjacent to at least 60 percent of front building elevations, 25 percent of street side building elevations, and ten percent of interior side building elevations, but are not required along rear elevations. Areas adjacent to building entry doors, benches, fountains or sculptures are excluded from these calculations. The following may be used in order to provide some alternatives to foundation plantings: 
a.  Architectural design. Foundation planting requirements may be reduced by the Land Use Administrator, when it is determined that building façade massing techniques, beyond the minimum architectural standards described in Chapter 13, provide a benefit similar to foundation plantings. 
b.  Landscape design. Foundation planting may be relocated along an alternate building elevation if the Land Use Administrator determines that mitigating circumstances are present (e.g., limited depth to the property or the property has an unusual shape) and the alternate location provides equal or greater benefit to the general public. 
2.  Wildfire hazard assessment. The development may be required, at the determination of the Land Use Administrator based on a Forest Resource Assessment and Strategy Map, to include a wildfire hazard assessment for the site prepared and certified by a forester, wildfire mitigation expert, or landscape architect. If the site is determined to be in a medium or higher wildfire hazard area, certain measures shall be required to be implemented prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy of the building. Wildfire mitigation shall be in accordance with City standards. 
C.  SUBD developments. 
1.  Common area. Common areas within subdivisions including, but not limited to: entrance ways, recreation areas, gateways, and street islands; shall maintain the same tree density standards as required in Section 11.03.01.A. and the same minimum planting standards as shown in Table 11-4. 
a.  Temporary sales trailers are required to be skirted and have a short screen planting as defined and described in Table 11-4 with temporary irrigation around all sides visible to the public plus two understory trees, to improve its aesthetics. 
b.  Unless an easement for perpetual maintenance is provided, buffer planting areas, if required, shall be provided in the common areas of the subdivision and not on individual private lots. 
c.  Provisions for maintenance of common areas and conservation/wetland areas shall be made through covenants and restrictions or other means. 
2.  Landscape buffers. For subdivisions fronting any of the specially designated road segments or roads as noted in Section 11.03.05.B., Type B or G landscape buffers shall be required. 
3.  Wildfire hazard assessment. The development may be required, at the determination of the Land Use Administrator based on a Forest Resource Assessment and Strategy Map, to include a wildfire hazard assessment for the site prepared and certified by a forester, wildfire mitigation expert, or landscape architect. If the site is determined to be in a medium or higher wildfire hazard area, certain measures shall be required to be implemented prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy of the building. Wildfire mitigation shall be in accordance with City standards. 
D.  SFR/DPX developments. 
1.  Number and type of trees. 
a.  At least one tree shall be provided for each 2,500 square feet of lot area, or major fraction thereof, excluding ponds, lakes, and canals, per Section 11.03.01.A. On lots one acre or larger this minimum tree planting standard shall only be based on the portion of the lot being developed with buildings, swimming pools, pavement, or new landscaped areas including turf. 
b.  Regardless of lot size, a minimum of one shade tree shall be provided, preferably in the front yard. At least two shade trees shall be provided on lots at least one-third acre but less than two-thirds-acre, three shade trees shall be provided on lots two-thirds-acre but less than one acre, and four shade trees shall be provided on lots one acre or larger. 
2.  Foundation plantings. 
a.  Residential homes shall provide foundation plantings consisting of 16 shrubs. On interior lots, eight shrubs shall be planted in front of the home, and four shrubs planted on each side of the home. On corner lots, six shrubs shall be planted on each side of the home facing a street, and four shrubs planted on the interior side of the home. When the rear yard of a home faces a saltwater canal, lake, or golf course, an additional four shrubs shall be planted along the rear of the home. 
b.  All of these required shrubs shall be planted between 21/2 and eight feet of the home's foundation. 
c.  The corners of the house shall be wrapped with shrubbery or have an understory tree planted there. Shrubbery shall be selected using varying heights to accent and soften walls. 
3.  Minimum planting requirement. There shall be a minimum planted area or preserved existing native vegetation area of 60 percent of the pervious open space. The remainder of the pervious open space area may be decorative gravel or decorative crushed stone commonly used for landscaping purposes, or mulches. All swales in rights-of-way shall be sodded. 
    11.03.03.  Tree and plant types, sizes, and quality. 
A.  Trees, shrubs, and groundcovers. All trees, shrubs, and groundcovers shall meet or exceed the standards of a Florida No. 1 or better quality as set forth in the latest edition of Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants, Florida Department of Agriculture. Damage to any tree, shrub, or ground cover that puts the plant material at risk of not surviving due to the injury, is grounds for rejection. The planting requirements at time of installation are listed in the following table: 
Table 11-4: Minimum Planting and Maintenance Requirements 
Type of Development Shade Trees Understory Trees Shrubs and Groundcovers Accent Plants MFR/COM, IND and SUBD Caliper: 31/2" 
3 palm trees at 8' clear trunk are required to replace 1 shade tree. Caliper: 11/2" Minimum container: 30 gallon-In parking lot islands minimum height shall be 12'-14'. Shrubs: 3 gallon 
Groundcover: 1 gallon 
Short screen planting: shrubs 2' in height, 3-gallon container, and maximum 3' on-center spacing or shrubs 21/2' in height, 7-gallon container, and maximum 4' on-center spacing. For either option shrubs shall achieve a minimum height of 3' within 2 years. 
Medium screen planting: shrubs 21/2' in height, 7-gallon container, and maximum 4' on-center spacing installed that achieves within 2 years a minimum height of 31/2'. 
Tall screen planting: shrubs 5' in height and 60% opacity installed that achieves within 2 years a minimum height of 6' and opacity of 80%. Dwarf to medium 3-gallon container shrubs. Height: 12" minimum at time of planting. SFR/DPX Caliper: 2" 3 palm trees at 3' clear trunk are required to replace 1 shade tree. Caliper: 1" Minimum container: 15-gallon Shrubs: 3 gallon 
Short screen planting: shrubs 2' in height, 3-gallon container, and maximum 3' on-center spacing or shrubs 21/2' in height, 7-gallon container, and maximum 4' on-center spacing. For either option, shrubs shall achieve a minimum height of 3' within 2 years. None required  
Notes 
1. A ten-percent tolerance level may be provided to the above minimum plant sizes to reflect plant variability, or 20-percent tolerance level during times of extremely limited plant availability, at the determination of the Land Use Administrator. 
2. Short, medium and tall screen plantings shall be non-deciduous, always maintained to meet their minimum height and opacity standards, and if planted on a berm, the berm may count towards the screening height. 
3. Trees shall be allowed to grow to their natural height and typical shape in MFR/COM, IND and SUBD Developments. 
4. In the case of mitigation for a historic tree on SFR/DPX properties, also see Section 11.02.05.F.2.b. 
1.  Existing trees shall count towards any tree requirements as noted in this Chapter if: 
a.  The trees are equal to or greater than the minimum sizes in Table 11-4; 
b.  Are in good structural condition and health; and 
c.  The root zone is protected during the construction phase of the project. 
2.  For MFR/COM, IND and SUBD developments a cluster of three palm trees may replace up to 25 percent of the required shade trees, at the ratios shown in this Chapter. Where an architectural theme in a MFR/COM or SUBD development has a dominant tropical design, clusters of three palm trees may replace 50 percent of the required shade trees with the same spacing requirements. On SFR/DPX developments, clusters of three palm trees may replace up to 50 percent of the required shade trees, but in all cases at least one shade tree shall be provided. 
B.  Turf. Grass areas shall be planted with sod in a species normally grown as permanent lawns in East Central Florida. Newly installed Bahia sod shall be healthy and have no more than 20 percent weeds or unlike grass species. Newly installed St. Augustine, Seashore Paspallum, Bermuda, and Zoysia sod shall have no more than five percent weeds or unlike grass species. For newly installed turf where irrigation is not provided, grass species shall be Bahia grass or Bermuda grass where appropriate. All areas of a disturbed site not otherwise landscaped or not left in natural native vegetation shall be grassed, or mulched, at a minimum. 
    11.03.04.  Parking lot landscaping requirements. 
A.  Screening. Screening from the right-of-way and adjacent properties in the form of a short screen planting, as defined herein, is required for off-street parking lot areas where the perimeter buffer does not already include one. The height shall be measured from the top of the adjacent parking surface, and if planted on a berm, the berm height can be included towards the minimum height. 
B.  Internal parking lot landscaping. Internal parking lot landscaping shall comprise an area equal to a minimum of ten percent of the vehicular use area excluding those areas beneath vehicular canopies, such as a bank drive-thru or a convenience store with gas pumps. The vehicular use area is the total area of all parking stalls, drive aisles, and access ways within the limits of the property being developed. Sites zoned industrial can exclude vehicular use areas designated for heavy-duty truck parking, loading, and maneuvering from these calculations. 
1.  Landscape islands. 
a.  A qualifying island or planting area shall contain at least one tree per landscaped island. Shade trees shall only be planted in islands having at least nine feet in width and at least 300 square feet of island area per tree, except for median islands described in Section 11.03.04.B.2.a.(1). 
b.  Required islands shall be a minimum of 150 square feet in area and shall have one understory tree unless the island is large enough for a shade tree, or a grouping of three palms. 
2.  Placement of landscape islands. 
a.  No more than five consecutive parallel parking spaces may be constructed without separation by a vehicular use area landscape island, and no more than ten consecutive parking spaces may be constructed without separation by a landscape island, except as specified below: 
(1)  Where shade trees are planted at a minimum of 50 feet on-center the length of a center island located between two rows of parking spaces ("median island"), the median island shall have a minimum planting width of eight feet. If understory trees or a cluster of three palm trees are planted instead, the median island shall have a minimum width of five feet with the understory trees or clusters of three palms spaced a minimum of 30 feet on-center. 
(2)  Where a minimum of an additional five feet of buffer width is provided, in addition to any required perimeter buffer width, along the outside edge of the parking lot adjacent to the parking spaces, with shade trees planted at a minimum of 50 feet on-center. 
b.  If stabilized grass parking is approved, the parking spaces shall be delineated with parking stops and the required vehicular use area islands shall be provided. 
c.  All parking rows ending adjacent to drive or parking aisles shall be terminated by a landscape island ("terminal island") that is at least five feet in width. 
3.  Design requirements for landscape islands. 
a.  Where light poles or flagpoles are placed in landscape islands that contain shade trees, the minimum size of those landscape islands shall be increased by 150 square feet, and the pole shall be located at least 15 feet from the shade tree. 
b.  Curbing shall be installed around the perimeter of all landscape islands that abut paved parking or drive aisles. Where the landscape islands abut stabilized grass parking, pressure-treated timbers (minimum size of six inches by six inches), securely attached with rebar to the ground, are allowed in lieu of the curbs. Curbing or areas beneath the pressure-treated timbers shall not be counted towards the landscape island areas. 
c.  The Land Use Administrator may supersede specific landscaping standards in this subsection when they conflict with concerns expressed by the Fire Department or utility providers regarding public safety. 
d.  Landscape islands shall have at least one tree credit for every 165 square feet of required internal parking lot landscape areas; with understory trees receiving one tree credit, clusters of three palm trees receiving 11/2 tree credits, and shade trees receiving two tree credits. 
4.  Alternate planting requirements for parking lot islands. The following specific planting requirements relate to internal parking lots: 
a.  In lieu of providing the minimum open space in a parking lot island, the Land Use Administrator may approve one or more of the following practices: 
(1)  Structural soils; 
(2)  Structural bridging under sub-base and pavement areas; 
(3)  Soil trenches/root paths that allow roots to access larger soil areas; or 
(4)  Other methodology, such as pervious pavers, that provide adequate means for tree roots to properly grow. 
b.  Upon submittal and approval of design plans and specifications of an alternate means of rooting area under a paved surface, the minimum parking lot island planting area as required in this section may be reduced. Structural soil specifications shall comply with City standards. 
5.  Driveway medians. A landscaped island ("driveway median") may be installed to separate the ingress and egress driveways of an access way. This driveway median shall meet the planting and design requirements for landscape islands. 
6.  Flexibility. 
a.  The Land Use Administrator may permit the use of architectural planters to provide partial credit towards landscape island/area requirements, if found to be of equivalent public benefit and where no other practical options exist. 
b.  The Land Use Administrator may permit more than ten contiguous parking spaces without an island in order to promote tree preservation or when unique site circumstances exist, such as redevelopment. 
c.  The Land Use Administrator may reduce the minimum area for parking lot islands if it is determined adequate tree rooting area is provided below the pavement area, per the City Technical Manual. 
7.  Related standards. 
a.  For large scale commercial centers, see Sections 4.15.03.B. and 4.15.03.C. 
b.  For screening of mechanical equipment, utilities and storage areas, see Section 13.04.07.A. 
    11.03.05.  Landscape buffer requirements. 
A.  Buffer type determination. Determining perimeter buffer requirements for a site consists of a two-step process: 
1.  Use Table 11-5 to determine the type of buffer required. 
2.  Use Table 11-6 to find the design standards for the particular buffer required. 
B.  Perimeter buffer requirements. Table 11-5 shows the perimeter buffer types required based on the zoning of the subject property and the adjoining zoning/use. The zoning of the subject property is shown on the second row with the black background and the adjoining zoning/use is shown on the left-hand column. To use Table 11-5, go along the second row to find the subject property's zoning and then go down that column to where it aligns with the same row as the adjoining zoning/use. For example, if the proposed development is located on land zoned "IND-1" and the abutting land is zoned "MFR-1" then use the "IND" column at the right-hand side of the table and follow it down to the row labeled "MFR", which would require a perimeter buffer type "D", "E", or "F". 
Table 11-5: Perimeter Buffer Requirements 
Zoning of Proposed Development AGR, PRS, P & G SFR, DPX, EST MFR, MHD OFC, COM, MPD 1 , PSP 2 IND Adjoining Zoning/Use (shown below): AGR, PRS, P&G None None None None None SFR, DPX, EST None None D, E or F D, E or F D, E or F MFR, MHD None None C D, E or F D, E or F OFC, COM, MPD 1 , PSP 2 None None C C D, E, or F IND None None C C C Non Specially Designated Roads None A A A A Specially Designated Segments Palm Coast Parkway, Palm Harbor Parkway and Colbert Lane 3 None B B B B Other Specially Designated Roads or Segments Thereof 4 None G G G G Retention Pond, Lake, or Canal None None None C D, E or F  
1 In the MPD zoning district the requirements shall revert to the underlying zoning district or use for the subject property, as described within the MPD Agreement. 
2 Requirements in the PSP zoning district shall revert to the existing or proposed use on the property, as determined by the Land Use Administrator. 
3 Segments are limited to Palm Coast Parkway east of I-95, Palm Harbor Parkway south of the Hammock Dunes Bridge, and Colbert Lane from the south right-of-way line of Palm Coast Parkway SE to 2,200 feet to the south. 
4 Other specially designated roads or segments thereof, include the following: Belle Terre Parkway, Belle Terre Boulevard, Colbert Lane (segment north of Palm Coast Parkway SE and segment more than 2200 feet south of Palm Coast Parkway SE), Cypress Point Parkway, 1-95, Matanzas Woods Parkway, Old Kings Road, Palm Coast Parkway (segment west of 1-95), Palm Harbor Parkway (segment north of the Hammock Dunes Bridge), Pine Lakes Parkway, Royal Palms Parkway, S.R. 100, Seminole Woods Parkway, U.S. 1, and White View Parkway. 
1.  For nonresidential uses, a perimeter buffer will not be required between two or more newly created adjoining lot lines when subdividing a parcel of land that has an existing development or an approved site plan. (For example, two outparcels in front of a shopping center with an anchor tenant building.) In order to qualify, the existing or approved project and future developments on the proposed lots must have approval for a unified or master site plan that incorporates shared facilities including: access, stormwater facilities, and connectivity. 
2.  The double-frontage lots fronting along Palm Coast Parkway SE or Palm Coast Parkway NE and fronting along the City un-named right-of-way, located about 350 feet south of Palm Coast Parkway NE and extending east from Florida Park Drive to the Intracoastal Waterway, do not have to provide any buffers along the City un-named right-of-way. 
C.  Buffer design standards. The required buffers shall meet the following landscape standards: 
Table 11-6: Buffer Design Standards 
Type Width 1 Shade Trees per Linear Feet Maximum Shade Tree Spacing per Linear Feet Understory Trees per Linear Feet Short Screen or Tall Screen Accent Planting per Linear Feet Decorative Wall/Fence A 10' 1/50' 75' 1/50' Short Screen N/A N/A B 35' 1/50' 75' 1/50' Short Screen 30/100' N/A C 2 10' 1/50' 75' Optional Short Screen 3 N/A N/A D 2 10' 1/50' 75' Optional Not Required 30/100' Decorative Wall E 2 20' 1/50' 75' Optional Tall Screen N/A Optional F 2 15' 1/50' 75' Optional Not Required 30/100' Fence G 25' 1/50' 75' 1/50' Short Screen 30/100' N/A  
1 A 35-foot Buffer B may be averaged with a minimum width of 25 feet and maximum width of 45 feet, and a 25' Buffer G may be averaged with a minimum width of 20 feet and a maximum width of 30 feet. 
2 Where an adjoining lot is undeveloped, shade tree spacing in the subject lot's adjoining buffer shall be increased to one per 75 linear feet and maximum spacing increased to 90 feet. Where an adjoining lot has been developed with an adjoining buffer having shade trees, the subject lot shall have understory trees planted that are staggered between the shade trees. 
3 Not required if the adjoining property has already been developed with the shrubs already planted, or where multi-family, office, or commercial uses are adjacent to any pond, lake, canal or waterway and the view would be an enhancement for the proposed project while not negatively impacting neighboring properties, as determined by the Land Use Administrator. Also, not required when industrial properties are adjacent to each other, except where a parking area is unscreened and adjacent to the buffer. 
1.  Landscape buffer areas shall be located at the perimeter of the site. Plantings shall not be located in any portion of a public or private right-of-way or drainage easement, unless permitted by a landscape easement. Short, medium and tall screen plantings may be located between the minimum landscape buffer area and the parking lot, building, structure or equipment they are intended to buffer. If not screening parking areas or other areas required to be screened, these screen plantings can be incorporated into the required foundation plantings. 
2.  At least 50 percent of the existing native vegetation shall be preserved within the landscape buffer area. Preserved native vegetation within the buffer shall be hand cleared of vines, debris, and dead branches to present an attractive transition from maintained to natural. If native vegetation is not present, is insufficient to meet the screening required by this section, or the Land Use Administrator has determined that it must be removed due to required site grading or existing utilities, then plant material shall be installed to meet the buffer requirement. 
3.  When calculating the required number of trees and shrubs within a buffer, the width of access ways or easements running perpendicular to the buffer shall be subtracted from the property length. 
4.  Understory trees may be used in lieu of shade trees where noted in Table 11-6 as "Optional"; however, no more than 25 percent of the required trees may be understory trees. 
5.  Where accent plants are required, no more than 30 percent of the planting bed area shall be comprised of groundcover plants. 
6.  Uses within buffers: 
a.  Buffer yards shall be limited to passive recreation and may contain pedestrian or bicycle trails and public amenities such as decorative fountains, artwork, and similar structures. 
b.  Mechanical equipment or structures, directional signs, and backflow preventers may be allowed in perimeter buffer areas pursuant to approval by the Land Use Administrator. 
c.  In a buffer ten feet or less in width, none of the required buffer area may be used for stormwater retention/detention. In a buffer 15 feet in width, no more than 33 percent of the required buffer area may be used for stormwater retention/detention. In a buffer 20 feet or more in width, no more than 50 percent of the required buffer area may be used for stormwater retention/detention. These ratios shall be reduced if insufficient room is left for plantings. 
d.  A required buffer shall be at least 15 feet wide before it can be encumbered by the partial overlap of a sidewalk or utility easement running parallel to the buffer, and the overlap shall not exceed one-third of the required buffer width. This ratio may be reduced if stormwater retention/detention areas are also in the buffer or if there is insufficient room for plantings. 
7.  Decorative walls and fences, when required, shall be six feet in height and comply with the material and design requirements (see Section 4.01 for material and design requirements for walls and fences). 
D.  Miscellaneous buffer requirements. 
1.  Vehicle display areas. For automotive, recreational vehicles, motorcycles, motorized watercrafts, and other similar displays, a maximum of 33 percent of the frontage short screen plantings may be reduced to a height of 12 inches at time of planting if a minimum height of 16 inches shall be achieved within two years and maintained at such height. The balance of the short screen planting shall be installed and maintained per the height standards in Table 11-4. 
2.  Frontage road buffers. Frontage roads that parallel the main road serving a site may encroach into a front landscape buffer if no less than ten feet of the required buffer is provided on the development side of the frontage road with the remaining footage of the buffer width on the side of the main road. 
3.  Fleet rental parking buffers. Fleet rental parking spaces (excluding spaces limited to the renting of automobiles or pickup trucks) shall be located to the side or rear of the building and screened with a tall screen planting. 
4.  Phased projects. Any development that proposes phasing shall be required to provide perimeter buffer plantings adjacent to existing development and rights-of-way that are visible to the general public. If existing trees and vegetation are sufficient to provide this buffer, they may be used to satisfy this requirement. The certificate of occupancy for the initial phase shall not be issued until the buffer plantings have been provided. 
    11.03.06.  Irrigation requirements. 
A.  Requirements by type of development. 
1.  MFR/COM, IND: These developments shall meet the irrigation design standards contained in this section. 
2.  SUBD: Irrigation systems for all common areas of a subdivision, including planted medians, shall be designed and installed with the subdivision infrastructure in accordance with this section. If the owner elects, the planting and irrigation of street trees on individual lots may be postponed until the lot is developed. 
B.  Design standards. Irrigation systems shall meet all City irrigation design standards as well as the following: 
1.  Water conservation. Irrigation systems shall be designed in such a way as to minimize runoff or spraying of irrigation water onto roadways, driveways, and adjacent properties that are not under the control of the owner. The irrigation systems shall be designed to locate plants into water use zones having the same irrigation needs. 
2.  Water source. Non-potable water use demands shall be met using water of the lowest quality supply that is both available and feasible for the intended application, as determined by the Land Use Administrator. Water reuse or water reclamation programs, if available, shall be used to reduce groundwater or surface water withdrawals for water use applications which do not require potable water. The following are the water source priorities of the City from highest preference to lowest preference: 
a.  Reclaimed water. 
b.  Stormwater, lake, or canal. 
c.  Groundwater (well). 
d.  Potable water. 
3.  Temporary irrigation. All landscape installations shall make necessary provisions for watering to establish and guarantee plant survival. Sites with these types of irrigation systems shall use super absorbents in the planting backfill as well as native plants or xeric plants and trees. A watering schedule shall be submitted. For an example, see the University of Florida Extension publication ENH856 - Tree Specifications for Planting and Shrubs in the Southeastern United States. Specifications shall be included to provide one of the following: 
a.  Automatic irrigation; 
b.  Hand watering via hose bib or other water source; 
c.  Water truck hand watering; or 
d.  Automated water bags. 
4.  Irrigated areas. The irrigation system, unless temporary, shall have mainlines and lateral lines buried underground and designed to provide adequate irrigation to all landscaped areas except for areas of existing native vegetation or planting areas comprised of vegetation that conserves water, is adaptable to local conditions, and is drought tolerant. 
5.  Backflow prevention. Irrigation systems connected to a potable water source shall have a backflow prevention assembly installed as required and approved by the Land Use Administrator. Permitted wells shall have a serviceable double-check valve as required and approved by the Land Use Administrator. See Chapter 9 for these requirements. 
6.  Moisture sensing device or smart irrigation system. All irrigation systems shall have an operational moisture-sensing device or a smart irrigation system. 
    11.03.07.  Installation of plants. All landscaping is to be installed in a professional manner following good nursery practices as set by the Florida Nurserymen Landscape and Growers Association. All planting requirements shall meet or exceed the standards set forth in this chapter and the University of Florida Extension Publication ENH856 - Tree Specifications for Planting Trees and Shrubs in the Southeastern United States. 
A.  Mulching requirements. All planting areas shall be mulched with a minimum of two inches and a maximum of four inches of mulching material. The type of mulching material is subject to approval by the Land Use Administrator. 
B.  Turf. See Section 11.03.03.B. for turf requirements and quality. 
    11.03.08.  Compliance with approved plans; maintenance. 
A.  Compliance with approved plans. All required plantings as shown on the approved landscape plans must be completed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
B.  Maintenance. 
1.  The owner is responsible for maintaining the approved landscaping on-site in a healthy condition indefinitely. All required plant material that dies, or becomes unhealthy and is not treatable, shall be replaced within 30 days. When any plants are replaced because they are dead, diseased, or destroyed by acts of nature, they should be of the same or similar species and meet the size standards of Table 11-4. 
2.  Pruning standards for all tree work done in the City shall follow American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A300, Part 1 "pruning standards" as well as ANSI Z133.1-2000 standards for safety. 
a.  The owner, tenant and their agents including personnel and companies who provide the tree services shall be jointly and severally responsible for following these pruning specifications and for tree damage or loss. Trees shall not be topped (hat-racking), over-lifted (lions-tailing), shaped, or significantly pruned, but shall be allowed to grow to maturity and attain their natural form so that crown development is not inhibited. Trees may only be pruned to maintain good health and growth by removal of limbs that are dead, weak, insect or disease-infested, storm damaged, crowded, rubbing other limbs, low and interfering with pedestrians or vehicles, or to maintain safe distances from utility lines. 
b.  For maintenance of commercial properties, including: office, medical, retail, and industrial uses; and multi-family projects of 25 units or more, tree pruning of branches one inch or larger and at a height of eight feet or more shall only be provided by or under the direct supervision of arborists certified by the International Society of Arboriculture within Florida or by tree trimmers certified annually by the City. 
3.  Adequate provision shall be made, as approved by the Land Use Administrator, for the perpetual maintenance of common areas through covenants and restrictions or other means. These requirements can be achieved through either existing tree preservation (preferred) or by planting new trees. Buffer plantings shall be planted in common areas and not private lots, unless a landscape maintenance easement is granted with adequate perpetual maintenance assurances. 
4.  The owners are responsible for maintaining the approved irrigation system in an operable and efficient condition in perpetuity. 
5.  For developed lots and the improved portions of partially developed parcels, the owners are responsible for ongoing removal of all invasive plant species, as determined by the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services "Noxious Weeds" rule set forth in the Florida Administrative Code. 
6.  The City may conduct periodic inspections to assure compliance with the planting and maintenance requirements of this section. If a violation is found the City will notify the owner that they have 30 days in which to replace plants and make any other necessary repairs. Continued violation after the 30 days will be referred to the Code Enforcement Board or another enforcement mechanism will be used. 
    11.03.09.  Construction phase/acceptance of improvements. 
A.  Construction phase. 
1.  Permit. No site work shall commence until appropriate tree protection and erosion control measures are in place and approved by the Land Use Administrator. 
2.  Pre-construction meeting. Prior to any site clearing on MFR, COM, IND, and SUBD developments, all trees and areas with shrubs to remain shall be properly marked and barricaded as indicated in this Chapter. A pre-construction conference shall be scheduled with the general contractor, land clearing contractor or its designee, and City staff to review specific criteria for construction. 
3.  Erosion control. Best management practices shall be utilized. 
B.  Acceptance of improvements. 
1.  Certificate of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy may be issued until all specifications on the approved plan have been attained unless the Land Use Administrator determines that an extension of up to sixty (60) days is warranted and the required landscape and irrigation are covered by a surety given to the City on a form provided by the City, in the amount of one hundred fifty (150) percent of the estimated value of the unfinished work. 
2.  As-built drawings. Landscape and irrigation as-built drawings (as-builts) are required prior to the certificate of occupancy of the project being issued in any zoning district except for SFR, DPX, and EST. The irrigation as-builts provided to the City for future reference shall include certification by a landscape architect for location of water source, rain sensor, valves, clocks, and heads. The purpose of the irrigation as-built drawings is to provide reasonable assurance that the irrigation system is installed in accordance with City approved irrigation plans. Approximate underground pipe run locations will be acceptable in lieu of exact locations. As-builts may be bonded according to the procedure as noted in Section 11.03.09.B.1. 
( Ord. No. 2016-6 , § 2, 11-1-16) 
Sec. 11.04. - Enforcement/Remediation and Penalties. 
    11.04.01.  Cease and desist orders. The Land Use Administrator may issue a cease and desist order for a maximum of two working days whenever a violation of this subpart has occurred. Upon review of the violation, the Land Use Administrator may extend the cease and desist order until the violation is brought into compliance and all resulting fines incurred as a result of the violation are paid. 
    11.04.02.  Correction of violation/remediation. The City shall take the following actions when a violation of this chapter has occurred in addition to all other available code enforcement remedies: 
A.  Tree replacement remediation requirements . Each tree destroyed or significantly damaged contrary to the latest ANSI A-300, Part I standards, including removal or effective removal, shall be replaced on SFR/DPX properties pursuant to Table 11-4 by a desirable type of tree; and on MFR/COM and IND properties only, the total diameter inches of the protected trees removed shall be replaced with a minimum replacement tree size of six-inch caliper. On MFR/COM and IND properties a mitigation plan consistent with this Chapter must be submitted to the City for review. This plan may require, in part, contribution to the tree bank fund. If contribution is to be made into the tree bank fund, the monetary equivalent amount of such contribution shall be determined pursuant to Subsection 11.02.07. The mitigation plan shall also require mitigation of any other damage to the property. Each tree so damaged or removed shall be considered a separate violation of this LDC. 
B.  Sites cleared without approved tree surveys. If the site has been cleared and the trees have been removed from the site such that the Land Use Administrator is unable to determine with reasonable certainty the number of protected trees removed in violation of this subpart, the violation may be corrected or partially corrected by paying into the tree replacement fund. The Land Use Administrator will determine the appropriateness and numbers of tree replacements to be planted back on the lot upon inspection. No work shall continue until the tree replanting plan has been approved. The contributions assessed under this subsection shall be payable to the City within ten working days after assessment. 
C.  Clearing without construction/inspections. Permitted projects which are cleared, and upon which construction and inspection has not occurred within six months of clearing, shall be subject to mitigation per Table 11-2, as well as stabilization of all disturbed areas with sod or seed. In areas where a tree survey was accomplished, all protected trees on the survey shall be mitigated, and in areas where trees were not surveyed, the fine established by the City shall apply. Additionally, all perimeter buffer plantings, as shown on the approved plans, shall be installed and irrigated. Trees used in these buffers shall be credited towards the mitigation requirements. 
    11.04.03.  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by an administrative order of the Land Use Administrator may appeal the order to the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board in accordance with requirements in Chapter 2. 
( Ord. No. 2016-6 , § 2, 11-1-16) 
Chapter 12 - SIGNS AND ADVERTISING 

Sec. 12.01. - Generally. 
    12.01.01.  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this chapter is to ensure adequate means of communication through signage while maintaining the attractive visual appearance within the City. This chapter does not regulate content of signage or restrain the free exercise of protected speech. By specifying criteria for all signage as stated herein, this chapter is intended to serve the following purposes: 
A.  Maintain the established suburban character of the City by regulating all exterior signage in a manner which promotes low profile signage of high quality design and enhances the City's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; 
B.  Protect and maintain the visual integrity of roadway corridors within the City by establishing a maximum amount of signage on any site to avoid visual clutter; 
C.  Protect motorists from visual distractions, obstructions, and hazards by regulating the location of signs; 
D.  Enhance the appearance of the physical environment by requiring that signage be designed to complement the architecture of the structure which the signage is intended to identify, and sited in a manner which is sensitive to the existing natural environment; 
E.  Allow signage that satisfies the visibility, identification, and communication needs of the local business community; 
F.  Foster civic pride and community spirit by maximizing the positive impact of development; 
G.  Establish procedures and regulations for the construction and maintenance of signs, removal of nonconforming signs, variances, and enforcement of these regulations; 
H.  Improve pedestrian and traffic safety; 
I.  Minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property; 
J.  Lessen the visual clutter that may otherwise be caused by the proliferation, improper placement, illumination, animation, excessive height, and excessive size (area) of signs which compete for the attention of pedestrian and vehicular traffic; 
K.  Categorize signs based upon the function that they serve and tailor the regulation of signs based upon their function; 
L.  Preclude signs from conflicting with the principal permitted use of the site and adjoining sites; 
M.  Except to the extent expressly preempted by state or federal law, ensure that signs are constructed, installed, and maintained in a safe and satisfactory manner, and protect the public from unsafe signs; 
N.  Protect property values by precluding to the maximum extent possible sign-types that create a nuisance to the occupancy or use of other properties as a result of their size, height, illumination, brightness, or movement; 
O.  Regulate the appearance and design of signs in a manner that promotes and enhances the beautification of the City and that complements the natural surroundings in recognition of this City's reliance on its natural surroundings and beautification efforts in retaining economic advantage for its resort community, as well as for its major subdivisions, shopping centers, and industrial parks; and 
P.  Provide the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign regulations. 
    12.01.02.  Applicability. These regulations apply to signs within residential and nonresidential areas. Signs shall be erected, placed, established, painted, created, and maintained in the City only in conformance with the regulations, procedures, exemptions, and other requirements of this chapter and pursuant to City standards and the Florida Building Code. 
    12.01.03.  Effect. The effect of this chapter is to prohibit all signs not expressly allowed in this Code, except as approved through the variance process established herein and in Chapter 2. 
    12.01.04.  Definitions. Words and phrases used in this chapter are defined in Chapter 14 (Glossary). 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, § 59, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 12.02. - Sign Permits. 
    12.02.01.  Permit required. 
A.  It is prohibited and unlawful for any person to erect, construct, alter, or relocate within the corporate City, any sign without first obtaining a sign permit, except as otherwise specified in this chapter. Applications shall be filed in accordance with City standards. 
B.  The owner of each sign shall obtain a separate sign permit and shall be compliant with an approved signage program as described in Subsection 12.02.02. 
C.  When considering the placement of freestanding signs, the Land Use Administrator shall consider the location of public utilities, sidewalks, and future street widening. 
D.  The sign permit application shall be reviewed for a determination of whether the proposed sign meets the applicable requirements of this section and any applicable zoning law. The review of a completed sign permit application shall be completed within ten calendar days. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, §§ 60, 61, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 12.03. - Exempt and Prohibited Signs. 
    12.03.01.  Exempt signs. The following signs shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter; however, they shall meet all other code requirements, including applicable construction regulations, and electrical permits as determined by the adopted electrical code: 
A.  For each detached dwelling unit in a residential district, flags not greater than 15 square feet in sign area may be displayed. For each parcel in multifamily residential district and in a nonresidential district, three flags not greater than 24 square feet in sign area (each) may be displayed; 
B.  One free expression sign four square feet or less in sign area for each parcel within the City with the written permission of the property owner. 
C.  Signs required by federal or state law; 
D.  A sign (except a window sign which shall be subject to the provisions of this section) located entirely inside the premises of a building or enclosed space; 
E.  A motor vehicle sign, other than a prohibited vehicle sign or signs, as set forth in Subsection 12.03.02; 
F.  Traffic-control devices required or allowed by the Florida Department of Transportation Traffic Control Manual; 
G.  The change of copy on permitted manually changeable copy signs; 
H.  For 911 and emergency response systems, street address signs and residential mailboxes. For each parcel within the City, one attached wall street-address sign shall be displayed. For parcels in residential use, the street address shall not exceed two square feet in sign copy area. For each parcel in nonresidential use, the street address sign shall not exceed four square feet in sign copy area. In addition to the street address signs, each residence in the City with a freestanding mailbox shall be allowed a sign with the address of the property affixed to the mailbox if the sign is no larger than one side of the mailbox. 
I.  For 911 and emergency response systems, signs which identify the occupant. For each residence, business or other occupancy within the City, one attached wall sign may be displayed. For residences, the occupant identification signs shall not exceed two square feet in sign copy area. For any nonresidential use, the occupant identification sign shall not exceed four square feet in sign copy area; 
J.  Machinery and equipment signs. Machinery and equipment signs shall be allowed in all districts; and 
K.  Temporary window and door signs. 
L.  Warning signs, such as "No Trespassing" and "Keep Out" measuring two square feet or less. 
    12.03.02.  Prohibited signs. It is prohibited and unlawful to erect or maintain any sign not specifically authorized by this chapter, including: 
A.  Signs that are in violation of the building code or electrical code adopted by the City. 
B.  Any sign that constitutes a traffic hazard or a detriment to traffic safety, as determined by accepted engineering standards, by reason of its size, location, movement, content, coloring, or intensity of illumination. 
C.  Specifically prohibited are signs using: 
1.  Lights or illuminations that flash, move, rotate, blink, flicker, or vary in intensity or color and stock tickers, except when required by the Federal Aviation Authority; 
2.  Bare incandescent bulbs in excess of 11 watts; 
3.  Signs that are of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or impair the vision of any motorist, cyclist, or pedestrian using or entering a public way or that are a hazard or a nuisance to occupants of any property because of glare or other characteristics; 
4.  Pursuant to state law, words and traffic control symbols which interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic, such as "stop", "look", "caution", "danger", "slow", or which violate with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD); 
5.  Signs that resemble any official sign or marker erected by any governmental agency or that by reason of position, shape, or color, would conflict with the proper functioning of any traffic sign or signal, or be of a size, location, movement, color, or illumination that may be reasonably confused with or construed as, or conceal, a traffic control device; and 
6.  Signs within ten feet of public rights-of-way or 100 feet of traffic control lights that contain red or green lights that might be confused with traffic control lights. 
D.  Nongovernmental signs attached to traffic control devices or utility poles. 
E.  Signs attached to trees. 
F.  Signs made of combustible materials that are attached to or located within 20 feet of fire escapes or firefighting equipment. 
G.  Signs that obstruct a fire escape, window, door, or other opening used as a means of ventilation, ingress, or egress. 
H.  Any type of balloon signage. 
I.  Signs that incorporate projected images. 
J.  Signs that involve the use of live animals and/or human beings. 
K.  Signs that emit audible sound, odor, or visible matter such as smoke or steam. 
L.  Signs that contain any lighting or control mechanism that causes unreasonable interference with radio, television, or other communication signals. 
M.  Signs that are painted, pasted, or printed on any curbstone, flagstone, pavement, or any portion of any sidewalk or street, except house numbers and traffic control signs. 
N.  Off-site signs, unless otherwise specifically allowed in this chapter. 
O.  Banners or signs placed across any public street, park, or property, unless specifically permitted in this chapter. 
P.  Private signs erected within any navigable waterway within the City. 
Q.  Portable signs, except as provided in this Chapter. 
R.  Roof, marquee, and pole/pylon signs. 
S.  Abandoned signs. 
T.  Signs containing statements, words, or pictures of an obscene nature. 
U.  Paper, cardboard, chalk, or white-board signs, except as allowed in this chapter. 
V.  Exposed neon signs. 
W.  Animated signs, including, flashing, undulating, swinging, rotating, or otherwise moving or scrolling signs or other decorations such as banners, pennants, ribbons, spinners, streamers, or captive balloons, or other inflatable signs, or devices designed to attract attention unless permitted as a temporary sign. 
X.  Electronic display type signs, including time and/or temperature signs, or any sign displaying any type of screen using animated or scrolling displays, such as a LED (light-emitting diode) screen or any other type of video display, even if the message is stationary; or signs displaying alternating or intermittent lights or lights of changing degrees of intensity or changes. Signs that have multiple views and objects that digitally or electronically produce color and/or black and white images similar to a television screen are prohibited. In addition, signs may not be multivision signs or display devices capable of presenting two or more separate images or ad copy sequentially by rotating multi-sided cylinders. 
Y.  Any sign or illumination that causes any direct glare into or upon any building, other than the building to which the sign may be related. 
Z.  A-frame signs, except as provided in this Chapter. 
AA.  Any sign located within a right-of-way, except as may be allowed by this chapter. 
BB.  Signs as a principal use in any zoning district, except as may be allowed by this chapter. 
CC.  Snipe signs. 
DD.  Signs mounted to fences except as permitted in this chapter. 
EE.  Parasite signs. 
FF.  Motor vehicle signs or any signs attached thereto or placed thereon subject to the following exceptions: 
1.  Any vehicle parked on private property so long as the vehicle is used regularly, is only parked while not in use, and is not intentionally parked on the private property for the sole purpose of displaying the sign on the vehicle. 
2.  Any vehicle upon which is placed a sign identifying the firm or its principal if such vehicle is one that is operated during the normal course of business; provided, however, that no such vehicle shall be routinely parked in a location for the purpose of serving as, or constituting, additional signage. 
3.  Buses, taxicabs, and similar common carrier vehicles that are licensed or certified by the City of Palm Coast, Flagler County, other governmental entities, and/or Florida Public Service Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, §§ 62-71, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 12.04. - General Sign Provisions. 
    12.04.01.  Calculating sign area. 
A.  In computing sign area, standard geometry formulas for common shapes shall be used. Common shapes shall include squares, rectangles, trapezoids, circles, and triangles. In the case of irregular shapes, the total sign area will be the area of the smallest common shape that encompasses the various components of the sign (see graphic below). 

B.  All words and components of a sign, including the support base of freestanding signs, shall be deemed to be part of a single sign. Individual words or components may be considered separate signs only if they are obviously disassociated from other components. When signs are enclosed in a border (not to include the cabinet) or highlighted by background graphics, the perimeter of such border (not to include the cabinet) or background will be used to compute sign area. Double face signs that meet the definition contained in this chapter shall be considered one sign. 
C.  The aggregate sign area of freestanding signs shall not be more than double of the proposed sign area, exclusive of the sign area, only to include architectural features. See graphics below. 

D.  The allowable size of some freestanding signs is determined based on lot frontage (i.e. the width of a site along a public street). The allowable size of some wall signs is calculated based on the building frontage (i.e. width of the building façade where the public entrance is located). 
    12.04.02.  Measuring sign height/clearance. 
A.  Freestanding sign height shall be measured from the ground elevation at the base of the sign to the highest point of the sign structure. Decorative column caps may extend up to 12 inches above the maximum height permitted. 
B.  The clearance of a projecting sign shall be measured from the bottom of the area to the ground below. 
C.  The height of a wall sign shall be measured from the grade level of the base of the building below the sign to the top of the sign. The top of the area shall be no higher than the roof eave line. 
    12.04.03.  Construction and maintenance requirements. 
A.  Except for banners, flags, temporary signs, and window signs conforming in all respects with the requirements of this Code, all signs shall be constructed of durable materials and shall be permanently attached to the ground, a building, or another structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall, frame, or structure. 
B.  All signs and their supports, braces, guys, and anchors; electrical parts and lighting fixtures; and all painted and display areas shall be maintained in good structural condition, in compliance with all building and electrical codes and in conformance with this Code at all times. Damaged faces or structural members shall be promptly replaced. 
C.  Vegetation around, in front of, behind, and at the base of any sign shall be maintained and neatly trimmed to conform to City landscape maintenance standards. 
D.  All signs shall maintain a minimum clearance from electric power lines of ten feet horizontally and 15 feet vertically or as otherwise directed by the utility provider. 
E.  No sign structure or framework may be exposed by removal of sign faces or advertising copy for a period in excess of 15 days. 
    12.04.04.  Existing signs. 
A.  Modifications to signs. Modifications to signs shall not result in a sign that violates the requirements of this Code. The modification of sign height or size requires sign permit approval. 
B.  Permits not required for change of sign copy. No permit or permit fee shall be required for changing the copy of a sign, as long as no changes are made to the sign's height, size, location, or structure. This exemption shall also apply to any change of copy on a changeable copy sign. However, a change in sign color requires approval from the Land Use Administrator. 
C.  Nonconforming signs. Signs lawfully existing prior to the effective date of this Code may be continued although their size, location, or other physical attributes do not conform to this chapter. 
D.  Loss of legal nonconforming status of a sign. A sign loses its legal nonconforming status and shall be considered in violation of this Code if one or more of the following occurs: 
1.  The sign is structurally altered in any way, including increasing its height, weight, width, depth, or enlarging it in any manner, except for normal maintenance or repair, which tends to or makes the sign less in compliance with the requirements of this chapter than it was before the alteration. 
2.  The sign is destroyed to such an extent that more than 60 percent of the upright supports of a sign structure are physically damaged such that normal repair practices of the industry would call for, in the case of wooden sign structures, replacement of the broken supports and, in the case of a metal sign structure, replacement of at least 25 percent of the length above ground of each broken, bent, or twisted support. A sign will not be considered "destroyed" within the meaning of this section where the destruction is caused by vandalism or other criminal or tortious act. 
3.  Signs determined to be abandoned under the provisions of Subsection 12.04.04.E of this section. 
E.  Abandonment. All nonconforming signs and sign messages shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises upon which an on-site sign is located when the business it advertises is no longer conducted. Conforming signs shall have the copy area face removed and replaced with a blank face. Said signs on vacant or unoccupied property must be removed after 30 days. Any sign face which advertises a service no longer conducted or product no longer sold upon the property must be removed after 30 days. If the owner or lessee fails to remove the sign or sign message, the sign or sign message shall be deemed in violation of this Code. 
F.  Signs subject to immediate removal. Any sign erected without a required building permit is unlawful and must be removed by the owner thereof. 
G.  Off-site signs. Existing off-site signs may not be converted to electronic display type signs. 
    12.04.05.  Sign design. Freestanding signs shall be aesthetically compatible with the principle structure. 
    12.04.06.  Lighting of signs. 
A.  Any lighting used to illuminate signs shall be shielded such that the light source cannot be seen from abutting roads or properties. 
B.  No unshielded light source may be visible from the edge of the public right-of-way at a height of three feet. 
C.  Sign lighting shall not be designed or located to cause confusion with traffic lights. 
D.  Illumination by floodlights or spotlights is permissible if none of the light emitted shines directly onto an adjoining property or into the eyes of the motorist using or entering public streets. 
E.  Illuminated signs shall have luminance no greater than 300 foot candles. 
F.  Illuminated signs shall not have lighting mechanisms that project more than 18 inches perpendicularly from any surface of the sign over public space. 
G.  Backlit awnings are prohibited. 
    12.04.07.  Sign location criteria. The following location standards shall apply to all signs, unless stated otherwise in this chapter. 
A.  Freestanding signs. 
1.  Freestanding signs shall only be allowed on sites with a frontage of 50 feet or more. 
2.  Unless specifically noted in this chapter, signs shall be located wholly within the premises and shall maintain a minimum setback of ten feet from all property lines. However, no sign shall be allowed within an easement not designated to include signs, or within a sight triangle. 
3.  No freestanding sign shall be located closer than 15 feet from any other freestanding sign, on or off the premises. On corner lots, the freestanding signs on each frontage shall be at least 100 feet apart, measured along the rights-of-way. This requirement does not apply to temporary signs. 
4.  Freestanding signs shall include landscaping around the base of the sign as required in Chapter 11. The plant material shall be selected to complement and enhance the sign. 
5.  Signs in nonresidential districts shall not be located closer than 50 feet from a residential zoning district except signs advertising uses allowed outright or by special exception in that residential district and conforming to the section of this chapter relating to that use. 
B.  Other signs. 
1.  Wall signs shall not exceed 75 percent of the width of the wall where they are placed, except if business is occupying more than one unit and no other wall signs will be placed on the adjoining unit(s) or if there are architectural elements separating facades where signs would be located. 
2.  Wall signs shall not cover windows and shall preserve the architectural integrity of the building. 
3.  No wall sign shall extend above the roofline except where an exterior parapet wall projects above the roofline, in which case, such sign may not extend above the top edge of the parapet. 
4.  Wall signs on multistory buildings are allowed above the first floor. 
5.  Wall signs shall not be allowed within 50 feet facing a residential zoning district. 
6.  A projecting sign shall be erected only on a wall of a building, and shall not project out more than four feet. Projecting signs over a parking space, travel lane, or a driveway shall have a minimum clearance from finished grade of 14 feet to the bottom of the sign. 
7.  Projecting signs that extend over a sidewalk or walkway shall provide a clearance of eight feet between the finished grade and the bottom of the sign. 
8.  Awning lettering shall be placed on the awning valance and not on the vertical arc or diagonal portion of the awning. 
9.  Directory signs may be attached to a wall or be freestanding, but shall not be located within 50 feet of any public right-of-way line. 
    12.04.08.  Flagpoles. Flagpoles are allowed subject to the following conditions: 
A.  One flagpole is allowed on each parcel in the City. 
B.  Maximum pole height shall be 30 feet in nonresidential districts, and 25 feet in residential districts. 
C.  All poles shall be ground mounted. 
D.  All flagpoles shall have a minimum five-foot setback from the property lines. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, §§ 72-78, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 12.05. - Permitted Permanent Signs. 
    This section establishes the type, location, and size of signs allowed within residential and nonresidential zoned districts. 
12.05.01.  Residential zoning districts. 
A.  Entrance signs. Residential subdivisions and residential multitenant developments may erect a development entrance sign meeting the following requirements: 
1.  Number of signs. One double-sided freestanding sign or two identical single-sided signs, one on each side of the entrance, are allowed at each entrance to the development (excluding emergency access entrances). 
2.  Maximum sign area. The total sign area for each entrance shall not exceed 32 square feet. 
3.  Sign location. Signs shall be located on a tract, easement, or parcel designated for signage purposes. Such tract or parcel shall be owned and maintained by a common property association and shall be located at the entrance of the subdivision or multitenant complex. 
4.  Maximum height. Maximum sign height shall be seven feet. 
B.  Signs for nonresidential uses. Except for those signs and sign-types allowed in residential and residentially-zoned districts in accordance with Subsection 12.05.01.A, no additional permanent signs or sign-types shall be allowed for permitted nonresidential uses in residential or residentially zoned districts, except for the following sign-types: 
1.  Freestanding sign. One double-sided freestanding sign meeting the following: 
a.  The total sign area shall not exceed 24 square feet. 
b.  Signs shall not exceed six feet in height. 
2.  Wall sign. Nonresidential uses permitted in residential districts pursuant to Table 3-2 of the LDC are allowed one wall sign per business. Such sign shall be included in the sign area calculation noted in Subsection 12.05.01.B.1. No other signs are permitted on the building, except signs to identify the number and address of the property. 
C.  Directional signs. Directional signs are allowed in residential district subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Directional signs to assist onsite vehicular traffic flow shall be low-profile signs not to exceed three feet in height above grade and four square feet of surface area, with the legend to be affixed thereon to include arrows and the words "enter" or "exit" as appropriate. 
2.  All directional signs shall be of consistent size, font, and color. 
12.05.02.  Nonresidential zoning districts. The following regulations shall apply to signs within nonresidential zoning districts, however electronic game promotion signs shall also comply with Chapter 16, Article IX, in the City of Palm Coast Code of Ordinances and F.S. ch. 166. 
A.  Subdivision entrance signs. 
1.  Number of signs. One double-sided freestanding sign or two identical single-sided freestanding signs, one on each side of the entrance, are allowed at each entrance to the development (excluding emergency access entrances). 
2.  Maximum sign area. The sign shall only display the name of the subdivision and shall not exceed a sign area of 32 square feet. 
3.  Sign location. Signs shall be located on a tract or parcel or easement designated for signage purposes. Such tract or parcel shall be owned and maintained by a common property association and shall be located at the entrance of the subdivision or multitenant complex. 
4.  Maximum height. Maximum sign height shall be seven feet. A maximum of 12 inches cap on a column is allowed in addition to the maximum sign height. 
B.  Freestanding sign. Freestanding signs are allowed provided they meet the following requirements: 
1.  Single use developments. 
a.  Number of signs. One freestanding sign is allowed per lot frontage. 
b.  Maximum sign area. Thirty-two square feet for the first 100 feet of lot frontage, plus one square foot for each four lineal feet thereafter, to a maximum size of 96 square feet for each sign. 
c.  Maximum height. Maximum sign height is seven feet. 
2.  Multitenant development. Multitenant developments such as shopping centers, mixed use developments, and office parks shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Number of signs. The main development/center and each outparcel may have one freestanding sign per frontage on a public street. The main development/center sign shall identify the center. Center name may be placed in the aggregate sign area of the sign and not counted towards the sign area. 
b.  Maximum sign area. The maximum sign area permitted for freestanding signs for the main development shall be calculated based on the street frontage for the entire development site (including outparcels), using the formula noted above for single use signs. The total size allowed may be divided among the center and the various outparcels fronting the street located within the master development site with a development order. The development order shall specify how the sign area will be divided amongst those qualifying and proposing to use a freestanding sign. Developments that do not have outparcels or outparcels that are not part of the development order sign criteria shall calculate the maximum sign area using the formula noted above as a single use sign. 
c.  Maximum height. Maximum sign height shall be seven feet. 
d.  Sign plan. 
1.  At master site plan application, developments shall include a conceptual wall sign plan showing consistency between architectural elements, designs, and themes for freestanding, wall, and where applicable, directory and directional signs throughout the planned development. The conceptual sign plan shall contain sufficient detail to address sign pattern, style, color, illumination, and locations(s). To encourage flexibility in the overall design of the master site plan project, up to 20 percent of total wall sign allowance on the street front facade can be transferred to the freestanding sign provided the request is depicted in a sign plan, the total size of the freestanding sign does not exceed 115 square feet, and is included in the development order. All other signs shall be in compliance with Chapter 12 of the LDC. 
2.  At site plan application, multitenant developments shall include a sign plan for all freestanding, wall, and where applicable, directory and directional signs throughout the development that identifies sign style and locations consistent with the architectural theme and architectural integrity of the proposed building(s). The sign plan shall be compatible with other sites within a master site plan development. The sign plan shall be part of the site plan development order with approved elevation plans and site plan showing the sign locations to include visual details of sign patterns, style, illuminations, and landscaping. Signs shall be in compliance with Chapter 12 of the LDC. 
a.  Wall signs. Wall signs with similar style sign casings and/or framings or architectural designated locations and illuminations are encouraged. Wall signs may have minor adjustments in location and size due to unit resizing or unit combining, but the overall architectural integrity of the building(s) and theme of the sign plan shall be maintained. 
b.  Freestanding signs. Freestanding signs are to be compatible with the proposed architectural design and landscaping. 
C.  Wall signs. Wall signs are allowed provided they meet the requirements of Subsection 12.04.07 (Sign Location Criteria) and the following requirements: 
1.  Maximum sign area. Each individual business having a separate building entrance shall be permitted one wall sign per street frontage including awning and projecting signs. If the business has a customer entrance on a separate building elevation not facing a street, an additional wall sign meeting the maximum sign area requirements may be permitted for that elevation. Signs shall be subject to the following maximum square footages: 
Table 12-1: Permitted Maximum Wall Sign Area in a Nonresidential District 
Business Frontage (Linear Feet) Area (Square Feet) 25 or less 32 26-50 50 51-100 75 101-150 90 151-200 110 201 or more 150  
2.  Large-scale retailers. Large-scale retailers, as defined in Chapter 14, may have one major wall sign and three minor wall signs. The major wall sign shall not exceed the maximum square footage depicted in Table 12-1. The minor wall signs shall not exceed 32 square feet each. 
3.  Canopies. No additional sign area is permitted for canopies over fuel operations. However, permitted wall sign area for the principal structure or building may be transferred to the canopy, as long as the canopy signage is only situated on the sides of the canopy facing a right-of-way. This does not apply to required signage pertaining to safety or hazardous situations. 
4.  Window signage. Window signage, including temporary signs, shall not exceed 35 percent of the total glass surface area of any one building elevation. 
D.  Directory signage. Directory signage shall comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Sign area for each sign cannot exceed a maximum size of 24 square feet and not more than two signs per building. 
2.  If freestanding signs are used, the sign height shall be limited to six feet. 
3.  All directory signs shall be consistent with building aesthetics. 
E.  Under-canopy sign. Each tenant within a multitenant development shall be allowed one under-canopy sign. The under-canopy sign area shall not be counted toward the maximum wall sign area allowed. The sign shall display the name of the business only. 
1.  The sign shall be no larger than six square feet. 
2.  The sign shall be rigidly supported by a decorative chain or bracket and the bottom of the sign shall have minimum clearance of eight feet above the sidewalk. 
3.  The sign shall be designed aesthetically compatible with the principal structure. 
F.  Directional signage. In addition to the other types of signs allowed on a site, directional signs are allowed subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Directional signs to assist onsite vehicular traffic flow shall be low-profile signs not to exceed three feet in height above grade and four square feet of surface area, with the legend to be affixed thereon to include arrows and the words "enter" or "exit" as appropriate. 
2.  All directional signs shall be of consistent size, font, and color. 
G.  Flagpoles. Refer to Subsection 12.04.08. 
H.  Drive-through menu board and speakers. Drive-through restaurants are allowed to display menu boards subject to the following provisions: 
1.  Each restaurant may display up to two freestanding menu signs per drive-through, which shall be adjacent to and oriented toward the drive-through area. 
2.  Menu boards may be a maximum of 30 square feet, with a maximum height of six feet. 
I.  Wayfinding sign. May only be installed by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, §§ 79-87, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2012-3, § 5, 5-1-12) 
Sec. 12.06. - Temporary Signs. 
    12.06.01.  Construction site signs. Construction site signs, which may include temporary subdivision signs, are permitted for each project as follows: 
A.  Number. One general sign per site. 
B.  Sign area. The maximum sign square footage for single-family and duplex residential lots shall not exceed six square feet. The maximum sign area allowed for other uses is based on parcel size as follows: 
Table 12-2: Permitted Construction Sign Area 
Parcel Size Maximum Area Less than 1 acre 12 sq. ft. 1.1 acres to 10 acres 32 sq. ft. More than 10 acres 48 sq. ft  
C.  Sign height. Seven feet maximum. 
D.  Setback. 
1.  A minimum of five feet from property line abutting any street. 
2.  A minimum of 25 feet from side property lines or equidistant between side property lines. 
E.  Duration. Construction site signs shall not be erected prior to the issuance of a building permit and shall be removed within three calendar days after issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Such signs shall be removed immediately if construction has not begun after 60 calendar days from issuance of a building permit or if construction is halted thereafter for a period of more than 60 calendar days. 
    12.06.02.  Garage sale signs. Residentially zoned properties may display up to one garage sale sign per street frontage. The sign(s) shall not exceed four square feet each and shall be displayed on the premises of which the sale is to be held. The sign shall not be located within the rights-of-way. 
    12.06.03.  Political signs. Political campaign signs or posters are permitted in all zoning districts and shall comply with the following: 
A.  Posting of political signs. 
1.  Placement of political signs on private property may occur only with the expressed consent of the property owner. 
2.  It is prohibited and unlawful to place a political sign on or within public rights-of-way or public property. 
3.  Setback shall be two feet from public rights-of-way and 15 feet from side property lines and shall not be located within any sight triangle. 
4.  Political signs placed in residential districts shall not exceed six square feet in size and shall not exceed five feet in height. 
5.  Political signs placed in nonresidential districts shall not exceed 16 square feet in size and shall not exceed ten feet in height. 
B.  Removal of political signs. 
1.  Signs shall be removed within 15 calendar days after the election or referendum to which it pertains. 
2.  The removal of all political signs shall be the joint and severally responsibility of the owner of the property upon which the sign is placed and the candidate for whom such sign was placed. 
    12.06.04.  Real estate signs. 
A.  Number of signs. A maximum of one sign shall be allowed per site frontage, except that large parcels with a site frontage of 500 feet or more are allowed a maximum of two signs per frontage, at least 250 feet apart. Properties represented by more than one real estate office must utilize the same sign. The total sign area, height, and location shall not exceed that permitted under Table 12-3. 
B.  Sign area. An on-site sale or rental sign that is not illuminated is allowed for each street frontage. The sale or rental sign shall comply with the following: 
Table 12-3: Permitted Maximum Real Estate Sign Area 
Type of Zoning District Maximum Sign Area Per Sign Single family and duplex residential areas Six sq. ft. per street frontage Residential areas for buildings with three or more units 16 sq. ft. per street frontage Nonresidential areas 24 sq. ft. per street frontage  
C.  Sign height. A maximum height of five feet in residential districts and seven feet in nonresidential districts is allowed. 
D.  Setback. Two feet from public rights-of-way and 15 feet from side property lines. 
    12.06.05.  Model home and sales offices. A model home is permitted to have one on-site, ground mounted, nonilluminated, freestanding sign in accordance with the following dimensional limitations: 
A.  Maximum sign area of 24 square feet. 
B.  Maximum height of four feet. 
C.  Setback a minimum of two feet from the right-of-way and located outside of the sight triangle as defined in Chapter 5. 
D.  Model homes are allowed to have one "open" flag that must be located within two feet of the freestanding sign, provided, however, that the sign may only be displayed during the model home's hours of operation. 
E.  Model homes are not permitted to have additional permanent or temporary outdoor signage. Signage not permitted includes, but is not limited to, temporary signs advertising an open house or model home, banners, pennants, streamers, and "A-frame" signs. 
    12.06.06.  Banners/miscellaneous temporary signs. Banners or other miscellaneous temporary signs are allowed under the following conditions: 
A.  Number of signs. No more than one banner/sign that is not illuminated shall be allowed per business frontage and no more than three signs per multitenant center at one time. 
B.  Duration. 
1.  In conjunction with a grand opening for a new business or use in a nonresidential zoning district, the banner/sign may be allowed to remain for a period not to exceed 30 consecutive days and must be utilized within the first three months of the new business or use. 
2.  In conjunction with seasonal promotions, the sign may be displayed for the duration of the sale, as authorized in Subsection 4.19.04. 
3.  In conjunction with a special event, the sign may be displayed for the duration of the event as authorized by Subsection 4.19.05. The temporary sign or banner may be installed up to 30 calendar days prior to the event and shall be removed no later than 48 hours following the closing of the event. 
4.  No more than three permits may be issued for each site per calendar year. 
C.  Sign area. The maximum sign area shall be 32 square feet per sign, unless as otherwise specified in this Code. 
D.  Banners. Temporary banners may be allowed upon issuance of a banner permit based on guidelines provided by resolution or other action by the City Council. 
E.  Temporary municipal and government signs. Temporary signs relating to municipal public purposes on City-owned property when installed to assist the public in locating City-sponsored programs or events shall be allowed. 
    12.06.07.  A-frame signs. 
A.  Permissible zoning districts. 
1.  A-frame signs are permitted in the following nonresidential zoning districts: 
Neighborhood Commercial (COM-1) 
General Commercial (COM-2) 
High Intensity Commercial (COM-3) 
Limited Office (OFC-1) 
General Office (OFC-2) 
2.  A-frame signs may be proposed as part of a nonresidential component of a Master Planned Development (MPD) District. 
B.  Criteria for A-frame signs. 
1.  Maximum number allowed. A business with its own separate building entrance is allowed no more than one A-frame sign. 
2.  Location. 
a.  No sign may block a business entrance and/or pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Sign placement shall not interfere with the American with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements. 
b.  The sign(s) shall not be placed in landscaped areas. 
c.  The sign(s) shall be located within ten feet of the business entrance which it serves but in no event shall the sign be located beyond the width of the business frontage. 
d.  No A-frame sign shall be secured, tethered, or installed on traffic devices, utility equipment, trees, furniture, poles, or any other fixture. 
e.  Sign(s) shall be located on the ground/sidewalk. 
f.  Sign(s) shall not be located within sight triangles or in a manner that obstructs visibility to vehicular traffic. 
g.  Sign(s) shall be displayed outside only during business hours. 
3.  Construction and maintenance. 
a.  When the adjacent sidewalk is less than six feet in width, the overall dimensions shall not exceed two feet wide by three feet in height; when the adjacent sidewalk is six feet or greater in width, the overall dimensions shall not exceed three feet wide by four feet in height. 
b.  No sign shall have moving parts, illumination, or attachments. 
c.  The sign shall have no more than two sides and shall be constructed of finished all-weather materials. 
d.  Sign(s) must be properly anchored (temporarily) or weighted against the wind to prevent safety hazards. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, §§ 88-92, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 12.07. - Variances. 
    12.07.01.  Review criteria. The Planning and Land Development Regulation Board may grant variances from the regulations contained in this Code, in accordance with Chapter 2, and based only upon the following criteria: 
A.  To permit a setback for a sign that is less than the required setback, or 
B.  To permit the area or height of a sign to be increased by up to 25 percent of the maximum height or area allowed. 
    12.07.02.  Review findings. The Planning and Land Development Regulation Board may grant one of the above two types of variances authorized by this section only if it finds there are special physical conditions that: 
A.  Are due to the exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape, or topography of the premises on which an activity is located, and 
B.  Prevent the activity from earning a reasonable return as compared with other activities in the area. 
    12.07.03.  Scheduling of public hearing. An application for said variance shall be scheduled for public hearing within 30 working days of the date the application is deemed complete by the City. 
Sec. 12.08. - Appeals to Planning and Land Development Regulation Board. 
    12.08.01.  Procedure. 
A.  Whenever it is alleged that there has been an error in an order, action, decision, determination, or requirement by the Land Use Administrator in the enforcement and application of any provision contained within this section or any other provision of this Code pertaining to sign permits (including any allegation that the Land Use Administrator has failed to act within applicable time frames), the aggrieved party may file a written appeal with the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board. 
B.  The written appeal shall be filed with the Planning and Development Regulation Board within 30 calendar days of the date of the alleged error. The written appeal shall describe the alleged error and the applicable provisions of the Code pertaining to the Land Use Administrator's order, action, decision, determination, requirement, or failure to act. 
C.  The Planning and Land Development Regulation Board shall hold a hearing within 45 calendar days following receipt of the written appeal, not counting the day of the receipt and not counting any Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday which falls upon the first or the 45th day after the date of receipt. 
D.  The Planning and Land Development Regulation Board shall render a written decision within ten working days following the hearing. 
E.  If the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board does not render a decision within ten working days following the hearing, the sign permit shall be deemed denied. 
F.  Failure to appeal the decision regarding a sign application by the Land Use Administrator to the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board shall not be deemed a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. The applicant may choose to proceed directly to a judicial action once the sign application has been denied by the Land Use Administrator. 
G.  If an administrative appeal is filed by the applicant, and the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board fails to meet within the prescribed time, the appeal will be deemed denied, and the decision of the Land Use Administrator regarding the sign application will be deemed a final decision subject to immediate appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
H.  Once a decision is appealed to the Planning and Land Development Regulation Board, the Land Use Administrator shall take no further action on the matter pending the Board's decision, except for unsafe signs that present an immediate and serious danger to the public, in which case the City may pursue any proper legal remedy available to it. 
I.  The Planning and Land Development Regulation Board shall comply with all applicable rules of conduct and procedures that pertain to zoning and that are not inconsistent with the provisions in this chapter. 
    12.08.02.  Appellate decisions deemed final, subject to review. The appellate decisions, pursuant to Subsection 12.08.01 above, shall be deemed final, subject to judicial review by the Circuit Court of the Seventh Judicial Circuit in and for Flagler County, Florida, filed in accordance with the requirements of law, seeking such appropriate remedy as may be available. 
Sec. 12.09. - Substitution of Noncommercial Speech for Commercial Speech. 
    Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter or Code to the contrary, any sign erected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or Code may, at the option of the owner, contain a noncommercial message in lieu of a commercial message and the noncommercial copy may be substituted at any time in place of the commercial copy. The noncommercial message (copy) may occupy the entire sign face or any portion thereof. The sign face may be changed from commercial to noncommercial messages, or from one noncommercial message to another noncommercial message, as frequently as desired by the owner of the sign, provided that the size, height, setback, and other dimensional criteria contained in this chapter and Code have been satisfied. 
Sec. 12.10. - Content Neutrality as to Sign Message (Viewpoint). 
    Notwithstanding anything in this chapter or Code to the contrary, no sign or sign structure shall be subject to any limitation based upon the content (viewpoint) of the message contained on such sign or displayed on such sign structure. 
Sec. 12.11. - Severability. 
    12.11.01.  Generally. If any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this chapter is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this chapter and Code. 
    12.11.02.  Severability where less speech results. Without diminishing or limiting in any way the declaration of severability set forth above in Section 12.11, or elsewhere in this chapter, this Code, or any adopting ordinance, if any part, section subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this chapter is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this chapter or Code, even if such severability would result in a situation where there would be less speech, whether by subjecting previously exempt signs to permitting or otherwise. 
    12.11.03.  Severability of provisions pertaining to prohibited signs. Without diminishing or limiting in any way the declaration of severability set forth above in Subsection 12.11.01, or elsewhere in this chapter, this Code, or any adopting ordinance, if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this chapter or any other law is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this chapter that pertains to prohibited signs, including specifically those signs and sign-types prohibited and not allowed under Subsection 12.03.02 of this chapter. Furthermore, if any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this chapter is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this chapter and Code. 
    12.11.04.  Severability of prohibition on off-site signs. If any part, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, phrase, clause, term, or word of this chapter and/or any other Code provisions and/or laws as declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect the prohibition on off-site signs as contained in this chapter and Code. 
Chapter 13 - ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN REGULATIONS 

Sec. 13.01. - Purpose and Applicability. 
    13.01.01.  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to create and maintain a positive community image and identity by requiring architectural treatments that enhance the visual appearance and character of the City. 
    13.01.02.  Intent. This chapter is intended to supplement City development regulations with specific design requirements that result in quality architecture, which emphasize pedestrian scale and recognize local character. 
    13.01.03.  Applicability. The provisions of this chapter apply to new development and construction, redevelopment and alterations to existing buildings in the City. In addition, stricter requirements are provided for the Gateway Overlay Zone and the Palm Coast Parkway Overlay Zone, as set forth in Chapters 3 and 4. 
A.  Mobile homes that bear a Department of Housing and Urban Development seal are not subject to the architectural design regulations contained in this chapter. 
B.  Manufactured dwellings and mobile homes that bear a Florida Department of Community Affairs seal shall meet the design regulations as residential uses. 
Sec. 13.02. - General Requirements. 
    The following architectural design requirements shall apply to all new development and construction, redevelopment, and alterations to existing structures within the City. Alterations shall include any change, addition, or modification including, but not limited to, repainting, that affects any of the elements governed by these architectural design criteria. 
13.02.01.  Architectural styles. The City has identified several recognized architectural styles for the design of buildings within the City. One of the following styles shall be used in the design of a nonresidential building. Applicable styles include Spanish Mission, Mediterranean, Italianate, Colonial, Neoclassical, Greek Revival, Modern, Craftsman, and Florida Vernacular. 
13.02.02.  Green building. Green building principles related to energy efficiency, resource protection, and environmental protection (e.g. reusable building materials, light colored roof materials, living roofs to treat stormwater, etc.) set forth by agencies such as, but not limited to, the United States Green Building Council and similar agencies are encouraged. 
13.02.03.  Coastal building visual relief. Buildings within 300 feet of the Intracoastal Waterway shoreline shall be oriented to provide one foot of unobstructed view to the waterfront for each three feet of view obstructed by the building. 
13.02.04.  Garages. Garages that are detached from the principal structure shall be designed and constructed so that the roof and exterior walls of the garage are of similar architecture, materials, and colors as the exterior of the principal structure. 
13.02.05.  Accessory structures. The roof, exterior walls, and exterior colors of accessory structures, excluding prefabricated sheds, shall be compatible with the design of the principal structure. Accessory structures must meet the requirements as set forth in Chapters 3 and 4. 
13.02.06.  Exterior colors. Colors of walls, roofing, and accents such as trim and doors, shall be coordinated to achieve a visually and aesthetically positive effect consistent with sound and generally accepted land development principles and practices. While varieties of natural and painted colors are permitted, certain color principles shall be followed. The range of roofing materials and colors allowed for residential and nonresidential uses shall be as described in this section. 
A.  Exceptions. 
1.  The exterior colors of all residential, multi-family and nonresidential buildings shall be regulated according to this section with the exception of properties zoned MPD which are exempt from Subsection 13.02.06.B.1. 
2.  Unpainted natural stone, brick, roof material or natural appearing substitutes are excluded from exterior color requirements. 
3.  Garage doors that are not painted but are a varnished or stained natural wood with natural wood colors and visible wood grain, or other garage door materials similar in appearance and color of natural wood garage doors with wood-like texturing and visible wood grain surfacing, are excluded from Subsection 13.02.06.B.1. 
4.  Front entry doors are excluded from the exterior color requirements Section 13.02.06 except for Subsection B.3., prohibited colors. 
B.  Measurement of color. Building walls or garage door colors, excluding accent colors shall be determined using the Light Reflectance Value (LRV) index or an equivalent methodology. 
1.  Wall or garage door colors. 
a.  Light pastel colors and white. Acceptable light pastel colors and white shall have LRV of 80 or greater. 
b.  Earth tones. Earth tones include shades of brown, brown-taupe or sandy-taupe, beige, terra cotta, olive, sage and gray. Acceptable earth tone shades shall have a LRV of 25 or greater. 
c.  Garage doors shall be pastel or earth tone colors. However, earth tones colors may have a LRV less than 80, and may include black. 
2.  Accent colors. 
a.  Accent colors are all colors except prohibited colors as stated in Subsection B.3. of this section. 
b.  Accent colors shall only be applied to architectural elements except garage doors. Architectural elements may include but are not limited to, doors shutters, keystones, quoins, awnings, window trims, door frames, window sills, cornices, and banding. 
c.  Accent colors shall not exceed 20 percent of any one elevation. 
3.  Prohibited colors. 
a.  Fluorescent colors shall be prohibited on all exterior surfaces. Neon lighting is not included within the term "fluorescent." 
b.  Colors that are deemed loud, clashing or garish, as determined by the Land Use Administrator, shall be prohibited. 
c.  Residential and multi-family are prohibited from using any shade of purple, fuchsia, magenta, and orange that does not meet the pastel requirements of Subsection 13.02.06.B.1 as an accent color. 
4.  Colors without a LRV. If the LRV of a color sample is not available, the Land Use Administrator shall compare the color sample to a color chip with a known LRV and determine whether the sample is lighter, darker, or equivalent LRV. 
C.  Building color combination. 
1.  Wall color combinations. 
a.  For residential buildings, one color shall be selected for the main surface of the building, and a compatible second wall color may be used for recessed front entryway walls. 
b.  Multi-family and non-residential buildings may vary wall color vertically between building masses, horizontally between stories, or a combination thereof, but no more than three colors can be used per building. 
2.  Accent color combinations. Accent colors should offer some contrast, and can therefore be darker, lighter, brighter, or richer than wall colors. However, the main consideration in choosing accent colors shall be compatibility with the wall color. Two accent colors shall be allowed per building. Accent colors shall complement the building's wall color. 
D.  Roof color. Roof color shall be compatible with the selected wall color. Roofs may be in the color of natural roofing materials (such as slate or clay) or may be finished in shades of gray, galvanized silver, copper, brown, green, red, black, blue, or white, except that a roof made of copper may be left in its natural color. Lighter colored roof materials, such as white or allowable galvanized metal, are strongly recommended for energy efficiency purposes. 
E.  Faux building features. It is prohibited to paint faux features or elements of a structure such as, but not limited to, windows, doors, shutters, or flower boxes. 
F.  Repainting. 
a.  When repairs are being made to the building's exterior wall surface, the wall may either be repainted in the same color or the building shall be painted in compliance with the LDC. 
b.  When repainting any portion of the building's exterior, the building shall either be painted in the same color or the building shall be painted in compliance with the LDC. 
13.02.07.  Exterior material/finishes. 
A.  Exterior walls. Exterior wall finish materials shall include stucco, stone, natural brick, finished concrete, split-faced block, wood, or other material including, but not limited to, synthetic materials similar in appearance and durability to those previously named. Finishes of exposed concrete block or corrugated metal are prohibited. 
B.  Roofs. Roof material visible from the ground shall consist of concrete, slate, or clay tiles, asphalt fiberglass shingles, or metal standing seam. Residential uses may also have cedar shake wood. To allow for the introduction of new roofing materials of similar quality and appearance, the Land Use Administrator may maintain a supplementary list of acceptable roofing materials. 
(Ord. No. 2013-9, § 2, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 13.03. - Single-Family and Duplex Residential Architectural Requirements. 
    This section shall apply to all single-family and duplex residential dwelling units. 
13.03.01.  Architectural styles. 
A.  Duplex residential dwelling units shall have the same architectural design, materials, and colors for both sides. 
B.  Within residential developments, an identical house can only repeat every four lots when fronting the same right-of-way including both sides of the street. However, two nonidentical houses of the same style may be built adjacent to each other. 
13.03.02.  Roofs. Roofs that are visible from the public right-of-way shall be of shed, hip, gambrel, mansard, or gable styles. Roof height, bulk, and mass must appear structural even when the design is nonstructural. The following requirements shall apply: 
A.  Pitched roofs. 
1.  All single-family and duplex buildings shall have a pitched roof covering a minimum of 65 percent of the overall floor area under the roof. 
2.  Pitched roofs shall have a minimum slope of 5:12 (five inches vertical rise for every 12 inches horizontal run) and shall have an overhang beyond the building wall; however, the overhang shall not encroach into an easement. 
3.  Flat roofed areas including, but not limited to, porches are permissible in the remaining 35 percent of floor area under roof. 
B.  Flat roofs. 
1.  Porches or screen rooms may have flat roofs where allowed. 
2.  Flat roofs shall be reviewed by the Land Use Administrator for architectural and aesthetic design and impact on the surrounding area. 
3.  Flat roofs shall be located at the rear of the building out of view from the public right-of-way. 
13.03.03.  Facade design. 
A.  Massing requirement. Building massing shall be implemented by use of techniques that reduce the appearance of high building density or bulk. At least one massing treatment, in addition to the articulation requirement, shall be included for each 50 linear feet of wall that exceeds 50 feet in length. 
B.  Articulation. Facade articulation is required to add interest to a building. The following features shall be acceptable techniques of exterior articulation: 
1.  A base course or plinth course; banding, moldings, or stringcourses; quoins; oriels; cornices; arches; balconies; brackets; shutters; keystones; dormers; louvers as part of the exterior wall construction. 
2.  Quoins and banding shall wrap around the corners of the structure for at least two feet. 
3.  Banding placed around the windows and doors visible from the right-of-way, golf course, canals, lakes, or other similar highly visible areas. Window shutters may substitute for banding. 
4.  Horizontal banding continuing the length of the wall that faces a street, golf course, saltwater canal, or other similar highly visible areas. 
C.  Fenestration. 
1.  Windowless exterior walls, excluding garage doors, that face a public right-of-way, golf course, canals, lakes, or other similar highly visible areas are prohibited. 
2.  Reserved. 
3.  Windows shall be in harmony with and proportionate to the rest of the structure. 
4.  The use of reflective glass on residential structures is prohibited. Reflective glass will be defined as having a visible light reflectance rating of 15 percent or greater. 
D.  Shutters. Shutters function as an accent to windows as well as weather protection. 
1.  Accent shutters. Accent shutters are designed as a visual detail for windows. 
a.  Accent shutters shall be a contrasting color to the wall color. 
b.  Shutters shall match the height of the window. 
c.  Acceptable types of accent shutters include traditional horizontal slat or panel type shutters. Professional scoring or etching of a stucco wall to give the appearance of shutters is also acceptable. 
2.  Weather protection shutters. Professionally installed Bahaman, Accordion, and Roll Down shutters, as well as clear-guard panels, used as weather protection shall maintain the architectural character when residences are boarded up. Plywood shall not be considered a weather shutter. Duct tape shall not be an acceptable method of shutter fastening. Storm shutters can be used one month prior to the hurricane season through one month after the hurricane season. 
E.  Awnings. If used, awnings shall complement the architectural style and colors of the residence. Awnings may be placed above windows and doors. Placing any awning on residential garage doors is prohibited. Permitted awnings shall be constructed from canvas, matte finish vinyl, copper, or a material that the Land Use Administrator deems appropriate with regard to the architectural style. 
1.  Prohibited materials. Plastic, shiny vinyl, Plexiglas, or materials resembling plastic are prohibited. 
2.  Illumination. Backlit awnings shall be prohibited. 
    13.03.04.  Mechanical equipment. Mechanical equipment such as, but not limited to, air conditioning units, pool pumps, generators, and gas tanks shall be screened from view of the public right-of-way and access easements with landscaping and/or fencing in compliance with City regulations. 
    13.03.05.  Manufactured dwellings and mobile homes bearing a Florida Department of Community Affairs Seal. Manufactured dwellings and mobile homes that bear a Florida Department of Community Affairs Seal shall comply with the regulations for single-family residential and duplex architectural design. In addition, they shall meet the following: 
A.  A continuous perimeter stemwall foundation or monolithic foundation floor slab system that meets all criteria of the Florida Standard Building Code, shall be provided. Exterior walls of these dwellings shall bear directly on the foundation. Isolated elevated pier foundations are prohibited. Interior load-bearing foundations and/or walls shall be continuous. 
B.  The electrical service entrance shall be located on the dwelling. 
C.  The exterior face of all stemwall foundations and/or monolithic design shall be architecturally finished with Portland cement stucco, brick, stone, siding materials, or other durable material approved by the Land Use Administrator. 
D.  The main entranceway shall be covered with a roof structure. The roof structure shall be consistent with the roof structure of the principal dwelling and shall cover, at a minimum, the required exterior landing at the door. The entry roof structure may be an extension of the main roof system or a separate roof system that matches the main roof slope, materials, and architectural style. If separate, the roof structure shall be consistent with the principal dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 2009-26, §§ 93-96, 12-15-09) 
Sec. 13.04. - Multifamily and Nonresidential Architectural Requirements. 
    The requirements contained in this section apply to all multifamily and nonresidential development. 
    13.04.01.  Corporate trademark design. Exceptions to the requirements contained within this chapter shall not be made for corporate franchises. 
    13.04.02.  Building architecture. Building enhancements are required and shall be achieved through the use of the following: 
A.  Building massing. Massing refers to the two-dimensional shape or three-dimensional volume of a building. Attention to massing is especially important for large buildings whose bulk can be out of scale with their surroundings; or whose walls or roof lines may be uninterrupted, excessively long or high, or monotonous. Multifamily and nonresidential developments shall provide building massing and articulation as follows: 
1.  Massing requirements. Building massing shall be implemented by use of techniques that reduce the appearance of high building density or bulk. At least one massing treatment, in addition to the articulation requirement, shall be included for each 50 linear feet of wall that exceeds 50 feet in length. 
2.  Massing techniques. The use of the following building features, when more than three feet in depth or height, shall qualify as techniques that improve building massing. Other massing techniques may be used, as approved by the Land Use Administrator: 
a.  Balconies. 
b.  Building wall offsets. 
c.  Colonnades. 
d.  Cupolas. 
e.  Towers. 
f.  Pavilions. 
g.  Arcades. 
h.  Porticos. 
i.  Projections and 
recessed sections. 
j.  Clock or bell towers. 
k.  Variations in the height of the roof line. 
l.  Verandas. 
m.  Overhangs. 
3.  Multifamily buildings. Large multifamily and townhome building volumes shall be broken into smaller parts to avoid a massive appearance and to allow for ventilation and vistas. In addition to the massing requirement noted above, facades of multifamily developments shall not extend for more than 100 horizontal feet without a major volume shift or a substantial break in volume. 
B.  Exterior articulation. Articulation of exterior walls is required to add interest and a distinctive sense of place to a building. The following features qualify as techniques of building articulation: 
1.  Articulation requirements. All facades shall include, in addition to the massing requirement, at least one articulation from the list below on each facade. Facades extending for more than 50 horizontal or vertical feet shall provide at least two exterior treatments. 
2.  Prohibited articulation techniques. Professional scoring or etching of a stucco wall to give the appearance of shutters, doors, or windows shall be prohibited. 
3.  Articulation techniques. The use of the following elements shall qualify as articulation techniques: 
a.  Base course or plinth course. 
b.  Portals. 
c.  Windows. 
d.  Transoms. 
e.  Show cases. 
f.  Bay windows and oriels. 
g.  Lintels. 
h.  String courses and moldings. 
i.  Fascia. 
j.  Cornice. 
k.  Piers. 
l.  Arches. 
m.  Bays. 
n.  Balconies. 
o.  Brackets. 
p.  Wings. 
q.  Porches. 
r.  Stoops. 
C.  Fenestration. 
1.  Windowless exterior walls that face a public right-of-way are prohibited. 
2.  For multistory commercial uses, 50 percent of the wall facade on the first floor story shall have windows. The windows shall be placed between three feet and seven feet from the ground. 
3.  For office and multifamily uses, 15 percent of the wall façade per story shall have windows. 
4.  Windows shall be in harmony with and proportionate to the rest of the structure. 
5.  The use of darkly tinted or reflective glass on the first floor of commercial structures is prohibited. Reflective glass will be defined as having a visible light reflectance rating of 15 percent or greater and darkly tinted glass windows include glass with a visible light transmittance rating of 35 or less. The use of low-emissivity (Low-E) glass is encouraged, but must demonstrate that the reflectance and transmittance requirements are met. All plans submitted to the City shall include the glass manufacturer's visible light reflectance, visible light transmittance ratings and Low-E glass specifications for evaluation. Privacy can be achieved through the use of blinds and curtains. 
6.  Uses such as movie theaters, bowling alleys, skating rinks, industrial facilities, warehouses, and similar uses are exempt from the fenestration requirements. The building façades shall provide additional architectural elements in lieu of windows at the same percentages of Subsection 13.04.02.C.2. 
    13.04.03.  Roofs. The following types of roofs are permitted: 
A.  Pitched roofs. 
1.  A pitched roof shall have a minimum slope of 5:12 (5" vertical rise for every 12" horizontal run) and shall have a minimum overhang of two feet beyond the building wall. Flat roofed areas including porches, are permissible in the remaining 35 percent of floor area under roof. 
2.  Pitched roofs shall be enhanced by the addition of dormers, belvederes, chimneys, cupolas, clock towers and similar elements. Enhancements shall be consistent with the main elements of the building. 
B.  Mansard style roof. False mansards are prohibited. 
C.  Flat roofs. Buildings that have a flat roof shall be hidden from public view by a parapet and decorated by a cornice. 
1.  Parapet. The highest point of a parapet shall not at any point exceed 15 percent of the height of the supporting wall. 
2.  Cornice. Cornices may be simple or mixed (straight and curved moldings), but should not exceed 24 inches in depth. Cornices shall have a minimum of 12 inches in height, and a minimum of three vertical (not diagonal) changes in plane, and a variety of thicknesses in relief ranging from the greatest at the top to the least at the bottom. 
D.  Canopy roofs. Canopy roofs for gas stations, drive-through restaurants, and banks are exempt from the pitched roof requirements. 
    13.04.04.  Building entrances. All buildings are subject to the following regulations: 
A.  Entrance placement. The main building entrance shall face the public right-of-way unless it is determined by the Land Use Administrator that such configuration is not practicable. When parking is located on the side or rear of the building, the placement of a suitably large building entrance that faces the parking area shall complement, but not displace the main building entrance. 
B.  Entrance articulation. Main building entrances shall be articulated in a manner consistent with the architectural style of the building. All buildings shall have a minimum of one of the following architectural treatments, separate from the massing and articulation requirements, for each main building entrance: lintels, pediments, pilasters, columns, porticos, porches, overhangs, railings, balustrades, and features consistent with the building style. 
    13.04.05.  Awnings. Awnings shall complement the architectural style and colors of the building. Awnings may be placed above windows and doors and are subject to the following requirements: 
A.  Height. A minimum clearance of eight feet shall be maintained between the sidewalk and the lowest part of the awning. 
B.  Prohibited materials. Plastic (or materials resembling plastic), shiny vinyl, and Plexiglas are prohibited. 
C.  Illumination. Backlit awnings are prohibited. 
    13.04.06.  Light fixtures. Light fixtures attached to the exterior of a building shall be architecturally compatible with the style, materials, colors, and details of the building. 
    13.04.07.  Mechanical equipment, utilities, and storage areas. 
A.  Mechanical equipment. When visible or audible from adjacent property or from the public right-of-way, mechanical equipment shall be screened by walls, fencing, roof elements, or landscaping. Screening shall be extended at least one foot above the equipment being screened. Ground-mounted mechanical equipment shall be located within 20 feet of the principal structure, except transformers. 
B.  Service, utility, display, and storage areas. 
1.  Loading areas or docks, outdoor storage, waste disposal, mechanical equipment, satellite dishes, truck parking, and other service support equipment shall be located behind the building line and shall be fully screened from the view of adjacent properties both at ground and rooftop levels by walls made of masonry, brick, or durable man-made materials. 
2.  Utility boxes must be totally screened from view of principal streets, as well as pedestrian areas and walkways. Backflow preventers shall be landscaped. 
3.  Areas for outdoor storage, trash collection, and loading shall be incorporated into the primary building design, and construction materials for these areas shall be of comparable quality and appearance as that of the primary building. 
4.  Shopping cart storage shall be located inside the building. Cart corrals used by patrons shall be screened by a solid landscaping hedge or wall consistent with the building architecture and materials. 
Chapter 14 - GLOSSARY 

Sec. 14.01. - Rules for Construction of Language. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein all words shall have the customary dictionary meaning. The present tense includes the future tense and the future tense includes the present tense. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. The word "person" includes a firm, corporation, association, organization, trust, or partnership. The word "lot" includes "plot", "tract" or "parcel." The word "building" includes "structure." The word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." The word "City" shall mean the "City of Palm Coast." The word "Staff" shall mean "City of Palm Coast Staff." The words "Comp Plan" shall mean the "City of Palm Coast Comprehensive Plan." The word "Code" or "LDC" shall mean the "City of Palm Coast Land Development Code." Any key word within the LDC for which a definition is not been provided shall have the same definition as provided in the Comp Plan or Florida Statutes (FS) Definition Index. 
Sec. 14.02. - Glossary. 
    Abutting: Any property that is immediately contiguous or immediately across any road or public rights-of-way from the subject property. 
    Accent color: Refers to the color application to any building accents such as shutters, doors, and awnings. 
    Accent plant: A shrub required for certain landscape buffer applications that have a minimum height of 12 inches at time of installation. 
    Access: The street system providing access to a parking facility, sometimes involving several streets, particularly if one-way. 
    Accessory use or accessory structure: A use or structure on the same lot with, and of nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or structure. 
    Access way: The place, means, or way by which pedestrians and/or vehicles shall have safe, adequate, and usable ingress and egress to a property, use, or parking space. 
    Acre: 43,560 square feet; a measurement of area. 
    Adult daycare center: See Daycare center/adult. 
    Adult entertainment and sexually-oriented businesses: An adult performance establishment, adult bookstore/adult video store, adult motel, or adult theater as those terms are defined in Chapter 16, Article III in the City of Palm Coast Code of Ordinances, which is operated for commercial or pecuniary gain. An establishment with an adult entertainment license shall be presumed to be an adult entertainment establishment and sexually-oriented business. 
    Adult family-care home: See Family-care home/adult. 
    Affordable multifamily unit: A multifamily unit that is available for rent or purchase by a household earning 100 percent or less of the county's median income, adjusted for family size, for no more than 30 percent of the household's annual income. 
    Aggregate sign area: See Sign area, aggregate. 
    Agriculture: The production, keeping, or maintenance of plants and/or animals useful to humans whether for sale, lease, or personal use. The term includes farming, dairying, pasturage, apiculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, animal and poultry husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating, or storing the produce, provided the operation of any such accessory uses shall be secondary to that of normal agricultural activities. 
    Aisle, drive: The traveled path through a parking facility between one or two rows of parked vehicles. 
    Alcoholic beverage: All beverages containing more than one percent of alcohol by weight and shall include intoxication beverages as defined herein. "Intoxication beverages" shall mean all liquors, wines, and beers containing more than three and two-tenths percent of alcohol by weight. In all prosecutions for violations of this LDC the manufacturer's label on the beverage container shall be prima facie evidence that the substance in such container was and is an alcoholic beverage. 
    Alteration/altered: These terms shall include any changes in structural parts, stairways, type of construction, kind or class of occupancy, light or ventilation, means of ingress or egress, or other changes affecting or regulated by the building code or this regulation, except for minor changes or repairs not involving the aforesaid features. 
    Alteration of a watercourse: A dam, impoundment, channel relocation, change in channel alignment, channelization, or change in cross-sectional area of the channel or the channel capacity, or any other form of modification which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the riverine flow of water during conditions of the base flood. 
    Alternative landscape betterment plan: A replacement landscape plan proposed by the developer of a unique or difficult site that provides additional landscape features not already required and a better public benefit, project screening, and aesthetic appeal than a standard landscaping plan. 
    Ancillary: A use that is incidental and subordinate to that of the main building or use of land and that is located on the same lot and under the same ownership in all respects. 
    Animal feedlot: A lot, building, or combination of lots and buildings intended for the confined feeding, breeding, raising, or holding of animals and specifically designed as a confinement area in which manure may accumulate or where the concentration of animals is such that cannot maintain a vegetative cover. 
    Antenna: Any apparatus designed for the transmitting and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves including, but not limited to, telephonic, radio, or television communications. Types of elements include, but are not limited to, omni-directional (whip) antennas, sectionerized (panel) antennas, multi or single bay (FM & TV), yagi or parabolic (dish) antennas. 
    Antenna array: A single or group of antenna elements and associated mounting hardware, transmission lines, or other appurtenances which share a common attachment device such as a mounting frame or mounting support structure for the sole purpose of transmitting or receiving electromagnetic waves. 
    Antenna element: Any antenna or antenna array. 
    Appeal: Relating to flood damage protection, means a request for review of the Floodplain Administrator's interpretation of any provision of Section 10.02. 
    Applicant: An owner of real property or authorized agent including, but not limited to, developers, an authorized developer of real property, or an apparently authorized person, contractor, or other legal entity including, but not limited to, agents, employees, independent contractors, or others in privity with any of the above. 
    Application: A written request on a form provided by the City for a specific use. 
    Aquifer: A saturated geologic formation that will yield a sufficient quantity of water to serve as a private and public water supply. 
    Arcade amusement center: A place of business having at least 50 coin-operated amusement games or machines on premises that are operated for the entertainment of the general public and tourists as a bona fide amusement facility. (For definition of "adult arcade amusement center," see Adult arcade amusement center. ) 
    Arch: A structure, especially one of masonry, forming a curved, pointed, or flat upper edge of an open space and supporting the weight above it, as in a bridge or doorway. 
    Arterial road: A route providing service that is relatively continuous and of relatively high traffic volume, long average trip length, high operating speed, and high mobility importance. In addition, every United States numbered highway is an arterial road. 
    Articulate: To give visible or concrete expression to the composition of structural elements. 
    ASCE 24: A standard titled Flood Resistant Design and Construction that is referenced by the Florida Building Code. ASCE 24 is developed and published by the American Society of Civil Engineers, Reston, VA. 
    Assisted living facility: Any building or buildings, section or distinct part of a building, private home, boarding home, home for the aged, or other residential facility, whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide housing, meals, and one or more personal services for a period exceeding 24 hours to one or more adults who are not relatives of the owner or administrator. 
    Available capacity: The amount of a concurrency public facility available for use by the demand from new development after evaluating existing conditions and committed capacity. The term "available capacity" also means the amount of residual potential of a concurrency public facility available to hold, store, or accommodate the demands upon the facility without such concurrency public facility falling below the level of service standards established in the Comprehensive Plan as it may be amended from time-to-time. 
    Aviary: A place for the keeping of birds for the purpose of racing, exhibiting, or selling. 
    Avoidance and minimization: The applicant must consider practicable design modifications, which would reduce or eliminate adverse impacts to wetlands and other surface waters. The term "modification" shall not be construed as including the alternative of not implementing the system in some form, nor shall it be construed as requiring a project that is significantly different in type or function. A proposed modification, which is not technically capable of being done, is not economically viable, or which adversely affects public safety through endangerment of lives or property is not considered "practicable." To receive City approval, a system cannot cause a net adverse impact on wetland functions and other surface water functions not offset by mitigation and in accordance with the requirements established by state law. 
    Awning: A cloth or other covering extending in front of a window or doorway, or over a deck that provides protection from the sun or rain. 
    Balcony: A platform that projects from the wall of a building and is surrounded by a railing, balustrade, or parapet. 
    Balustrade: A balustrade is a row of repeating balusters-small posts that support the upper rail of a railing. Staircases and porches often have balustrades. 
    Banding: A horizontal decorative feature of a wall, such as a flat frieze or fascia, usually with a projecting molding at upper and lower edges. The flat portion between the moldings may be ornately decorated or flat and unadorned. 
    Banner: See Sign, banner. 
    Base course: The first or lower course of a foundation wall and made of large stones or a mass of concrete; also called foundation course. 
    Base flood: A flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood is commonly referred to as the "100-year flood" or the "one-percent-annual chance flood." 
    Base flood elevation: The elevation of flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, relative to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) or other datum specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map. 
    Basement: That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Bay: A division of a wall, roof, or other part of a building marked off by vertical elements, such as columns or pilasters. When related to parking, a parking facility unit that has two rows of parking stalls and a central aisle. 
    Bay window: A window projecting outward from the wall and forming a bay or an alcove within. 
    Bed and breakfast inn: A bed and breakfast inn is a family home structure, with no more than 15 sleeping rooms, that has been modified to serve as a transient public lodging establishment. Such use provides the accommodation and meal services generally offered by a bed and breakfast inn and is recognized as a bed and breakfast inn in the community in which it is situated or by the hospitality industry. 
    Belvedere: A roofed structure, especially a small pavilion or tower on top of a building, situated to command a wide view. 
    Berm: A bank or mound of earth usually placed against a foundation wall. 
    Best management practice (or "BMP")(does not apply to Chapter 9): A practice, activity, procedure, technique, program, methodology, or any combination thereof that, through experience and research, has proven to reliably lead to a desired result. A commitment to using the best management practices in any field is a commitment to using all the knowledge and technology at one's disposal to ensure success. 
    Best management practices (applies only to Chapter 9): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, treatment methods and other management practices to prevent or reduce pollutants from entering or discharging from the City stormwater system. 
    Boarding home: A building or part thereof, other than a hotel, motel, or restaurant, where meals and/or lodging are provided for compensation for three or more unrelated persons where no cooking or dining facilities are provided in individual rooms. 
    Bona fide: Genuine or authentic; being actually and exactly what is claimed. 
    Bona fide agricultural uses: Good faith commercial or domestic agricultural use of the land, any such determination of which shall be based upon, but not limited solely to, the following factors: 
(1)  The productivity of land in its present use; 
(2)  The relationship of the property to the Comp Plan; 
(3)  The classification placed upon such lands by the Property Appraiser pursuant to F.S. § 193.461, and 
(4)  The current zoning classification of such lands. 
    Bottle club: A commercial establishment licensed by the state operated for a profit, whether or not a profit is actually made, where patrons consume alcoholic beverages which are brought onto the premises and not sold or supplied to the patrons by the establishment, whether the patrons bring in and maintain custody of their own alcoholic beverages or surrender custody to the establishment for dispensing on the premises, and which is located in a building or other enclosed permanent structure. Non-alcoholic mixers or so-called "set-ups" may be provided by the club. This definition does not apply to sporting facilities where events sanctioned by nationally recognized regulatory athletic or sports associations are held; bona fide restaurants licensed by the Division of Hotels and Restaurants of the Department of Business and Professional Regulation whose primary business is the service of full course meals; or hotels and motels licensed by the Division of Hotels and Restaurants of the Department of Business and Professional Regulation; or a social, fraternal or civic association or organization which only occasionally or intermittently provides facilities for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages by its members and their guests and is not registered to sell alcoholic beverages. This definition also does not include the private clubs listed in F.S. § 561.20(7)(a). 
    Bracket: A decorative or weight-bearing structural unit, two sides of which form a right angle with one arm flush against a wall and other flush beneath a projecting surface, such as eaves or a bay window. 
    Breakpoint technology: The engineering design of a monopole wherein a specified point on the monopole is designed to have stresses concentrated so that the point is at least five percent more susceptible to failure than any other point along the monopole. This is so that in the event of a structural failure of the monopole, the failure will occur at the breakpoint rather than at the base plate, anchor bolts, or any other point on the monopole. 
    Breezeway: A roofed passageway, open-sided, the design and construction of which is in keeping with that of the main building and which provides direct access between a main and attached accessory building. 
    Buffer: Open spaces, landscaped areas, fences, walls, berms, land that is vegetated with native species and left undeveloped, or any combination thereof used to physically separate or screen one use or property from another so as to visually shield or block noise, lights, or other nuisances and/or reduce the shock of impact. 
    Buffer, landscape: The area of a site that commences at the property line or where plantable area begins and extends for the width of the required buffer, no matter how far into the site it goes. 
    Buffer, wetland: Upland area adjacent to or surrounding a wetland that is vegetated with native species and left undeveloped to provide protection from potential adverse secondary impacts associated with future development. The buffer area is not part of the jurisdictional wetland and as such shall not be calculated as part of the wetland acreage for the determination of wetland impacts. 
    Buildable area: Portion of a building site remaining after deducting all required setbacks and meeting any requirements regarding maximum impervious surface. 
    Buildable land: Land recognized as being above the 100-year flood level with soil conditions that can properly support structures, not including critical wetlands, such as lakes, streams, swamps, and marshes. 
    Builder: Any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, realtor, or corporation who constructs model homes and other residential dwellings for sale to the public. 
    Building: Any structure, temporary or permanent, with a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind. 
    Building envelope: The space in which a structure is permitted to be built on a lot; it is defined by the minimum yard setbacks. 
    Building height: See Height of building . 
    Building line: See Setback line . 
    Building permit: Written permission issued by the proper municipal authority for the construction, repair, alteration, or addition to a structure. 
    Building, principal: A building or buildings in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which said building is situated. 
    Building site: See Site, building. 
    Bulkhead: A structure built between a waterbody on one side and land on the other side. 
    Business office: Facility consisting of desks, computers, files, phone banks, coping machines, or other equipment usually associated with and utilized in a business office. 
    Business transaction: A business transaction is a transaction between the seller and a potential purchaser other than the signing of a contract of purchase, selection of a lot or house plan, selection of paint colors, selection of cabinets, fixtures, and appliances, and other similar actions by a purchaser in deciding on the purchase of a home. 
    Bypass lane: See Lane, bypass . 
    Caliper: The trunk diameter for new trees up to, and including, four inches in diameter as measured at six inches above grade. All new trees over four inches in caliper will be measured 12 inches above grade. The diameter of all existing trees shall be measured at 41/2 feet above grade (diameter at breast height (DBH)). 
    Canopy: With reference to structures, a roof like cover, including an awning, that projects from the wall of a building over a door, entrance, or window; or a freestanding or projecting cover above an outdoor service area, such as at a gasoline service area. With reference to buffer yards, a landscape element that functions as an overhead or "ceiling" used in single or multiple plantings to create shade. 
    Caretaker's dwelling: An accessory dwelling that houses a caretaker, manager, or security agent employed on the building site due to the need for 24-hour care and security of plants, animals, equipment, or other conditions of the site. 
    Carport: A roofed structure not more than 75 percent enclosed by walls used to provide shelter for one or more vehicles. 
    Cemetery: Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the animal or human dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including crematories, mausoleums, and mortuaries if operated in connection with and within the boundaries of such cemetery. 
    Certificate of completion: A written document required prior to occupancy, issued for a use upon a developer's compliance with the provisions of this LDC and any applicable development agreement. 
    Certificate of concurrency: A statement issued by the City, on a form designed by the Land Use Administrator, relating to a specific development project on a specific parcel of real property or part thereof that is valid for so long as the underlying development order on the parcel is valid. It is to state that all concurrency review requirements, as provided herein, are satisfied as to said development and that specified quantities of concurrency public facilities are reserved. The issuance of a certificate of concurrency shall be a prerequisite to the issuance of any final development order. The issuance of a certificate of concurrency shall not be deemed to insure or guarantee any person or entity including, but not limited to, the holder or owner of the certificate, that any particular level of service currently exists or will exist in the future on a particular concurrency public facility at the time of issuance or at any other given point in time. 
    Certificate of exemption: A statement issued by the City, on a form designed by the Land Use Administrator, relating to a specific development project on a specific parcel of real property or part thereof, stating that said development is exempt from the concurrency requirements identified in Chapter 7. The issuance of a certificate of exemption shall be a prerequisite to the issuance of any final development order. The issuance of a certificate of exemption shall not be deemed to insure or guarantee any person or entity including, but not limited to, the holder or owner of the certificate, that any particular level of service currently exists or will exist in the future on a particular concurrency public facility at the time of issuance or at any other given point in time. 
    Certificate of occupancy: An official certificate issued by the City under the authority of ordinance or law authorizing the occupancy of a building for its intended use. The certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until a certificate of completion has been issued. 
    Change in use: See Use, change in . 
    Child daycare center: See Daycare center/child. 
    Child family daycare home: See Family daycare home/child. 
    City Council: The City Council of the City of Palm Coast. 
    City Manager: Either the City Manager or such staff person designated to act by the City Manager in order to respect the rules of the City Manager under the City Charter. 
    City Stormwater system (or "MS4"): A conveyance, storage area or system of conveyances and storage areas (including, but not limited to, roads with drainage systems, streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, storm drains, treatment ponds and other structural BMPs), owned or operated by a city that discharges to waters of the United States or to other MS4s, that is designed solely for collecting, treating or conveying stormwater, and that is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW), as defined by 40 Code of the Federal Register 403.3. 
    Clinic: A place used for the care, diagnosis, and treatment of sick, ailing, infirm, or injured persons, and those who are in need of medical and surgical attention, but who are not provided with board or room or kept overnight on the premises. 
    Club civic: An establishment operated by a corporation or association of persons for community, social, fraternal, or recreational purposes and not operated or maintained for profit. 
    Coastal high hazard area: Relating to flood damage protection, this term means a special flood hazard area extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. Coastal high hazard areas are also referred to as "high hazard areas subject to high velocity wave action" or "V Zones" and are designated on Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) as Zone V1-V30, VE, or V. 
    Collector road: A route providing service that is of relatively moderate average traffic volume, moderately average trip length, and moderately average operating speed. Such a route also collects and distributes traffic between local roads or arterial roads and serves as a linkage between land access and mobility needs. 
    Colonnade: A series of columns placed at regular intervals. 
    Colors: 
a)  Fuchsia: A dark purplish-red color, a red with a tint of purple or hot bright pink. 
b)  Magenta: A dark purplish-red color. 
c)  Olive green: Varies from a medium yellowish green similar to the color of green olives to a dark brownish green to the grayish olive drab associated with military-issue clothing. 
d)  Orange: Color combinations using yellows and reds, lacking visible brownish shades. 
e)  Purple: Color combinations using reds and blues to include colors known as violet. 
f)  Sage: Grey-green color. 
g)  Taupe: A dark grayish brown or brownish gray. 
h)  Terra cotta: A brownish orange. 
    Column: A column is an upright pillar or post. Columns may support a roof or a beam, or they may be purely decorative. The base is the lower portion of a column. The capital is the upper portion of a column. The entablature is the area that the column supports. 
    Commencement of construction: See Construction, commencement of. 
    Common area: Area under common ownership of a subdivision (e.g. recreation area, medians), site plan, condominium, or similar development excluding rights-of-way. 
    Communication conduit: Any pipe which is installed in a road right of way or easement with the intent of carrying wire and cable to be used for communication technology. 
    Community residential home: Per F.S. ch. 419, a dwelling unit licensed to serve residents who are clients of the Department of Elderly Affairs, the Agency for Persons with Disabilities, the Department of Juvenile Justice, or the Department of Children and Family Services, or a dwelling unit licensed by the Agency for Health Care Administration. Such dwelling unit provides a living environment for up to 14 unrelated residents who operate as the functional equivalent of a family, including such supervision and care by supportive staff as may be necessary to meet the physical, emotional, and social needs of the residents. 
    Compatibility: The characteristics of different uses or activities, which allow them to be located near or adjacent to each other in harmony. Some elements affecting compatibility include: height, scale, mass, and bulk of structures, pedestrian or vehicular traffic, circulation, access, and parking impacts, landscaping, lighting, noise, odor, architecture, and public hazards. Compatibility does not mean "the same as." Rather, compatibility refers to the sensitivity of development proposals in maintaining the character of existing development. 
    Compensatory storage (floodplain): An artificially excavated hydraulically equivalent volume of storage used to balance the loss of natural flood storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed within the floodplain. 
    Completeness review: The review of an application in order to determine if all material is present for the specific application type. 
    Compliance review: The review of an application in order to determine compliance with all federal, state, and local regulations. 
    Comprehensive plan: A plan designed and adopted to guide development in the City of Palm Coast as required by F.S. ch. 163. 
    Concurrency baseline statement: A documented status report as to available capacity relating to concurrency public facilities as a result of the commitment, entitlement, or utilization of concurrency public facilities. 
    Concurrency management monitoring system: The data collection, processing, and analysis performed by the City to determine available capacity for concurrency public facilities and services and to track certificates of concurrency. Data utilized shall be the most current reliable information available to the City as determined by the Land Use Administrator. 
    Concurrency management system (CMS): The procedures and processes that the City utilizes to ensure that no development order or permit is issued by the City unless the necessary concurrency public facilities are available or are assured to be available consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and comply with State law in order to meet the impacts of development. As part of the CMS, the City shall operate and maintain a concurrency management monitoring system. 
    Concurrency public facilities: All arterial and collector roads; stormwater management; potable water treatment plants; sanitary sewer treatment plants, solid waste processing facilities, transfer stations and landfills; urban community parks including land and facilities; and mass transit buses. Such concurrency public facilities may be owned or operated by local, state or federal governments, independent districts and/or private organizations. 
    Concurrency review: The process utilized by the City to determine if concurrency public facilities and services are adequate to accommodate the impacts of new development at or above the levels of service standards adopted in the Comprehensive Plan. 
    Conditionally exempt small quantity generator: A conditionally exempt small quantity generator, as defined by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, 40 Code of Federal Regulations 261, is a facility or business which, in a calendar month, generates no more than 100 kilograms (220 pounds or 25 gallons) of hazardous waste or less than one kilogram of an acute hazardous waste. Additionally, the generator shall not accumulate more than 1,000 kilograms (2,200 pounds or 250 gallons) of hazardous waste at any time. 
    Connectedness (of a wetland): The degree to which a wetland borders terrestrial, aquatic, or other wetland systems. The greater the extent to which this bordering occurs (in numbers or linear distance), the greater the connectedness. 
    Conservation: Preserving from loss, waste, or harm. The official preservation of natural resources such as topsoil, forests, and waterways. 
    Construction (does not apply to Chapter 9): Any activity including erection, fabrication, installation, alteration, demolition, or removal of any structure, facility, or addition thereto, including all related activities, but not restricted to, clearing of land, earth moving, blasting, and landscaping. 
    Construction activities (applies only to Chapter 9): The creation, alteration or abandonment of any project, including placement of fill, land clearing, earthwork, or the placement or removal of structures. Cutting of trees or removal of vegetation is not considered land clearing, except where it involves stump removal, root raking, or grubbing. 
    Construction, commencement of: Construction activity beyond the mere clearing of land that has occurred on a parcel of real property and the construction of the infrastructure required to support an approved development plan has begun in good faith in accordance with all necessary permits and with bona fide intention to complete the construction of such infrastructure. 
    Construction, new: Relating to flood damage protection and the flood resistant requirements of the Florida Building Code, this term means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced after February 5, 1986, or standard based upon specific technical base flood elevation data that establishes the area of special flood hazard. The term also includes any subsequent improvements to such structure. 
    Construction, start of: Relating to flood damage protection, this term means the date the building permit was issued for new construction and substantial improvements, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a building including, but not limited to, a manufactured home and mobile home on a site such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home or mobile home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units and are not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Containment: Physical systems or operational practices used to prevent the release of hazardous substances to the environment. 
    Containment, secondary: A physical structure such as curbing, trays, double-walled tanks, spill pallets, or other structural controls used to prevent the release of a spill of regulated substances to the environment. 
    Contamination: The presence of hazardous substances in surface water, groundwater, soil, sediment, or upon the land in quantities that exceed applicable cleanup, target levels established in the Florida Administrative Code (FAC) or other applicable regulations as amended from time to time. 
    Continuing care retirement community: An integrated residential development designed to let senior adults age in place by providing independent living units, and including either an assisted living facility where assistance with personal care is provided, or a nursing home providing long-term skilled nursing. 
    Continuous transit: The nonstop movement of a vehicle except for stops required by traffic laws. 
    Contractor: Any person, firm, association, partnership, realtor, or corporation engaged in the business of accepting orders or contracts. 
    Convenience store with fueling stations: A retail store selling convenience goods that may include prepared foods with seating for on-site consumption, and having pumps for the fueling of automobiles and pickups. 
    Copy area: See Sign area. 
    Cornice: The cornice is the uppermost section of moldings along the top of a wall or just below a roof. 
    Critical facilities: Any facility that, if flooded or impacted by a natural disaster, would result in severe consequences to public health and safety. Critical facilities include, but are not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes, police stations, fire stations, emergency operation centers, chemical or hazardous materials storage facilities, and utility facilities. The term includes facilities that are assigned Flood Design Class 3 and Flood Design Class 4 pursuant to the Florida Building Code, Building. 
    Cross connection: Any physical arrangement whereby a public water supply is connected directly or indirectly with any other water supply system, wastewater, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, or any other device, facility, or system which contains or may contain contaminated water, sewage, waste material, or other material or substance of unknown or potentially unsafe quality which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water supply as a result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper-connections, changeable devices, or other devices through which, or because of which, backflow could occur are deemed to constitute cross connections. 
    Cross section: A profile of the ground surface perpendicular to the centerline of a street, stream, or valley bottom. 
    Cultural resources: Any prehistoric or historic district or building, archaeological site, building, object, or other real or personal property of historical, architectural, or archaeological value and folk life resources. These properties or resources may include, but are not limited to, monuments, memorials, Native American habitations, ceremonial sites, abandoned settlements, sunken or abandoned shops, engineering works, treasure trove, artifacts, or other objects with intrinsic historical or archaeological value, or any part thereof, relating to the history, government, and culture of the State. 
    Cultural resources, potentially significant: A cultural resource or archaeological site that may be considered, after further investigation, by the State Historic Preservation Officer to be eligible for the National Register of Historic Places. 
    Cultural resources, protection of: Measures taken to avoid, minimize, or mitigate effects to cultural resources consistent with the provisions of this LDC. 
    Cultural resources, significant: An archaeological site of prehistoric or historic significance that the State Historic Preservation Officer considers eligible for the National Register of Historic Places. 
    Cupola: A dome-shaped ornamental structure placed on the top of a larger roof or dome. In some cases, the entire main roof of a tower or spire can be a cupola. More frequently, however, the cupola is a smaller structure which sets on top of the main roof. 
    Curb: A raised edge on the side of a street or pavement surface. 
    Daycare center/adult: Any building, buildings, or part of a building, whether operated for profit or not, in which is provided through its ownership or management, for a part of a day, basic services to three or more persons who are 18 years of age or older, who are not related to the owner or operator by blood or marriage, and who require such services. 
    Daycare center/child: Any child care center or child care arrangement which provides child care for more than five children unrelated to the operator and which receives a payment, fee, or grant for any of the children receiving care, wherever operated, and whether or not operated for profit. 
    De minimis activity establishment: An establishment operated by an organization exempt from federal taxation under Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code and with five or fewer electronic or mechanical devices that are used to conduct a drawing by chance, sweepstakes, or game promotion utilizing those electronic or mechanical devices. 
    Dead tree: Means a tree that is dead or damaged beyond repair or is in an advanced state of decline (where an insufficient amount of live tissue, green leaves, limbs, or branches exists to sustain life) and has been determined to be such by the Land Use Administrator. 
    Demand for concurrency public facilities: The quantitative measure of the amount of concurrency public facility or other public facilities that is necessary to support a specific increment of development. 
    De minimis: A minor deviation from the required standards or a small degree of relief from requirements as set forth in the LDC in which it is not necessary to acquire a quasi-judicial decision. 
    Density: The number of dwelling units per gross acre of buildable land, which includes all streets, public right-of-ways, easements, open space, and onsite recreational facilities. 
    Derelict vessel: A vessel left upon any public waters or docked at private property in a wrecked, junked, or substantially dismantled condition. 
    Design flood: The flood associated with the greater of the following two areas: 
(1)  Area with a floodplain subject to a 1-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year; or 
(2)  Area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
    Design flood elevation: The elevation of the "design flood," including wave height, relative to the datum specified on the community's legally designated flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO, the design flood elevation shall be the elevation of the highest existing grade of the building's perimeter plus the depth number (in feet) specified on the flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO where the depth number is not specified on the map, the depth number shall be taken as being equal to two feet. 
    Designee: A person(s) duly authorized to act on the behalf of another. 
    Developer: That person improving a parcel of land within the City and, who may or may not be the owner of the property. 
    Development: Relating to flood damage protection, this term means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, tanks, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, temporary or permanent storage of materials or equipment or other land disturbing activities. 
    Development order, final: The approval of a development of regional impact, a borrow pit permit, an electrical permit, a master planned development, a right-of-way utilization permit, a site plan, a special exception, a variance, a subdivision preliminary plat, a statutory subdivision final plat, a nonstatutory subdivision plat, an underground utility permit, a dredge and fill permit, a written agreement with the Flagler County School Board for the provision of public facilities and services as required by state law, and any other development order which results in an immediate and continuing impact upon concurrency public facilities. Final development orders may address future expansions of a development and may provide for phasing. A final development order may provide for conditions that must be met in order for subsequent approvals to be given or permits to be issued. 
    Development order having no impacts on concurrency public facilities: Those development orders that permit or approve: 
(1)  Accessory facilities for agricultural use that create no additional impacts on concurrency public facilities. 
(2)  An accessory structure to a residence. 
(3)  Any sub-permit to new construction. 
(4)  A change of electrical services. 
(5)  A driveway or parking lot paving. 
(6)  Fences. 
(7)  Permits for historical documentation. 
(8)  Remodeling, such as moving a wall, if no change in use, addition of units or interior completion of a shell only structure is involved. 
(9)  The repair or replacement of mechanical systems, wiring or plumbing. 
(10)  The replacement of structures which will have no additional impacts on concurrency public facilities. 
(11)  The re-roofing of existing structures. 
(12)  Room additions (including screen rooms) to a residence. 
(13)  Signs. 
(14)  Swimming pools. 
(15)  Temporary construction trailers. 
(16)  Use permits and right-of-way utilization permits that do not increase the needed capacity of concurrency public facilities. 
(17)  Walls. 
(18)  Wells and septic tanks. 
    Diameter at breast height: Shall mean the measurement of an existing tree trunk's diameter at four and one-half feet above grade (breast height). For trees with less than four and one-half feet of clear trunk, diameter shall be of the largest leader measured four and one-half feet above ground level. For multitrunk trees, each branch that forks below four and one-half feet is considered a separate tree. Trees that originate from the same base shall be considered one tree regardless of the number of forks present above ground only for purposes of minimum tree cover count only. 
    Directional sign: See Sign, directional . 
    Discharge: Any spilling, leaking, seeping, pouring, misapplying, emitting, emptying, or dumping that may be either accidental or purposeful of any hazardous substance that may negatively impact surface water, soils, or groundwater. 
    Discount superstore: A very large retail store greater than 100,000 square feet in size that is usually part of a chain, offering a wide variety of merchandise for sale at prices typically below the market price. 
    Dock: Fixed or floating structure, including access walkways, platforms, catwalks, mooring pilings, lifts, boathouses, and other associated water-dependent structures used for mooring and accessing watercraft. 
    Dormer: A dormer is a window that is set vertically on a sloping roof. The dormer has its own roof, which may be flat, arched, or pointed. 
    Drainage: The control of surface flow of water by man-made facilities such as canals, ditches, culverts, or dikes. It can also refer to the artificial lowering of groundwater and the natural drainage of a site in the predevelopment condition. 
    Drainage area: The watershed (acreage) contributing surface water runoff to the City's stormwater management facilities or systems. 
    Dredging: To excavate underwater material. 
    Drinking establishment: An establishment where alcoholic beverages are obtainable within or thereon and where such beverages are consumed on the premises. A bottle club is also a drinking establishment. 
    Driveway: A private roadway providing access for vehicles to a parking space, garage, dwelling, or other structure. A standard driveway is one leading to a garage for a single-family, two-family, or townhouse residence. 
    Driveway median: A landscaped island that separates ingress and egress driveways. 
    Duplex: A detached building intended, designed and occupied as two dwelling units with a common wall or roof on a single lot. 
    Dwelling or dwelling unit: Any building, portion thereof, or other enclosed space or area used as or intended for use as the home of one family, with separate cooking and housekeeping facilities, either permanently or temporarily. 
(1)  Single-family: A detached building designed for and occupied by one family as a home, with cooking and housekeeping facilities. 
(2)  Two-family: A detached building intended, designed and occupied as two dwelling units with a common wall or roof, and with each unit located on a separate lot under separate ownership. 
(3)  Multifamily: A building designed for or occupied by three or more families, with separate cooking and housekeeping facilities for each. 
    Earth tones: Various rich colors containing some brown. Earth tones are defined herein to include shades of brown, taupe, beige, and gray. 
    Easement: A grant by a property owner of the use of land for a specific purpose. 
    Educational facilities: See Schools. 
    Effective removal: A condition of a tree caused by the excessive damage or improper pruning of roots or tree canopy. This includes, but is not limited to, topping, lion tailing, hat racking, or elevation of lower tree branches to a height of more than one-third of the total height of the tree (unless tree is a "standard" form tree). 
    Egress: An exit. 
    Electronic equipment: Any electronic device provided by or on behalf of the operator that is used or adapted for use to conduct, or reveal the results of, a drawing by chance conducted in connection with the sale of a consumer product or service, sweepstakes or other game promotion, that displays results by simulating a game or games ordinarily played on a slot machine or other similar games of chance. 
    Electronic game promotion: A sweepstakes or other game promotion which utilizes electronic equipment, or a drawing by chance conducted in connection with the sale of a consumer product or service which utilizes electronic equipment that does not violate Florida law. 
    Encroachment: The placement of fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or other development into a flood hazard area which may impede or alter the flow capacity of riverine flood hazard areas. 
    Encumbrance: Any claim or restriction on a property's title. Relating to concurrency, an administrative technique within the concurrency management system implemented to avoid over committing available capacity. The encumbering of available capacity is not synonymous with the issuance of a "certificate of concurrency." 
    Endangered species: Those animal species listed in Section 39-27.003, FAC and those plant species listed as endangered in 50 Code of Federal Regulations 17.12. 
    Entrance: Entranceway into a structure. 
    Erected: The word "erected" includes built, constructed, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operations on the site required for building. Excavation, fill, drainage, and the like shall be considered a part of erection. 
    Etching: Engraving a design in glass, metal, or a hard surface by removing part of the surface. Also, to remove surface concrete to create an exposed aggregate finish. 
    Excavation: To make a hole, unearth, scrape, or dig out for the purpose of construction, demolition, or stump/root removal with specific relation to a tree drip line and root system. 
    Facade: The exterior face of a building including the front exterior wall and any side exterior walls facing the public right of way or access easement. 
    Facility: A structure or place built, installed, or established to serve a particular purpose. 
    Facility reservation fees: The dollar amount that is due as impact fees and connection fees relating to concurrency public facilities which fees must be paid as a condition precedent to the validity of a certificate of capacity. The fees are computed at the rate that is in effect at the time that payment is made. Such fees are refundable if a final development order is not issued, expires or is surrendered pursuant to an amending development order issued by the City and a new applicant purchases the reserved capacity from the City. If no refund occurs, however, the fees paid run with the real property to which they relate as a credit against future fees relating to development of the real property. 
    Family care home/adult: Per F.S. ch. 429, a full-time, family-type living arrangement, in a private home, under which a person who owns or rents the home provides room, board, and personal care on a 24-hour basis for no more than five disabled adults or frail elders who are not relatives. 
    Family child daycare home/child (large): An occupied residence in which child care is regularly provided for children from at least two unrelated families, which receives a payment, fee, or grant for any of the children receiving care, whether or not operated for profit, and which has at least two full-time child care personnel on the premises during the hours of operation. One of the two full-time child care personnel must be the owner or occupant of the residence. A large family child care home must first have operated as a licensed family day care home for two years with an operator who has had a child development associate credential or its equivalent for one year, before seeking licensure as a large family child care home. A large family child care home shall be allowed to provide care for one of the following groups of children, which shall include those children under 13 years of age who are related to the caregiver: 
(1)  A maximum of eight children from birth to 24 months of age. 
(2)  A maximum of 12 children, with no more than four children under 24 months of age. 
    Family day care home/child: A residence in which child care is regularly provided for children from at least two unrelated families and which receives a payment, fee, or grant for any of the children receiving care, whether or not operated for profit. The license holder must reside in the residence. A family daycare home shall be allowed to provide care for one of the following groups of children, which shall include those children under 13 years of age who are related to the caregiver: 
(1)  A maximum of four children from birth to 12 months of age. 
(2)  A maximum of three children from birth to 12 months of age, and other children, for a maximum total of six children. 
(3)  A maximum of six preschool children if all are older than 12 months of age. 
(4)  A maximum of ten children if no more than five are preschool age and, of those five, no more than two are under 12 months of age. 
    Farm animals: Animals considered permissible for an agricultural use, including horses, mules, burros, sheep, cattle, rabbits, chickens, ducks, geese, pigs, goats, ostrich, emu, or other similar animals. 
    Fascia: A flat horizontal band or member between moldings, especially in a classical entablature. 
    Fence: An artificially constructed vertical barrier constructed of wood, vinyl, or metal erected to enclose, restrict access to, screen, or separate areas. An open fence is one having at least 50 percent visibility. 
    Field conference: A specific purpose meeting scheduled and held at a job site. 
    Final development order: See Development order, final . 
    Flat roof: See Roof, flat . 
    Fleet storage: The storage of all operable and/or inoperable vehicles consisting of five or more vehicles, which are owned or leased by the business establishment, exclusive of lawful display of all vehicles and trailers, the parking of vehicles for permitted businesses and the parking, storage, and display of heavy commercial vehicles and construction equipment. 
    Flood or flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood damage-resistant materials: Any construction material capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining any damage that requires more than cosmetic repair. 
    Flood hazard area: The greater of the following two areas: 
(1)  The area within a floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any year. 
(2)  The area designated as a flood hazard area on the community's flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 
    Flood insurance rate map: An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study: The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. It is an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations or an examination, elevation, and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood related erosion hazards. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the Flood Boundary Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    Floodplain: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. Also, see definition of flood or flooding . 
    Floodplain Administrator: The office or position designated and charged with the administration and enforcement of this article (may be referred to as the Floodplain Manager). 
    Floodplain development permit or approval: An official document or certificate issued by the community, or other evidence of approval or concurrence, which authorizes performance of specific development activities that are located in flood hazard areas and that are determined to be compliant with this article. 
    Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
    Floodway encroachment analysis: An engineering analysis of the impact that a proposed encroachment into a floodway is expected to have on the floodway boundaries and base flood elevations; the evaluation shall be prepared by a qualified Florida licensed engineer using standard engineering methods and models. 
    Floor: The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), i.e. top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. 
    Floor, lowest: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area of a building or structure, including basement, but excluding any unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, other than a basement, usable solely for vehicle parking, building access or limited storage provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the non-elevation requirements of the Florida Building Code or ASCE 24. 
    Floor area: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings. Provided that for the purpose of determining compliance with the permitted floor area, the floor area of enclosed required off-street parking areas shall not be included. Provided further that floor area for outdoor display of merchandise or customer seating, whether uncovered or covered by a tent or canopy, under the provisions of this LDC shall mean the smallest rectangular area encompassing the display or customer seating area. 
    Floor area, gross: The sum of the horizontal areas of the stories of a building or buildings, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the centerlines of walls that separate buildings. Included within such sum shall be the areas of all stories and attic spaces providing structural headroom of at least five and five-tenths feet; interior balconies and mezzanines; and any other space reasonably usable for any purpose except parking; no matter where located within a building. This term does not include the area of any parking garage structure, but does include all other interior spaces including those that are not heated or air conditioned. 
    Floor area ratio: The gross floor area of all buildings divided by the lot area. 
    Florida Building Code (FBC): The family of codes adopted by the Florida Building Commission, including: Florida Building Code, Building; Florida Building Code, Residential; Florida Building Code, Existing Building; Florida Building Code, Mechanical; Florida Building Code, Plumbing; Florida Building Code, Fuel Gas. 
    Florida Department of Transportation Design Standards Road and Bridge Technical Specifications: Publication by the Florida Department of Transportation tabulating and specifying design and safety requirements appropriate for use in designing and constructing roadways and bridges for motor vehicle and pedestrian uses. 
    Florida Department of Transportation Standards for Sight Triangles and Sight Distances: Publication by the Florida Department of Transportation tabulating design and safety requirements protecting appropriate lines of sight for motor vehicle drivers. 
    Florida-friendly landscaping: A set of nine guiding principles which help protect natural resources and preserve Florida's unique beauty including: right plant, right place; water efficiently; fertilize appropriately; mulch; attract wildlife; manage yard pests responsibly; recycle; reduce stormwater runoff; and protect the waterfront. 
    Florida master site file: The listing of cultural resources, historic or archaeological resources maintained by the Florida Department of State, Division of Historical Resources and Bureau of Archaeological Research. 
    Fluorescent colors: Very bright and or glowing colors. 
    Foot-candle: A unit of measurement referring to illumination incident to a single point. One foot-candle is equal to one lumen uniformly distributed over an area of one square foot. 
    Footprint: The horizontal area as seen in a plan measured from outside of all exterior walls and supporting columns. It includes buildings, residences, garages, covered carports, and accessory structures, but not trellises, patios, and areas of porch, deck, and balcony less than 30 inches from finished grade. 
    Foundation: The underlying structure of a building, usually constructed of concrete, which supports the foundation walls, piers, or columns. 
    Freeboard: Relating to flood damage protection, this term means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
    Full cut-off light fixture: A light fixture with elements such as shields, reflectors, or refractor angles that direct and cut off the light at a cutoff angle less than 90 degrees. 
    Fully shielded: When pertaining to lighting, light fixtures shielded in such a manner that light rays emitted by the fixture, either directly from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture, project below the horizontal plane running through lowest point on the fixture where light is emitted. 
    Functionally dependent use: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, including only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities; the term does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Gable roof: See Roof, gable . 
    Gallons per day: The gallons per day based on an annual average basis. 
    Gambrel roof: See Roof, gambrel . 
    Garage: For residential purposes, an enclosed area for the parking/storage of vehicles. For nonresidential purposes, a building for the storage and/or repair of motor vehicles generally closed on all sides. 
    Garage, attached: An enclosed area for the parking/storage of vehicles that is structurally connected to a residential unit, which may include connection by the means of a breezeway, provided the breezeway is a minimum of six feet in length and in which openings are required for each building as an entrance/exit. 
    Garage, detached: A detached structure that is accessory to a single detached dwelling unit and to which there is legal vehicular access from a public right-of-way, designed for the storage of motor vehicles for the residents of the single detached dwelling unit. 
    Gasoline service station: A business having at least one bay for automotive services, pumps for the fueling of automobiles and pickups, and which may include limited retail sales of convenience goods. 
    Geographic search area: The area designated by a wireless provider or operator for a new base station, produced in accordance with generally accepted principles of wireless engineering. 
    Good faith: An honest intention to accomplish or complete an approved development plan on a particular parcel of real property, but shall not encompass dishonest, fraudulent, or deceitful actions, ignorance of the law, mistakes of law, delays that are intentional or result from neglect or lack of diligence, or actions or occurrences caused by, resulting from, or facilitated by the property owner, developer, or agent thereof. It shall not be an absence of good faith if a developer attempts to proceed with a development if the developer was prevented from attaining a certain status, event, or condition due to the demonstrated and clear and convincing uncertainty of obtaining required governmental permits for which there is a substantial likelihood that such permits will be granted; provided, however, that delays which are caused by the developer or real property owner and acts by said persons causing delays and omissions by said persons which cause delays shall eliminate the delay as a valid factor which would excuse the attainment of the status, event or condition. 
    Good faith continuation: The final development order for a project pertaining to a parcel of real property that has not expired and a certificate of completion for development of infrastructure must be received within three years of the date of the preconstruction conference and subject to the following: 
(1)  Within four years of issuance of the final development order which resulted in the development being deemed statutorily vested, the preconstruction conference for the development must have occurred, provided, however, that if the developer diligently attempted to attain the completion of the preconstruction conference for the development in good faith, but was inhibited due to adverse general market conditions, said time frame shall be tolled during the period during which the recessionary cycle occurred. 
(2)  Within three years of the completion of the preconstruction conference, the developer must be issued a certificate of completion for the completion of the development's infrastructure; provided, however, that if the developer attempted to attain the certificate of completion, but was inhibited due to adverse general market conditions, said time frame shall be tolled during the period during which the recessionary cycle occurred. 
(3)  As to residential preliminary plats, the final plat for the development must be submitted within one year of the effective date of this LDC, provided, however, that the underlying development order that resulted in the development being deemed statutorily vested must not have expired. 
(4)  It shall not be an absence of good faith if a developer attempts to proceed with a development, if the developer was prevented from attaining a certain status, event, or condition due to the demonstrated and clear and convincing uncertainty of obtaining required governmental permits for which there is a substantial likelihood that such permits will be granted; provided, however, that delays which are caused by the developer or real property owner, and acts by said persons causing delays and omissions by said persons which cause delays shall eliminate the delay as a valid factor which would excuse the attainment of the status, event, or condition. 
    Grade, highest adjacent: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a building. 
    Groundwater: Water in the subsurface of the earth in both soils and geologic formations that are saturated. 
    Hazardous substance: A substance or combination of substances, which because of its quantity or concentration or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or may pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly used, handled, treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. A material may be judged as hazardous if it is corrosive, reactive, ignitable, or toxic. 
    Hazardous waste: Waste materials including, but not limited to, poisons, pesticides, herbicides, acids, caustics, pathological wastes, radioactive materials, flammable or explosive materials, and similar harmful chemicals and wastes that require special handling and must be disposed of in a manner that conserves the environment and protects the public health and safety. 
    Hedge: A close planting of shrubs that forms a compact, dense, visually opaque, living barrier when mature. 
    Height of building: Building height refers to the vertical distance between lowest finished grade at the front of the building, or the base flood elevation where applicable, and: 
(1)  The average height level between the eaves and ridgeline of gable, shed, hip or gambrel roof; 
(2)  The deck line of a mansard roof; or 
(3)  The highest point of the coping of a flat roof. 
    Hip roof: See Roof, hip . 
    Historic resources: See cultural resources . 
    Historic structure: Any structure that is determined eligible for the exception to the flood hazard area requirements of the Florida Building Code, Existing Building, Chapter 12 Historic Buildings. 
    Home occupation: A use approved as a permitted use or special exception and any on-site business conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by residents thereof. Such use is to be clearly incidental and secondary to the residential uses and shall not change the residential character of the dwelling, and further provide that the use can meet the special exception regulations, as outlined in this LDC. 
    Hotel: A transient commercial lodging establishment consisting of one or more buildings used only for this purpose, including accessory uses such as eating and drinking facilities, recreation facilities, and parking. Lodgings may consist of sleeping rooms only, or may include cooking facilities also, but not intended for long-term occupancy. 
    Identification sign: See Sign, identification. 
    Illuminating Engineering Society of North America: Agency that approved an American National Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting. This recommended practice provides the design basis for lighting roadways, adjacent bikeways, and pedestrian ways. 
    Imperiled upland habitat: Includes natural habitats known to support rare species and the Coastal/Conservation element of the Comp Plan. Florida Natural Areas Inventory (FNAI) criteria are utilized to determine if the area consists of the following designations: 
(1)  Sandhill. 
(2)  Scrub. 
(3)  Maritime Hammock. 
(4)  Live Oak Hammock. 
(5)  Coastal Strand. 
(6)  Coastal Grassland. 
    Impervious: Any improvements that do not readily absorb or retain water including, but not limited to, building roofs, parking, driveway areas, gravel areas, sidewalks, and paved areas. 
    Impervious surface ratio: The percentage of the area of a lot covered by impervious surface. 
    Improvements, required site development: All land development improvements necessary to support the proposed buildings, as documented on the approved site plan drawings. 
    Improvements, required subdivision: All land development improvements necessary to support and service a proposed division of land into smaller parcels. Work includes, but is not limited to, water and sewer, paving and drainage, earthwork and clearing, erosion and sediment control facilities, and measures. 
    Independent living unit: A senior adult detached or attached housing unit that is an element of a continuing care retirement community, that provides optional services for residents to receive their choice of meals, personal services, medical services, housekeeping, transportation services, and organized social/recreational activities. 
    Infrastructure: A set of interconnected structural elements that provide the framework supporting an entire structure. This term has diverse meanings in different fields, but in the LDC, it refers to roads, water mains, and storm and sanitary sewer pipes to support a site plan or subdivision project. 
    Inspection: Observation of construction work being performed to assure compliance with approved plans and permits. 
    Inspection punch list: List of deficiencies and concerns that are a result of an inspection of a construction site. 
    Institution: Building and/or land designed to aid individuals in need of mental, therapeutic, rehabilitative counseling, or other correctional services. 
    Island: A raised area in a roadway, driveway, or parking facility used to control or direct traffic flow that typically contains landscape material to provide shade and aesthetics within parking facilities. 
    Island, median: A landscaped island at least five feet wide located between two rows of parking spaces with no intervening drive aisle. 
    Island, terminal: A landscaped island at least five feet wide located at the beginning or the end of a row of parking spaces that separates the adjacent parking space from a drive or parking aisle. 
    Junk yards: Place, structure, or lot where junk, waste, discarded, salvaged, or similar materials such as old metals, wood, slush, lumber, glass, paper, rags, cloth, bagging, cordage, barrels, containers, etc., including auto wrecking yards, used lumber yards, house-wrecking yards, and yards or places for storage or handling of salvaged house-wrecking and structural steel materials. This definition shall not include pawn shops and establishments for the sale, purchase, or storage of usable secondhand cars, salvaged machinery, used furniture, radios, stoves, refrigerators, or similar household goods and appliances. Nor shall it apply to the processing of used, discarded, or salvaged materials as part of manufacturing operations. 
    Kennel: Any place or premises where four or more canines or felines over four months of age are kept. 
    Keystone: Stone wedge at uppermost point of an arch that secures other arch members in place. Wedge-shaped member installed above an arch for ornamentation. 
    Kitchen, summer: An outdoor kitchen located for the primary use of outdoor entertaining not to be used for the purpose of a separate single-family dwelling and enclosed by no more than three walls under roof, including but not limited to, glass enclosures. 
    Landscape area: All pervious area within a site that supports the growth of plant material of any type. When used to calculate minimum tree requirements and landscape area requirements, the following areas shall not be counted as landscape area: synthetic turf areas, ponds, lakes, streams, rivers, and normally wet stormwater retention areas. If an existing or proposed water body, or normally wet retention area is a limiting factor as far as available site development area, then up to 25 percent of the area comprised by these features may be counted as landscape area providing this area be included in the area calculations for overall tree requirements. 
    Landscape buffer: See Buffer, landscape. 
    Landscape feature: An embellishment to the natural environment by blending manmade or natural materials with plantings in order to improve the outdoor aesthetics of a property. Landscape features, which include decorative planters, stone work, brick work, shall not exceed three feet in height. A Landscape feature, as defined herein is not a fence or wall. 
    Landscaping: Living plant material purposely installed for functional or aesthetic reasons at ground level and open to the sky. 
    Land Use Administrator: The City Manager shall act as the Land Use Administrator under the provisions of this LDC and shall prescribe and direct the processes and procedures, other than as otherwise specifically set forth in this LDC, relative to the administration of development review within the City. The City Manager may assign such duties to a City staff person or a team of City staff persons as he or she deems appropriate. 
    Lane: A strip of roadway or vehicular use area specifically designated to accommodate a single line of vehicles; a narrow way or passage for a specific use such as bicycles, pedestrians, etc. 
    Lane, bypass: An alternative channel, passage, or route. 
    Large quantity generator: A large quantity generator, as defined by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, 40 Code of Federal Regulations 260, is one who generates more than 1,000 kilograms (2,200 pounds or 250 gallons) of hazardous waste in a calendar month. 
    Large-scale commercial center: A commercial facility intended to function as a unit with a large-scale retailer as the anchor with shared services of other commercial uses. At least one anchor unit shall contain a minimum of 60,000 square feet. 
    Lawn/turf/sod: Upper layer of soil bound by live plant roots supporting the grass covered surface of the ground. 
    Letter of Map Change (LOMC): An official determination issued by FEMA that amends or revises an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study. Letters of Map Change include, but not limited to: 
(1)  Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA): An amendment based on technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective Flood Insurance Rate Map and establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure is not located in a special flood hazard area. 
(2)  Letter of Map Revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features. 
(3)  Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F): A determination that a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation and is, therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard area. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in accordance with the community's floodplain management regulations. 
(4)  Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR): A formal review and comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built documentation, a Letter of Map Revision may be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM. 
    Level of service: An existing or projected indicator of the extent or degree of service provided by a concurrency public facility or other public facility based on and related to the operational characteristics of the concurrency public facility or other public facility. 
    Level of service standard: The adopted and acceptable volume of demand for each concurrency public facility or other public facility thereby reflecting an acceptable operational level as to a facility. Volume of demand may be stated as a measure of quantity of capacity per unit of demand or may state a level of performance for which the methodology and rationale used for quantitative measurement is clearly demonstrated in the Comp Plan or its supporting data and analyses. 
    Light-duty truck: As defined in 40 C.F.R. 86.082-2, any motor vehicle rated at 8,500 pounds Gross Vehicular Weight Rating or less which has a vehicular curb weight of 6,000 pounds or less and which has a basic vehicle frontal area of 45 square feet or less, which is: 
(1)  Designed primarily for purposes of transportation of property or is a derivation of such a vehicle; or 
(2)  Designed primarily for transportation of persons and has a capacity of more than 12 persons; or 
(3)  Available with special features enabling off-street or off-highway operation and use. 
    Light fixture: An artificial illuminating device or lamp, permanent or portable, used to illuminate or to attract attention. Such devices shall include, but are not limited to, search, spot, string, or floodlights for: 
(1)  Building and structure lighting, to include canopies and overhangs. 
(2)  Recreational area lighting. 
(3)  Parking lot lighting. 
(4)  Landscape lighting. 
(5)  Billboard or sign lighting. 
(6)  Street lighting. 
(7)  Display and service area lighting. 
    Lintel: A horizontal structure member, such as a beam or stone, which spans an opening, as between the uprights of a door or window or between two columns or piers. 
    Listed species: Those animal species which are endangered, threatened, or of special concern and are listed in Sections 39-27.003, 39-27.004 and 39.27.005, FAC and those plant species listed in 50 Code of Federal Regulation 17.12 when such plants are found to be located in a wetland or other surface water (Subsection 40C-4.021(19), FAC). 
    Littoral zone: An environmental planting area around the perimeter of water bodies consisting of littoral shelf plantings, transitional plantings, and upland vegetation. 
    Live aboard watercraft: Any watercraft docked at a marina facility inhabited by a person or persons for any three consecutive days or a total of five days within a 30-day period, or any watercraft represented as a place of business, a professional or other commercial enterprise, or a legal residence. 
    Living area: Enclosed rooms, as measured by its outside dimensions, which can be heated or cooled with the exception of garages. 
    Loading space, off-street: A space logically and conveniently located for pickups or deliveries or for loading or unloading, scaled to the size of the delivery vehicles expected to use it, and accessible to such vehicles when required off-street parking spaces are occupied. 
    Local road: A route providing service that is of relatively low average traffic volume, short average trip length or minimal through-traffic movements, and high land access for abutting property. 
    Lot: A parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law. 
    Lot, corner: A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection of less than 135 degrees. The point of intersection of the street lines is the corner. In the event the principal building is more directly oriented to the lot corner at the street intersection than to either street frontage, such lot shall be considered to have two front yards, one abutting each street. 
    Lot depth: The average distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
    Lot, double frontage: A lot having frontage on two nonintersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot. 
    Lot line, front: The lot line separating the lot from the rights-of-way of the principal street on which the lot abuts. 
    Lot, interior: A lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot line, rear: The lot line opposite to and most distant from the front lot line, except for double frontage lots, which shall have two front lot lines. 
    Lot line, side: Any lot line other than front or rear lot line. A side lot line of a corner lot, separating a lot from a street, is called a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot is called an interior lot line. 
    Lot of record: A lot established prior to the enactment of this regulation that is a part of a recorded map or plat or a lot described by metes and bounds description, which is recorded according to Florida Law prior to November 16, 2008. 
    Lot width: The average distance between the side lot lines, measured along the front setback line. 
    Louvers: Vented covering for an opening that allows passage of air, but prevents rain and pests from entering. Commonly made of wood, aluminum, or galvanized steel and designed of horizontal slats in doors and shutters. 
    Luminaire: A complete lighting unit consisting of one or more lamps, together with the components designed to distribute the light, to position and protect the lamps, and to connect the lamps to the electrical power supply. 
    Machinery and equipment sign: See Sign, machinery and equipment. 
    Maintenance surety: See Surety, maintenance. 
    Mangrove stand: An assemblage of mangrove trees which is mostly low trees noted for a copious development of interlacing adventitious roots above the ground and which contain one or more of the following species: black mangrove (Avicennia nitida); red mangrove (Rhizophora mangle); white mangrove (Longunculariaracemosa); and buttonwood (Conocarpus erecta). 
    Mansard roof: See Roof, mansard . 
    Mansard, false or stuck on: A sloped plane that is attached or applied to a flat roof to make it appear to be a mansard roof. 
    Manual on transportation: The standard manual of recommended minimum requirements for signs, signals, and pavement markings in the United States. 
    Manufactured home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is eight feet or more in width and greater than 400 square feet and which is built on a permanent, integral chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle" or "park trailer." 
    Manufactured home (mobile home) park/subdivision, existing: Relating to flood damage protection, this term means a manufactured home (mobile home) park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes (mobile homes) are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before February 5, 1986 or standard based upon specific technical base flood elevation data which established the area of special flood hazard. 
    Manufactured home/mobile home/park/subdivision, expansion to an existing: Relating to flood damage protection, this term means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes (mobile homes) are to be affixed (including the minimum installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before February 5, 1986. 
    Manufactured home/mobile home park/subdivision, new: Relating to flood damage protection, this term is defined as a manufactured (mobile home) park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes (mobile homes) are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after February 5, 1986. 
    Manufacturing, heavy: An establishment whose principal purpose is the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products, including the bulk storage of raw materials, and which process may emit noise, vibration, dust, odor, or pollutants. Activities include manufacturing, assembly, and fabrication, including large scale or specialized industrial operations, processing, and compounding of semi-finished products from raw material in bulk form used in an industrial operation. Examples of heavy manufacturing include, but shall not be limited to, cement manufacturing, ship/boat manufacturing, and similar uses. 
    Manufacturing, light: An establishment whose principal purpose is the manufacturing, assembling, compounding, processing, packing, baling, repairing, storage, or distribution of products made from previously prepared basic materials. Examples include bond, cloth, cork, fiber, leather, paper, plastics, metals (not involving punch presses over 50 tons rated capacity), stones, tobacco, wax, yarns, or wood (except where sawmills or planing mills are employed). Uses deemed to qualify as light manufacturing include, but are not limited to, sign manufacturing, commercial bakeries, and similar uses. 
    Marina facility: Any structure or combination of structures, other than a single residential dock, located on or over the water surface of the navigable waters of the City, and is designed or used for the mooring of watercraft. Marina facilities are classified into the following subcategories. 
(1)  Commercial marina: Any facility or structure that is used for business or income producing purposes, through rental or any other means, the services of which are open to the general public, or which serves as an accessory facility to other rental, commercial, or industrial operations. It shall include, but not be limited to, docking for restaurants, hotels, motels, commercial fishing, shipping, or sales. 
(2)  Noncommercial marina: A marina facility designed to moor three or more watercraft that is intended to be used for private recreational or leisure purposes by persons or groups of persons who are residents of a development, or a nonprofit organization. General public usage and/or access is and will be prohibited by deed restrictions, easements, or other legally binding documentation except that a de minimis number of watercraft slips, not to exceed five percent, may be subject to rental agreements to nonresidents of the development associated with the marina facility. A marina associated with and part of a development shall not be deemed a commercial marina if instruments of title, acceptable to the City, bind the developed property to the marina in a manner approved by the City. A marina facility with no more than five-day slips shall be considered a noncommercial marina. 
    Marine service station: A facility that provides fueling services for watercraft while they are located on or over the water. 
    Market value: Relating to flood damage protection, this term means the Property Appraiser's 'Just Value' of the structure, excluding the land, or an appraisal of the structure by a qualified independent appraiser. For the purposes of determining "substantial damage" per incident, the market value is the value prior to the damage occurring. For purposes of determining "substantial improvements", the market value is the value prior to the start of construction of each improvement. 
    Market value: The price at which a property will change hands between a willing buyer and a willing seller, neither party being under compulsion to buy or sell and both having reasonable knowledge of relevant facts. As used in this article, the term refers to the market value of buildings and structures, excluding the land and other improvements on the parcel. Market value may be established by a qualified independent appraiser, Actual Cash Value (replacement cost depreciated for age and quality of construction), or tax assessment value adjusted to approximate market value by a factor provided by the Property Appraiser. 
    Master meter: A single meter serving a multifamily residential or multi-unit commercial facility. This term includes, but is not limited to, master meters serving condominiums, apartments, mobile home parks, hotels, motels, travel trailer parks, shopping centers, and office buildings. 
    Master Planned Development District (MPD): The purpose of the Master Planned Development District, which takes the place of the former Planned Unit Development (PUD), former Planned Rural Development (PRD), former Village Center (VGC-1, VGC-2), and former Golf Course Community (GCC) Districts, is to provide opportunities for innovative planning and design. Although greater flexibility is given within this district, procedures are established in this LDC to ensure that master planned developments are consistent with sound and generally accepted land development practices and that added benefit is accrued to the community. 
    Mechanical equipment: Equipment such as air conditioning units, pool pumps, generators, and gas tanks. 
    Median income: The Flagler County median income is the figure published, and periodically updated, for the County as a whole by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
    Medical marijuana treatment center: Has the meaning provided in Article X, Section 29, Florida Constitution. Medical marijuana treatment center dispensing facilities are a component of said definition. Medical marijuana treatment center dispensing facilities are subject to licensure by the Florida Department of Health, pursuant to F.S. § 381.986 (2017) and implementing regulations. 
    Microbrewery: A facility licensed by the State for the production and packaging of malt beverages with low alcoholic content for distribution or for consumption on the premises, with a capacity of not more than 15,000 barrels per calendar year. Accessory uses may include tasting rooms with food sales or tours of the microbrewery. 
    Mitigation: An action or series of actions to offset the adverse wetland impacts. Mitigation usually consists of restoration, enhancement, creation, preservation, or a combination thereof. Mitigation also refers to the required replacement of protected trees that are removed for multi-family, institutional, commercial, and industrial development and residential lots. 
    Mobile home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is eight body feet or more in width and which is built on an integral chasses and designed to be used as a dwelling when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. This structure is required to bear the insignia of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 
    Mobile home park: A residential development on a parcel of land in one ownership providing rental spaces for two or more mobile homes on a long-term basis, with recreation and service facilities for the tenants. 
    Mobile home park/subdivision, existing: See Manufactured home park/subdivision, existing . 
    Mobile home park/subdivision, expansion to an existing: See Manufactured home park/subdivision, expansion to an existing. 
    Mobile home park/subdivision, new: See Manufactured home park/subdivision, new. 
    Mobile home park/subdivision, substantially improved existing: See Manufactured home park/subdivision, substantially improved existing. 
    Mobile home space: A plot of ground within a mobile home park designated for the accommodation of one mobile home or travel trailer. 
    Mobile home subdivision: A residential development designed for the accommodation of mobile homes on individually owned lots or in condominium or cooperative ownership, including recreation and open space areas held in common ownership, but not including developments serving tourists or vacation-oriented travel trailers, motor homes, campers, etc. 
    Model home: A finished single-family residential unit, including units in a multifamily structure and manufactured/mobile homes, for which a certificate of occupancy has been obtained and located in a residentially zoned district, but utilized as an example of a product offered for sale to purchasers by a realtor, builder, developer, or contractor. 
    Molding: An embellishment in strip form, made of wood or other structural material, used to decorate or finish a surface, such as the wall of a building or the surface of a door. 
    Monotonous: Tediously uniform or unvarying. 
    Motel: Any public lodging establishment which offers rental units with an exit to the outside of each rental unit, daily or weekly rates, off-street parking for each unit, a central office on the property with specified hours of operation, and a bathroom or connecting bathroom for each rental unit. Lodgings may consist of sleeping rooms only or may include cooking facilities also, but not intended for long-term occupancy. 
    Mulch: An organic soil additive or topping such as compost, wood chips, wood shavings, seasoned sawdust, bark, leaves, or pine straw, used to reduce evaporation, prevent erosion, control weeds, enrich the soil, and moderate soil temperature. Inorganic materials such as rock or chipped rubber are also considered mulch. Where the word mulch is used in reference to seeding requirements, it is deemed to be straw or hay. 
    Multifamily: See Dwelling, multifamily. 
    Multi-tenant retail center shall mean retail uses in one or more buildings consisting of two or more individual, unaffiliated tenants. Multi-Tenant Retail Centers include shared access connections to external roads, shared internal circulation, parking and external signs and master stormwater management areas. Multi-Tenant Retail Centers do not include outparcels. 
    Multiuse building: A building that provides for nonresidential uses on the first floor and residential living quarters located above the first floor. 
    Munsell: A standard color system that allows precise documentation of colors using an alphanumeric code to describe the color attributes of hue (pigmentation), value (lightness/darkness), and chroma (color intensity). To establish an objective means of color evaluation, the Munsell color system's lightness value shall guide the selection of acceptable colors. 
    National Register of Historic Places: The official listing of cultural resources or historic properties significant in American history, architecture, archaeology, engineering and culture, maintained by the Secretary of the Interior as established by the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended. 
    Native plant: See Plant, native. 
    Navigable waters of the City: Lakes, ponds, Intracoastal Waterway, saltwater canals, freshwater canals, streams, or any other body of water or waterway natural or artificially created, or any constructed channel or water body to said bodies of water or waterways, located within the City of Palm Coast that can be used for the navigability of watercraft. It is not the intent of the LDC to assert ownership of such waters, but it is the intent of this Ordinance to assert land use regulatory jurisdiction as set forth in the LDC. 
    Nonconforming use: A use of land existing lawfully at the time of the enactment of this regulation, or at the time of a zoning or use change and which does not conform with the regulations of the use district in which it is located. 
    Nonresidential: Used or intended for purposes other than as a dwelling unit. 
    Nonresidential controlling master site development: Commercial facilities developed on one or more lots and intended to function as a unit with shared services and facilities. 
    Non-vehicular non-access easement: An easement that limits or preludes legal access for any lot, tract, or parcel onto a street or adjacent property or between subdivision boundaries. See also, spite strip. 
    Nursery, plant materials: Land, building, structure, or combination thereof for the storage, cultivation, transplanting of live trees, shrubs, or plants offered for retail sale on the site, including products used for gardening or landscaping. 
    Nursing home: A home for aged, chronically ill, or incurable persons in which three or more persons, not of the immediate family, are received, kept, or provided with food and shelter or care for compensation, but not including hospitals, clinics, or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the sick or injured. 
    Off-site improvements: All land development improvements proposed to be built on land that is not part of the project property, except for work within a public road right-of-way immediately adjacent to the project limits of frontage on that road. 
    Off-street loading space: See Loading space, off-street. 
    Off-street parking space: See Parking space, off-street. 
    One hundred (100)-year flood elevation: See Base flood elevation . 
    One-way: A roadway or aisle on which traffic moves in only one direction. 
    On-site: Within the limits of the area encompassed by the tract area or parcel of record on which the activity is conducted. 
    Open space: The land area within a development which is retained in its natural condition or improved in a manner for the enjoyment of all persons owning property within the development. Open space includes, but is not limited to, tree and environmental preservation areas, waterbodies, and common area parcels, and is not developed with impervious surface unless it is common open space. Open space also includes those portions of the right-of-way that are pervious. 
    Operation: To cause or to allow a system to function. 
    Operator: Any person in whose name an electronic game promotion is conducted and in whose name a certificate of use is issued. 
    Oriel: A bay window supported from below by corbels or brackets. 
    Outdoor display: An outdoor arrangement of objects, items, products, or other materials, typically not in a fixed position and capable of rearrangement, designed and used for the purpose of advertising or identifying a business, product, or service. 
    Outparcel: For the purpose of this Code, an area meeting the minimum zoning district dimensional requirements and located within a shopping center that shares a common parking lot with other buildings and establishments within said shopping center, but separated from the principal building and establishments by parking or vehicular use area. 
    Overhead utility facilities: Communications and power lines installed through the air supported on and spanning between poles. 
    Parapet: A low wall projecting from the edge of a platform, terrace, or roof. 
    Parasite sign: See Sign, parasite. 
    Parent parcel: A tract or parcel of land that was lawfully created by either a plat or nonstatutory subdivision. 
    Park trailer: A transportable unit which has a body width not exceeding 14 feet and which is built on a single chassis and is designed to provide seasonal or temporary living quarters when connected to utilities necessary for operation of installed fixtures and appliances. [Defined in F.S. § 320.01.] 
    Parking: The temporary, transient storage of motor vehicles used for personal transportation while their operators are engaged in other activities. It shall not include storage of new or used cars for sale, service, rental, or other purpose other than specified above. 
    Parking angle: The angle formed by a parking stall and the wall or centerline of the facility, ranging from 90 degrees (perpendicular) to 45 degrees. 
    Parking design: The layout and design of a parking facility based on standard criteria. 
    Parking lot: A surface area for parking off the street or beyond the right-of-way. 
    Parking, parallel: Spaces designed parallel to the curb of a street, a lot, or a parking structure wall. 
    Parking, shared: The approved use of the same off-street parking space for two or more distinguishable uses where peak-parking demand of the different uses occurs at different times of the day. 
    Parking space: A surface area reserved for temporary storage of one motor vehicle and connected to a street by a driveway. 
    Parking space, off-stree t: An off-street parking space shall consist of an area adequate for parking an automobile with room for opening doors on both sides, together with properly related access to a street or alley and maneuvering room, but shall be located totally outside of any street, alley right-of-way, or highway. 
    Parking stall: The area, usually marked with distinguishing lines, in which one vehicle is to be parked; a parking space. 
    Passenger station: A facility at which passengers may board and alight from buses and/or trains, usually consisting of at least one covered structure or building for the use of waiting passengers. 
    Pavilion: A central or flanking projecting subdivision of a façade, usually accented by more elaborate decoration or a greater height and distinction of a roof line. 
    Peak period: The period of maximum parking activity, this can be by the hour, day of week, or seasonal. 
    Pedestrian: A person whose mode of transportation is on foot, including a person "walking a bicycle." 
    Pediment: A low-pitched triangular gable on the front of a building. 
    Performance surety: See Surety, performance. 
    Permanent commercial campground: A parcel or plot of ground upon which two or more permanent (year-round) campsites are located, established and maintained for occupancy by camping units of the general public. Such campgrounds must meet the minimum state code requirements for sanitary facilities and potable water supply. 
    Pervious area: The total lot area left in a condition that permits full percolation of the stormwater including surface water bodies, wetlands, and retention areas. 
    Pharmacy: A retail use licensed under the Florida Statutes to dispense or sell prescription drugs, including, but not limited to medical marijuana treatment center dispensing facilities, as referenced in F.S. § 381.986(11) as amended from time to time. The term does not include hospice services, medical and diagnostic laboratories, dental labs, medical and professional offices, outpatient care facilities, assisted living facilities, nursing homes, adult day care centers, child day care centers, schools, colleges, or other educational or health care institutions. 
    Pier: Wharf projecting into a body of water. In addition, an upright support member of a building designed and constructed to function as an independent structural element in supporting and transmitting building and environmental loads to the ground with a height limited to a maximum of three times its least lateral dimension. 
    Pilaster: A pilaster is a rectangular support which resembles a flat column. The pilaster projects only slightly from the wall, and has a base, a shaft, and a capital. 
    Pile: An upright support member of a building, usually long and slender in shape, driven into the ground by mechanical means and primarily supported by friction between the pile land the surrounding earth. Piles often cannot act as individual support units and require bracing to other pilings. 
    Pitch: The slope of a roof expressed in terms of a ratio of height to span. 
    Pitched roof: See Roof, pitched. 
    Planned unit development (PUD): A former zoning classification that allowed an area of land, controlled by a landowner(s), to be developed as a unified project and single entity for a group of structures such as residential or nonresidential or any combination thereof. See Master Planned Development District. 
    Plant, native: Means any plant species with a geographic distribution indigenous to all or part of the State of Florida. 
    Plat: A map or delineated representation of the subdivision of lands, being a complete exact representation of the subdivision and other information in compliance with all applicable sections of F.S. ch. 177, and this LDC. 
    Plinth: A continuous course of stones that form the base or foundation of a wall. 
    Political sign: See Sign, political. 
    Pollutant: Includes, but is not limited to, dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, 42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), heat, wrecked or damaged equipment, rock, sand and industrial (excepting the county's discharges), and agricultural waste discharged into the MS4, and including other materials which the City Manager or designee or federal or state regulatory agencies may deem appropriate to be included. 
    Porch: A roofed, open space that may be screened, attached to, or part of a building and with direct access to or from the building. 
    Portal: A doorway, entrance, or gate, especially one that is large and imposing. 
    Portico: A porch or walkway with a roof supported by columns, often oriented at the entrance of a building. 
    Poultry: Any chickens, turkeys, ducks, or geese. 
    Potable water: The water that is satisfactory for drinking, culinary, and domestic purposes and that meets the quality standards of the Florida Department of Environmental Protection. 
    Preconstruction conference: A meeting that is held between City staff and the contractor or developer after the issuance of a development order, but prior to the issuance of a building permit for the purpose of coordination of project and assurance of compliance with City regulations. 
    Preliminary site plan: An illustration of the details of development of areas such as, but not limited to, commercial, industrial, recreational, and multifamily residential uses not being platted. The required submittals and processing procedures shall be similar to those provisions for final platting to the extent deemed applicable for the proposed use by the Land Use Administrator. 
    Preservation: The identification, evaluation, recordation, documentation, analysis, recovery, interpretation, curation, acquisition, protection, management, rehabilitation, restoration, stabilization, maintenance, or reconstruction of historic properties. 
    Principal building: See Building, principal. 
    Private club: See Club, private. 
    Project: A particular development on an identifiable parcel of land. 
    Property: For the purpose of utilities, the real property owned or controlled by an applicant for which water service capacity allocation, wastewater service capacity allocation, or both is requested. 
    Public facility baseline statement: The concurrency baseline statement is an assessment of public facility available capacity anticipated for the reporting period. 
    Public use: See use, public. 
    Qualified environmental professional: A professional entity (may be an individual or company/firm) having appropriate scientific background and experience in the evaluation of wetland systems, delineation of jurisdictional wetlands, and listed flora and fauna in the State of Florida and the assessment of central Florida ecological communities. 
    Quoin: A stone or brick forming an exterior angle of a masonry wall that is differentiated from adjoining surfaces by material, texture, color, size, or projection. 
    Rain garden: On-site retention of stormwater using vegetated depressions engineered to collect, store, and infiltrate runoff. Also, known as Bio-Filter and an LID IMP. 
    Reclaimed water: Water, treated wastewater, or wastewater effluent that has been appropriately treated and which, as a result of the treatment of wastes, is suitable and usable for direct beneficial uses or a controlled use by and for public agricultural, commercial, residential or industrial developments, projects or purposes including, but not limited to, irrigation purposes in green areas of developments or other appropriate areas; water that has received at least secondary treatment and is reused after flowing out of a wastewater treatment plant. 
    Reclaimed water distribution system: 
(1)  Reclaimed water mains. 
(2)  Sub mains. 
(3)  Transmission lines. 
(4)  Storage and pumping facilities. 
(5)  Valves. 
(6)  House services. 
(7)  Meters. 
(8)  Other appurtenances. 
    Reclaimed water system: As used interchangeably, means any and all reclaimed water production, transmission, treatment, and distribution facilities currently owned, operated, managed, controlled, or otherwise used or hereafter owned or operated by the City. Such system includes any and all improvements, extensions, or additions thereto hereafter constructed or acquired either from the proceeds of bonds or from any other sources, together with all property, real, personal, or mixed, tangible or intangible, currently or hereafter owned, operated, managed, controlled, or otherwise used in connection therewith. 
    Recreation, indoor: An indoor public or private establishment designed and equipped for the conduct of sports and leisure time activities except for electronic game promotions. Some examples include bowling alleys, game rooms, theaters, gymnasiums, pool halls, and skating rinks. 
    Recreation, outdoor: Any site where the principal use is the provision of outdoor amusements, sports, games, athletic facilities, or other outdoor recreational facilities and/or services. This term includes botanical gardens, zoological gardens, skeet and gun clubs, golf driving ranges, miniature golf, go-cart tracks, drive-in theaters, aquatic centers, and water parks, but does not include golf courses or public parks and recreational facilities. 
    Recreational vehicle: Relating to flood damage protection, this term means a vehicle that is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Redevelopment: In addition to the definition of "development" provided in F.S. § 380.04, this term shall mean a substantial or material change in the use or character of an existing development property including, but not limited to, alterations, expansions, or renovations to structures, paved areas, and other property fixtures and features requiring a building permit. 
    Regulated use (or regulated activity): Any publicly or privately owned operation within a wellhead protection zone that handles, sells or otherwise distributes, produces, uses, stores, or disposes of a regulated substance, unless specifically exempted. 
    Remedy a violation: See Violation, remedy of . 
    Remove or removal: Actual or effective removal through killing, damaging or destroying any trees listed as protected. 
    Replat: A map or delineated representation of the subdivision of lands, being a complete exact representation of the subdivision and other information in compliance with all applicable sections of F.S. ch. 177, and this LDC. 
    Required site development improvements: See Improvements, required site development . 
    Required subdivision improvements: See Improvements, required subdivision . 
    Residential: Used or intended for use as a dwelling unit and includes uses accessory to a dwelling unit. 
    Restaurant, fast-food/fast-casual: An eating establishment where customers order and receive their food and/or beverages at a counter, select individual items prepared in front of the person, serve themselves buffet style, which include a drive-in window, or service is via drive-up service. Customers may or may not consume the food or beverages on-site. 
    Restaurant, sit-down: An eating establishment where food and/or beverages are served by waitresses or waiters to patrons seated at booths or tables. A sit-down restaurant may also provide accessory drive-through and walk-up services. If the business also sells alcoholic beverages, the sale of food products must represent at least 51 percent of the facility's total sales, or the business shall be considered a drinking establishment. 
    Retail fulfillment distribution center: A building where an e-commerce retailer can quickly deliver merchandise to online shoppers for pickup, or where the merchandise is transferred to a retail operator or local delivery service for rapid delivery to shoppers' homes or businesses. 
    Reuse: The deliberate application of reclaimed water, in compliance with the Florida Department of Environmental Protection and St. Johns River Water Management District rules, for a beneficial purpose. 
    Revetments: Wall with severe slope away from the base. 
    Right-of-way: Land in which the City owns the fee or has received a dedication for, or has an easement devoted to, or required for, the use of a public road, the use of stormwater management, or any other public use, including for medians, sidewalks, and driveways. 
    Riverine: Relating to flood damage protection, this term means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river including, but not limited to, tributaries, stream, brook, etc. 
    Road: Means and shall include streets, alleys, highways, sidewalks, bike paths, driveways, medians, and any other ways open or unopened to travel by the public, including the road bed, right-of-way and all culverts, drains, ditches, inlets, stormwater facilities, embankments, bridges, retaining walls, guardrails or other appurtenances necessary for the maintenance of travel. 
    Roof: The outside top covering a building or structure. 
    Roof, flat: A roof having no slope, or one with only a slight pitch to drain rainwater. 
    Roof, gable: Roof with gabled ends that slopes in two opposite directions from the ridge. 
    Roof, gambrel: Roof sloped in two opposite directions from the ridge, with each surface divided into two sections with different pitches. Lower section of the roof slopes steeply to the outside walls. 
    Roof, hip: A roof with sloping ends and sides. In addition, external angle formed at the intersection of two adjacent sloped roof sections. 
    Roof, mansard: A mansard roof has two slopes on each of the four sides. The lower slope is steeper than the upper slope. Dormers are often set in the lower slope. The upper slope is usually not visible from the ground. 
    Roof, pitched: A roof having one or more slopes. 
    Roof, shed: A roof with one slope. 
    Rooming house: See Boarding home . 
    Runoff (applies only to Chapter 9): The draining away of water (or substances carried in it) from the surface of an area of land, building, or structure. 
    Runoff (does not apply to Chapter 9): Relating to flood damage protection, that portion of precipitation that is not intercepted by vegetation, absorbed by the land surface, or evaporated, and thus flows overland into a depression, stream, lake, or ocean (runoff, called immediate subsurface runoff, also takes place in the upper layers of the soil). 
    Sand dunes: Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach. 
    School: A facility used for education or instruction in any branch of knowledge, and including the following: elementary, middle, and high schools, whether public or private; colleges, community colleges and universities; vocational and professional schools giving instruction in vocational, professional, technical, industrial, musical, dancing, dramatic, artistic, linguistic, scientific, religious or other special subjects. This term does not include childcare centers if separate from elementary schools. 
    Scoring: Scratching or roughening the surface of a member or material to create a rough finish or key for subsequent coats. To cut a narrow channel or groove in the surface of a material to allow for deeper cuts without shattering or splintering the face of the material. 
    Screen planting, medium: A 30-inch-high planting of continuous non-deciduous shrubs, with appropriate spacing, intended to partially block the view of something from adjacent properties or a rights-of-way. 
    Screen planting, short: A two-foot-high planting of continuous non-deciduous shrubs, with appropriate spacing, intended to partially block the view of something from adjacent properties or a rights-of-way. 
    Screen planting, tall: A five-foot-high planting of continuous non-deciduous shrubs, with appropriate spacing, intended to primarily block the view of something from adjacent properties or a rights-of-way, with opacity of at least 60 percent at time of planting that achieves 80-percent opacity within two years. 
    Seat: For purposes of determining the number of off-street parking spaces for certain uses, the number of seats is the number of seating units, installed or indicated, for each 24 lineal inches of benches, pews, or space for loose chairs. 
    Seawall: A structure built between a water body on one side and land on the other side. 
    Semipublic use: See Use, semipublic . 
    Septic tank: The sewage disposal system in which effluent is flushed into an underground tank and allowed to slowly absorb into the surrounding soil. 
    Service use: See Use, service. 
    Setback: The area between a property line and a line parallel thereto at a distance equal to the appropriate setback distance. (See Yard and Lot line ) 
    Setback line: The minimum distance prescribed by a zoning district between any property line and the foundation of a building or structure, or from the property line to the edge of a deck or concrete pad. A line within a lot parallel to a corresponding lot line, which is the boundary of any specified front, side or rear setback/yard, or the boundary of any public right-of-way whether acquired in fee, easement, or otherwise, or a line otherwise established to govern the location of buildings, structures, or uses. (See Yard and Lot line ) 
    Setback, 25-foot floodway: The area between the outer boundary of the regulatory floodway associated with natural named wetland systems including, but not limited to Big Mulberry Branch and Bulow Creek shown on the FIRM and a line parallel thereto at a distance of 25 feet. The purpose of the 25-foot floodway setback is to minimize encroachments to protect floodplain storage and natural floodplain functions. 
    Sewers, public or community: An approved sewage disposal system that provides a collection network and disposal system, and central sewage treatment facility for a single development, community, or region. 
    Sexually oriented business: A commercial bodily contact establishment, escort service, or sexual encounter business. A business shall be a sexually oriented business, whether services are provided on the premises of an establishment or on an out call basis at any other place and regardless of whether such business is licensed under this LDC. A business with a sexually oriented business license shall be presumed to be a sexually oriented business. An individual operating a sexually oriented business is subject to the provisions of this LDC notwithstanding the fact that services are being provided at or from a residence, motor vehicle, vessel, or any other location. A license pursuant to this LCD is required unless the individual is a paid employee for whom taxes and social security payments are withdrawn and paid by the licensed establishment, worker records are maintained, and the individual is not an independent contractor. 
    Shade tree: See Tree, shade . 
    Shared parking: See Parking, shared . 
    Shed roof: See Roof, shed . 
    Shopping center: An integrated group of primarily retail-oriented commercial establishments that is planned, developed, owned and managed as a unit. 
    Shutters: Wood, metal, or plastic panel on either side of a window. May be hinged, but commonly fixed in position. Originally used as a protective covering for windows when swung closed. 
    Sight distance: The minimum distance that allows a vehicle traveling at a designed speed to be able to stop before reaching a stationary object in its path. Typically, the design sight distance allows a below-average driver to stop in time to avoid a collision. 
    Sight triangle: A triangular-shaped area at intersections that provides a clear line of sight for drivers at a vertical level between two feet and seven feet above the average grade at the centerline of the right-of-way. Two sides of the triangle shall be the edges of pavement along each roadway from their intersection with their lengths based on the type of roadways, and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the first two lines. 
    Sign: Any letters, numbers, symbols, graphics, pictures, or figures, or combination thereof that are erected, constructed, placed, or attached on a structure, ground, or body which identify, advertise, or direct attention to a product, business, institution, place, person, or event, or any other communication and that can be seen from the public right-of-way or public waterway. When not modified by the terms "structure" or "face", the term "sign" shall include all parts of the sign and its supporting structure. 
    Sign, A-frame: A type of sign composed of two boards set up in a triangle shape hinged along the top. 
    Sign, abandoned: 
(1)  Any sign face which advertises a business no longer conducted or product no longer sold. In making the determination that a sign advertises a business no longer being conducted, the Land Use Administrator shall consider the existence or absence of a current occupational license, utility service deposit or account, use of the premises, and relocation of the business. 
(2)  Any sign structure that not used for business purposes for over six months and that is nonconforming according to existing codes regarding height, setback, or sign area. 
    Signage program: A graphic representation showing a comprehensive detailed presentation of all signage proposed for a particular development to include style, color, location, size, and material. 
    Sign, animated: Any sign of which all or any part thereof revolves or moves in any fashion whatsoever; and any sign which contains or uses for illumination any light, lights or lighting device or devices which change color, flash or alternate, show movement or motion, or change the appearance of said sign or any part thereof automatically. Animated signs also include electronic, LCD and LED signs if they are using movement and change of light to depict action or to create special effects or scenes. Also, known as Automatic Electric Changing Signs (ACS). Does not include manually changeable copy sign. 
    Sign area: The area of a sign face (which is also the sign area of a wall or other sign with only one face) shall be computed by means of the smallest square, circular, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display. This includes any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed. The sign area does not include any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets the LDC and is clearly incidental to the display itself. 
    Sign area, aggregate: The architectural area around the copy of the sign. The maximum aggregated sign area is determined by calculating sign area times two and is exclusive of the sign area. 

    Sign, awning: Any sign consisting of information painted on, sewn on, imprinted on, or attached to the surface of an awning or canopy. 
    Sign, banner: A sign either enclosed or not enclosed in a ridged frame and secured or mounted to allow movement caused by atmosphere. Flags are not banners. 
    Sign, directional: Any sign intended to provide direction to the public, including signs that direct traffic onto or within a site, identify restrooms, parking areas or spaces, freight entrances, or other facilities for the convenience of the public. 
    Sign, directory: A sign that provides a listing of the occupants of a multitenant center and their suite/building numbers. Directory signs are not intended to be visible from the public right-of-way, but to give direction to customers already within the site. 

    Sign, double faced: A sign with two faces that are no more than three feet apart at their closest point, or placed at an angle of 30 degrees or less. Double-faced signs shall be considered one sign. 
    Sign, electronic display type: A sign for presentation of information for visual reception, acquired, stored, or transmitted in various forms, where the input information is supplied as an electric signal, and uses a light source, LED (light emitting diodes), bare electric bulbs, luminous tubes, fiber optic, or other combination of light source to create the message. In addition, signs that appear protected, or are intermittently or intensely illuminated, or of a traveling, scrolling, or sequential light type, or contain, or are illuminated, or flashing light. 
    Sign, free expression: A sign, not in excess of four square feet in size (area) where the top of the sign is not more than three feet off the ground, if freestanding, and communicating information or views of concern to the owner of the sign, or containing any other noncommercial message that is otherwise lawful. 

    Sign, freestanding: A sign supported by a sign structure in the ground and that is wholly independent of any building, fence, vehicle, or object other than the sign structure for support. 
    Sign height: The vertical distance as measured from the finished grade to the highest point of the sign structure. Finished grade is the newly established grade at the base of the sign after construction of the sign, exclusive of any filling, berming, madding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. 
    Sign, identification: A sign that indicates the name and type of business or service, residents, or the name of the development located on the site where the sign is located including street address, phone number, and graphic of business logo. 
    Sign, illuminated: A sign that uses artificial light, either internal or external to the sign faces, to draw attention to the sign or otherwise increase its visibility. 
    Sign, machinery and equipment: Graphics and trademarks on vending machines, gas pumps, and machinery customarily used outside of buildings. Also, includes signs on public works and/or construction equipment (bulldozers and such) that have the brand/make of the machinery or equipment. 

    Sign, marquee: A sign attached to or hung from a marquee that is a permanent projecting structure protruding from the entrance of a building wall to provide shelter and display advertising. 
    Sign, manually changeable copy sign: The message on the sign is changed manually (without the use of an electric signal) using individual letters, numbers, phrases, or symbols. Examples include reader boards with manually changeable letters or changeable pictorial panels. 
    Sign, monument: See Sign, freestanding. 
    Sign, off-site advertising: A sign identifying, advertising or directing the public to a business, merchandise, service, institution, residential area, entertainment or activity which is located, sold, rented, based, produced, manufactured, or taking place at a location other than on the site on which the sign is located. 
    Sign, parasite: Any sign not exempted by this Code, for which no permit has been issued, and which is attached to another sign. 
    Sign, pole: A freestanding sign supported by a pole, a column, or other fabricated support member without any type of secondary support. Pole/pylon signs typically provide clear view between the sign and the ground. 
    Sign, political: Any sign used solely to present information suggesting a candidate's suitability for elected public office or presenting an issue to be voted upon in the upcoming legally recognized election at the Federal, State, County, or City level or for special districts. 
    Sign, portable: A sign that has no permanent attachment to a building or to the ground by means of a footing including, but not limited to, an A-frame or sandwich board sign; a sign with wheels designed to be pulled or towed on a trailer or similar device, pull attachments, hot air or gas filled balloons; umbrellas used for advertising; signs mounted for advertising purposes on a vehicle that is parked and visible from the public right-of-way, sidewalk, or curb. 
    Sign, projecting: A sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a building for support and that projects horizontally more than 12 inches from such building. 
    Sign, roof: A sign painted on or affixed to the roof of a building and primarily supported by that roof structure, except fascia signs. 
    Sign, snipe: Any sign or any material when such sign is attached in any way to trees, utility poles, motor vehicles, trailers, waterborne craft, or other objects. 
    Sign, temporary: A sign erected for two weeks or less to advertise or identify transitory events unless specifically permitted for a longer period by this LDC. 
    Sign, wall: A sign attached to a wall of a building or structure so that the wall forms the supporting structure or becomes the background of the sign. For the purpose of Chapter 12, wall signs include awning and projecting signs. 

    Sign, wayfinding: A directional sign placed in the public-right-of-way to advertise the location of one or more business or facilities in the immediate area. 
    Sign, window: A sign posted, painted, placed, or affixed in or on the interior or exterior of a window/glass door, or placed within three feet of a window/glass door pane, or displayed to be visible from the exterior of the building. 
    Silt fence: A temporary sediment barrier consisting of a filter fabric stretched across, and attached to, supporting posts and entrenched. 
    Site: The entire lot on which a use is or will be located and that is otherwise subject to the provisions of the LDC. 
    Site, building: Any lot or parcel, or group of lots or parcels, occupied or intended for development as a unit, whether or not as part of a larger development site. Building site area does not include surface waterbodies, floodways, or wetlands. 
    Site characteristics: The physical features of a site such as shape, area, topography, soil conditions, and access. 
    Site plan: A plan, to scale, showing uses and structures proposed for a parcel of land as required by the regulations involved. Includes lot lines, streets, building sites, reserved open space, buildings, landscape features-both natural and manmade-and the locations of proposed utility lines. 
    Site plan completion surety: See Surety, site plan completion . 
    Small quantity generator: A small quantity generator, as defined by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, 40 Code of Federal Regulations 260, is one that generates less than 1,000 kilograms (2,200 pounds or 250 gallons) of hazardous waste in a calendar month. 
    Smart irrigation controller: A weather-based irrigation device that utilizes prevailing weather conditions, current, and historic evapotranspiration, soil moisture levels and other relevant factors to adapt water applications to meet the estimated needs of plants and lawns. The controller shall estimate or measure depletion of available plant moisture to operate an irrigation system that replenishes water as needed while minimizing excess. 
    Special exception: A land use that is not similar in nature to the uses permitted in the district for which application is made (or in any district), but which is desired in the community, with appropriate controls, where a suitable location is available. 
    Special flood hazard areas: An area in the floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. Special flood hazard areas are shown on FIRMs as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, V1-V30, VE or V. 
    Special use: Includes utilities, transportation terminals, and facilities. 
    Spill: See discharge. 
    Spite strip: A private easement that limits or precludes legal access for any lot, tract, or parcel onto a street or adjacent property or between subdivision boundaries. 
    Stall: The area, usually marked with distinguishing lines, in which one vehicle is to be parked; a parking space. 
    Standing seam, metal: A standing seam roof is constructed of many interlocking panels that run vertically from the roof's ridge (the top of the roof) to the eave. The interlocking seam where two panels join together is raised above the roof's flat surface, allowing water to run off without seeping between panels. 
    Stoop: A raised platform approached by steps at the entrance of a house. 
    Stormwater: Water collected or collecting as a result of natural precipitation. 
    Stormwater management system: A system which is designed and constructed or implemented to control discharges that are necessitated by rainfall events, incorporating methods to collect, convey, store, absorb, inhibit, treat, use, or reuse water to prevent or reduce flooding, over drainage, environmental degradation, and water pollution, or otherwise affect the quantity and quality of discharges from the system. 
    Story: That portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor and upper surface of the floor or roof next above. 
    Stream: Any river, creek, slough, or natural watercourse in which water usually flows in a defined bed or channel. It is not essential that the flowing be uniform or uninterrupted. The fact that some part of the bed or channel shall have been dredged or improved does not prevent the watercourse from being a stream. Also, a body of water flowing in a natural surface channel. Flow may be continuous or only during wet periods. Streams that flow only during wet periods are termed "intermittent streams." 
    Street tree: See Tree, street . 
    Stringcourse: A horizontal band or molding set in the face of a building as a design element. 
    Striping: Painted lines delineating stalls and circulation patterns. 
    Structure: Anything constructed, installed or portable, the use of which requires a location on a parcel of land, such as buildings, manufactured homes, mobile homes, fences, billboards, swimming pools, poles, pipelines, transmission lines, advertising signs, a gas or liquid storage tank, seawall, bulkhead, revetment, or other man-made facilities or infrastructure. For the purposes of Subsection 4.01.05-Residential Docking Facilities along Saltwater and Freshwater Canals (and Intracoastal Waterway, as applicable) and Section 4.16-Marinas, this term means anything constructed or otherwise located or operated on or over water, extended over water, or affixed to something that is or will be located on the ground and covered by water, or is located on land and is an essential part of the operation or an integral system of the marina such as, by way of example only, fuel and electrical systems. 
    Structure, existing and building, existing: Relating to flood damage protection, this term means any structure or building for which the "start of construction" commenced before February 5, 1986 or standard based upon specific technical base flood elevation data that establishes the area of special flood hazard. 
    Structure, principal: The main building in which is conducted the principal use of the property on which such building is located. 
    Substantial damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a building or structure whereby the cost of restoring the building or structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the damage occurred. The term also includes flood-related damage sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement: Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a building or structure taking place during a ten-year period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building or structure before the improvement or repair is started. The period of accumulation begins when the first improvement or repair of each building is permitted subsequent to August 19, 2008. If the structure has incurred "substantial damage," any repairs are considered substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a building required to correct existing health, sanitary, or safety code violations identified by the building official and that are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
(2)  Any alteration of a historic structure provided the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Summer kitchen: See Kitchen, summer. 
    Supply well, public: A well that is constructed for purposes of extracting groundwater to the surface, by mumping or natural flow, and the groundwater from such excavation is to be used for human consumption assuming it has at least 15 service connections or regularly serves at least 25 individuals daily at least 60 days out of the calendar year. 
    Surety: A pledge or formal promise made in the form of a cash deposit, bond, or letter of credit to secure against loss, damage, or default; a guarantee. 
    Surety, maintenance: Surety that guarantees that the installed improvements will remain in operable condition and not have any defects in material or workmanship for a period of 12 months after satisfactory completion of installation. 
    Surety, performance: Surety that guarantees that the cost of the infrastructure improvements necessary to support the subdivision to be platted is funded to complete the improvements if the property owner cannot complete them. 
    Surety, site plan completion: Surety that guarantees that perimeter landscape buffers will be constructed and property fenced if construction does not proceed to completion. 
    Surface water (applies only to Chapter 9): Water upon the surface of the earth, whether contained in bounds created naturally or artificially or diffused. Water from natural springs shall be classified as surface water when it exits from the spring onto the earth's surface [F.S. § 373.019(21).] 
    Surface water management system: A dam, impoundment, reservoir, appurtenant work or works, or any combination thereof. The terms "surface water management system" or "system" include areas of dredging or filling as those terms are defined in F.S. §§ 373.403(13) and 373.403(14). 
    Surface water management system: A stormwater management system, dam, impoundment, reservoir, appurtenant work or works, or any combination thereof. The terms "surface water management system" or "system" include areas of dredging or filling as those terms are defined in F.S. §§ 373.403(13) and 373.403(14), (Subsection 40C-4.021(26), FAC). 
    Swale: Depression or channel in the ground, often designed for channeling surface water. 
    Temporary irrigation system: An interim system, including surface distribution elements (hose, pipe, etc.), that shall be removed once the landscaping is established or once it is no longer needed. 
    Temporary uses or structures: Any use or structure placed on a parcel of land for a period of short duration. 
    Threatened species: Those animal species listed in Section 39-27.004, FAC and those plant species which are listed as threatened in 50 Code of Federal Regulations 17.12. 
    Townhouse: Three or more attached single-family dwelling unit constructed in a series or group of attached units with property lines separating such units. 
    Traffic circulation: A traffic flow pattern, such as a two-way or a one-way, for an on-street system or off-street parking facility. 
    Traffic control devices: Signs, pavement markings, and signal lights designed and installed to aid in safe and effective flow of motor vehicles across roads and parking lots. 
    Traffic flow: The pattern of traffic movement through an area or through a parking facility. 
    Transom: A horizontal crosspiece over a door, or between a door and a window above it, or a small hinged window above a door or another window. 
    Transportation center: A designated area for public transportation such as buses, taxicab stand, etc. 
    Travel trailer: A recreational vehicle used for temporary housing by individuals and families during travel. This category, in this LDC, is assumed to include also campers, camping trailers, motor homes and smaller mobile homes (up to a length of 35 feet, exclusive of hitch, and eight feet in width), capable of being towed by a passenger motor car and complies with F.S. § 320.01(1)1. 
    Travel trailer park: A development for the accommodation of tourists or vacationers of short-term basis, providing rental spaces for each individual trailer, camper, motor home, etc., and recreation and service facilities for the use of the tenants. This designation does not permit or allow permanent residents. 
    Tree: Any living, self-supporting woody perennial plant which at maturity attains a trunk diameter of at least four inches or more when measured at four and one-half feet above ground level and which normally attains an overall height of at least 15 feet, usually with one main stem or trunk and many branches. 
    Tree protection zone (TPZ): The circular area usually under the canopy of a tree to be protected where access, construction activities, driving, parking, storage, grubbing, fill dirt, trenching, and digging is restricted by a sturdy but temporary fence. The radius of the TPZ is equal to one foot of TPZ radius for each inch of diameter of the tree to be protected. 
    Tree, shade: Any tree attaining a mature height of over 35 feet and a spread of 35 feet. Other trees may be acceptable upon approval of the Land Use Administrator including, but not limited to, the species listed per City standards. 
    Tree, street: Any tree growing in the public rights-of-way or on private property that is within five feet of the rights-of-way line. The tree must be a shade tree if no overhead utility conflicts exist. 
    Tree, understory: Any tree that has a mature height of less than 35 feet or is a slower growing species, as determined by the Land Use Administrator, including, but not limited to, certain species per City standards. 
    Trim: To reduce, shorten, or diminish gradually a plant or parts of a plant without altering the natural shape using proper horticultural and arboricultural techniques. 
    Trim color: Refers to a complementary color used for the trim of architectural components such as window trim, windowsills, doorframes, cornice, and banding. 
    Turbidity barrier: A floating geotextile material that minimizes sediment transport from a disturbed area adjacent to or within a body of water. 
    Turning radius: The pavement or ramp width necessary to permit a vehicle to complete a turning maneuver. 
    Two-way: A roadway or aisle on which traffic moves in the opposite, yet parallel, direction. 
    Underground utility facilities: Communications and power lines installed below the ground surface within road rights-of-ways or easements. 
    Understory tree: See Tree, understory. 
    Use: The specific purpose(s) for which land or a building is designated, arranged, intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained. 
    Use, change in: Substitution of one thing for another specifically regarding use of land or use of a building. 
    Use, conforming: Any use of a structure or land that is a permitted or approved provisional or special use in the district in which the structure or land is situated and which conforms to the regulations of that district and all other regulations as adopted by the City. 
    Use, discontinued: A use that is interrupted or in which there is a break in continuity regardless of the intent of the owner or operator. 
    Use, legal nonconforming: A use that lawfully occupied a building or lands at the time this LDC was adopted and that does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    Use, nonconforming: The use of a building, structure, or parcel of land not in compliance with the regulations as adopted by the City. 
    Use, principal: The main or primary purpose for which a structure or lot is designated, arranged, or intended, or for which it may be used, occupied, or maintained under this LDC. 
    Use, public: The use of land, water, or building by a municipality, public body or board, commission, or authority, or federal, state, or county government, or any agency thereof for a public service purpose. 
    Use, semipublic: Includes churches, museums, and organizations operating as a nonprofit activity serving a public purpose or service and includes such organizations as noncommercial clubs and lodges, theater groups, recreational, conservation, and neighborhood associations, and cultural activities. 
    Use, service: An establishment where the principal use is the provision of services for individuals, business, and government establishments, and other organizations; as opposed to the selling of goods or merchandise. This term includes automotive services, business services, major vehicle service, and personal services, but does not include retailing uses, restaurants, residential social service facilities, or any industrial uses. 
(1)  Service, automotive: Where the provision of services is focused on the repair and maintenance of motor vehicles. Examples of automotive services include detailing, mechanical or interior repair, tune-ups, tire sales and service, and stand-alone car washes, and similar uses. 
(2)  Service, business: Where the provision of services is focused on support to professional office establishments. Some examples include copy centers, secretarial service, computer rental-repair service, internet service, and similar uses. 
(3)  Service, major: Vehicle or machinery service activities that do not meet the definition of automotive service shall be classified as major service. Examples include bus, truck or train terminal/maintenance facilities, commercial or industrial machinery repair shops, and body and paint shops. 
(4)  Service, personal: A service use primarily engaged in providing services involving the care of a person, his or her apparel, pets, or small appliances. Some examples include barbershops, beauty shops, dance studios, funeral homes, pet grooming, laundromats, dry cleaners (drop-off and pick up only), health and fitness clubs, caterers, window tinting, video tape/disc rentals, consumer goods rental and service centers, and similar uses. 
    Use, temporary: A use established for a fixed period of time with the intent that such use will terminate automatically upon expiration of the fixed time period. 
    Utility agreement: A written agreement between the City and a property owner that establishes the terms and conditions pursuant to which the City will provide water and/or wastewater service. 
    Utility facilities or utility installations: By way of illustration and not limitation, all equipment, fixtures, pumps, lines, mains, manholes, lift stations, pumping stations, laterals, service connections, and any and all appurtenances thereto together with all real property, easements and rights-of-way necessary to provide water and wastewater service to property whether located on-site or off-site. 
    Variance: A modification of the strict terms of the regulations where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the regulation would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. As used in this regulation, a variance may be authorized only for area and size of structure, size of yards, open spaces, and flood damage protection regulations. The establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of nonconformities in the district or uses in an adjoining district. 
    Variance, floodplain: Relating to flood damage protection, this term means a grant of relief from the requirements of Section 10.02 or the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code that permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by Section 10.02 or the flood resistant construction requirements of the Florida Building Code. 
    Vegetation: Plant material, including trees, shrubs, groundcover, and vines, that are either existing or planted on a site. 
    Vehicle: Any device or conveyance for transporting persons or property over the public streets, including, but not limited to, any automobile, motorcycle, motor truck, trailer, van, semi-trailer, tractor-trailer combination, commercial vehicle or trailer, recreational vehicle or trailer, golf cart, and boat or boat trailer but it shall not include tractors, construction equipment or machinery, or any other device used to perform a job except as stated above. 
    Vehicle fueling position: A location next to a pump island at a service station or convenience store where a single vehicle obtains fuel simultaneously while other vehicles are being fueled. Typically, one fuel dispenser will provide two vehicle fueling positions located on opposite sides of the pump island. 
    Vehicle repair: The repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles or parts thereof, including collision service, painting, and steam cleaning of vehicles. 
    Vehicle sales: The sale of new and used motor vehicles. 
    Vehicular use area (VUA): Any area used by vehicles for driving or parking except public thoroughfares, including but not limited to areas for parking, display, storage or traverse of any and all types of motor vehicles, bicycles, watercraft, trailers, airplanes or construction equipment. 
    Veranda: A large, open porch, usually roofed and partly enclosed, as by a railing, and often extending across the front and sides of a house. 
    Vested development: A project that has received an entitlement to develop due to a City issued development order or permit for the project, such as a site plan approval or building permit or which meets the legal requirements for vesting. Such a project, having satisfied the City's concurrency requirements, shall be permitted to develop as per the terms of the development order or permit application. Should the development program of a "vested development" project be substantially modified in terms of density, intensity or facility impact from that development program described in the original permit application or development order, the project will lose its vested rights and be obliged to undergo a concurrency review per Chapter 7. 
    A project may also be a vested development if the City issued a development order or permit such as site plan approval or a building permit for the project prior to November 16, 2008. Such a project is not required to meet the concurrency requirements of Chapter 7, unless the project is significantly changed in terms of its density, intensity, or facility impact subsequent to such effective date, as determined by the City, in which case it will lose its vested development status and be obliged to undergo a review as per Chapter 7. 
    Vested rights: The right to undertake and complete the development and use of property under the terms and conditions of an approved site-specific development plan or an approved phased development plan for a specified time, regardless of changes in this Code. 
    Wall offset: A ledge or recess in a wall formed by a reduction in wall thickness above. 
    Wall (when referred to as a fence): An artificially constructed vertical barrier that is typically solid and constructed of stone, brick or masonry erected to enclose, restrict access to, screen, or separate areas. 
    Wastewater: A combination of any type of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, industrial establishments, any and all other customers facilities, together with such ground, surface and stormwater as may be present, but does not mean or include hazardous or toxic wastes. 
    Wastewater system: As used interchangeably, means any and all wastewater or wastewater collection, transmission, treatment and disposal facilities currently owned, managed, controlled, or otherwise used or hereafter owned, operated, managed, controlled, or otherwise used by the City. Such system includes any and all improvements, extensions or additions thereto hereto constructed or acquired either form the proceeds of bonds or from any other sources, together with all property, real, personal or mixed, tangible or intangible, currently or hereafter owned, operated, managed, controlled, or otherwise used by the City in connection therewith. 
    Waterbodies: Fresh and saltwater canals, ditches, lakes, marshes, rivers, swamps, and swales in the City. 
    Watercourse: A natural or artificial channel in which a flow of water occurs either continually or intermittently. 
    Watercraft: Any craft, vessel, or boat used or capable of being used as means of transportation on or under the water including watercraft such as houseboats and other watercraft not used primarily for transportation. 
    Water or waters in the state: Any and all water on or beneath the surface of the ground or in the atmosphere, including natural or artificial watercourses, lakes, ponds, or diffused surface water and water percolating, standing, or flowing beneath the surface of the ground, as well as all coastal waters within the jurisdiction of the state. [F.S. § 373.019(22).] 
    Water distribution system: 
(1)  Water mains. 
(2)  Sub mains. 
(3)  Transmission. 
(4)  Storage and pumping facilities. 
(5)  Valves. 
(6)  House services. 
(7)  Meters. 
(8)  Other appurtenances. 
    Water system: As used interchangeably, means any and all water production, transmission, treatment, and distribution facilities currently owned, operated, managed, controlled, or otherwise used or hereafter owned by and/or operated by the City. Such system includes any and all improvements, extensions, or additions thereto hereafter constructed or acquired either from the proceeds of bonds or from any other sources, together with all property, real, personal, or mixed, tangible or intangible, currently or hereafter owned, operated, managed, controlled, or otherwise used in connection therewith. 
    Water surface elevation: The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal and riverine areas. 
    Water use zone: A grouping of spray, sprinklers, or micro irrigation emitters so that they can be operated simultaneously by the control of one valve according to the water requirements of the plants used and soil conditions. 
    Well: Any excavation that is drilled, cored, bored, washed, driven, dug, jetted, or otherwise constructed for conveying groundwater levels or other characteristics, providing cathodic protection or providing a method of injecting water into the aquifer system from above the earth's surface. 
    Wellfield: A tract of land that contains a number of existing or proposed wells for the purpose of supplying public potable water. 
    Wellhead: The specific location of a well. 
    Wellhead protection zone: An area surrounding a public supply well or group of wells that has or have been established where special protective measures or land use activities are restricted for purposes of protecting the quality of water contributing to public supply well(s). The following wellhead protection zones have been established: 
(1)  Primary wellhead protection zone: The innermost protective zone around a wellhead as defined by a 500-foot radius from a wellhead. 
(2)  Secondary wellhead protection zone: A delineated area around favorable potable water production areas for the Floridan and intermediate aquifer as determined by the Land Use Administrator. 
    Wetland: Those areas inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soils. Soils present in wetlands generally are classified as hydric or alluvial or possess characteristics that are associated with reducing soil conditions. The prevalent vegetation in wetlands generally consists of facultative or obligate hydrophytic macrophytes that are typically adapted to areas having soil conditions described above. These species, due to morphological, physiological or reproductive adaptations, have the ability to grow, reproduce or persist in aquatic environments or anaerobic soil conditions. Florida wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bayheads, bogs, cypress domes and strands, sloughs, wet prairies, riverine swamps and marshes, hydric seepage slopes, tidal marshes, mangrove swamps and other similar areas. Florida wetlands generally do not include longleaf or slash pine flatwoods with an understory dominated by saw palmetto. The landward extent of wetlands is delineated pursuant to Sections 62-340.100 through 62.340.550, FAC as ratified by F.S. § 373.4211 (Subsection 40C-4.021(30), FAC). 
    Wetland buffer: See Buffer, wetland . 
    Wetland quality assessment method: According to the Uniform Mitigation Assessment Method (UMAM), a score is determined by calculating the average of the three quality assessment criteria: Location and Landscape Support, Water Quality, and Community Structure (Chapter 62-345, FAC). The score will range from zero to one. 
    Wetland systems, named: The following wetland and surface water systems shall be designated named wetland systems: 
(1)  Graham Swamp. 
(2)  Long Creek. 
(3)  Pellicer Creek. 
(4)  Hulett Branch. 
(5)  Hulett Swamp. 
(6)  Pringle Branch. 
(7)  Pringle Swamp. 
(8)  Styles Creek. 
(9)  Hominy Branch. 
(10)  Big Mulberry Branch. 
(11)  Gore Lake. 
(12)  Black Branch. 
(13)  Black Branch Swamp. 
    Wheel stop: A bumper or block placed at the head of a parking stall to restrain the vehicle from moving or overhanging any pedestrian access way. 
    Wing: A part of a building projecting from and subordinate to a central or main part. 
    Wireless communication facilities: Any staffed or unstaffed location for the transmission and/or reception of radio frequency signals, or other personal wireless communications, as defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and usually consisting of an antenna or antenna array, transmission cables, feed lines, equipment cabinets, towers, cabling, antenna brackets, and other such equipment. The following shall be deemed a wireless communication facility: new, replacement, or existing towers, government-owned towers, modified towers, collocation on existing towers or base stations, attached concealed and non-concealed antenna, dual purpose facilities, DAS, small cell, concealed towers, and non-concealed towers, so long as those facilities are used in the provision of personal wireless services as that term is defined in the Telecommunications Act. 
    Xeric: Native plants as well as other trees, shrubs, ground covers, and vines proven to survive only on natural rainfall after a sufficient plant establishment period. 
    Yard: The open space existing on the same lot with a principal building, unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings from the ground to the sky, between the lot lines and building line. 
    Zero lot line: An arrangement of development on adjoining lots in which the required side yard offsets is reduced on one side and increased on the other so that the sum of the offsets on any lot is no less than the sum of the required offsets. No building or structure shall be closer to a lot line than five feet, unless it abuts the lot line and provided with an access easement of five feet on the adjoining lot or abuts a building or structure on the adjoining lot. The offset adjacent to property not included in the zero lot line development or a street shall not be less than that required in the zoning district. All required building codes shall be adhered to (i.e. firewalls, etc.). 
Abbreviations 
/ = per ad = advertisement max. = maximum min. = minimum % = percent ac. = acre; acres ' = foot; feet ft. = foot; feet " = inch; inches ht. = height sf = square foot; square feet sq. ft. = square foot; square feet n/a = not applicable gal. = gallon(s) pop. = population FS = Florida Statutes FAC = Florida Administrative Code CMS = Concurrency Management System  
(Ord. No. 2009-26, § 97, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 2012-3, § 6, 5-1-12; Ord. No. 2013-9, § 3, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 2015-08 , § 4, 7-21-15; Ord. No. 2016-4 , § 1, 3-15-16; Ord. No. 2016-6 , § 2, 11-1-16; Ord. No. 2017-19 , § 2, 10-17-17; Ord. No. 2018-02 , § 6(Att. B), 2-6-18; Ord. No. 2018-13 , § 3, 4-17-18; Ord. No. 2018-21 , § 4, 10-2-18; Ord. No. 2018-24 , § 3, 11-6-18) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
    This is a numerical listing of the ordinances of the City used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
Date Section Section 
this Code 2004-10  5- 4-04 1-7       Added 2.17 2008-16  8-19-08 2(Exh. A)       Added Chs. 1-5, 7, 9-14 2009-17  7-21-09 3(Exh. A)       Added 3.04.05 2009-26 12-15-09 2 2.08.02.A.2.c. 3       Added 2.08.02.A.2.d.       Rnbd 2.08.02.A.2.d.       as 2.08.02.A.2.e. 4 2.15.01 5 2.15.03.B. 6 2.16.01 7       Added 2.16.02.C.5. 8 2.16.02.D. (title) 9 2.16.02.D.3. 10 3.02.02 (table 3-3) 11 3.03.02 (table 3-4) 12 3.03.03 (table 3-5) 13 3.05.02.B.3. 14 4.01 15 4.01.01.A. 16 4.01.02.A.3.c. 17       Added 4.01.02.A.3.g. 18 4.01.02.B. 19 4.01.03.B.1. 20 4.01.05.B.4.d. 21 4.01.05.B.4.f. 22       Rpld 4.01.05.B. (table 4-1) 23 4.01.05.C.6.b. 24 4.01.08.A.2. 25       Added 4.01.09 26 4.09.01, 4.09.02       Rnbd 4.09.02 1.-5.       as 4.09.02 A.-F.       Added 4.09.03 27 4.15 (title) 28 4.15.01-4.15.04 29 4.15.02 30 4.15.03.A.2. 31 4.16.08.G. (title) 32 4.16.08.G.1. 33       Added 4.16.08.G.3. 34 4.19.05 35 5.03.02.B.3. 36 5.04.02.B.1. 37 5.04.02.C.5. 38 5.04.02.E. (table 5-5) 39 5.04.02.E.6. 40       Rpld 5.04.02.E.7. 41 7.04.02.A. 42       Rpld 7.04.03.B. 43 7.04.03.C. 44 7.04.05.B. 45 7.07.04.C. 46 9.02.05.A.2. 47 9.02.05.B. 48       Added 9.04.02.B.1. 49 10.03.05 50 10.05.04.B. 51 11.03.01.F. 52 11.03.02.A.1. 53 11.03.02.C.2.b. 54       Added 11.03.04.B.1.c. 55 11.03.05.A. (table 11-4) 56 11.03.05.B. (table 11-5) 57 11.03.05.C. (table 11-6) 58 11.03.06.B.6. 59 12.01.01.P. 60       Added 12.02.01.D. 61       Rpld 12.02.02 62 12.03.01.B. 63 12.03.01.D. 64 12.03.01.H. 65 12.03.01.K. 66       Added 12.03.01.L. 67 12.03.02.B. 68 12.03.02.Q. 69 12.03.02.Z. 70 12.03.02.EE. 71 12.03.02.FF. 72 12.04.03.C. 73 12.04.04.D.2. 74 12.04.04.E. 75 12.04.05 76 12.04.06.A. 77 12.04.07.A.3. 78 12.04.07.B. 79 12.05.01.B. 80 12.05.01.C.1. 81 12.05.02.B.2. 82 12.05.02.C.1. 83 12.05.02.C.4. 84 12.05.02.D. 85 12.05.02.E.3. 86 12.05.02.F.1. 87       Rnbd 12.05.02.H.3.       as 4.09.03 88 12.06.01.B. 89       Rpld 12.06.03.A.6. 90 12.06.04.B. (table 12-3) 91 12.06.06.E. 92       Added 12.06.07 93 13.03.03.B.3. 94 13.03.03.C.1. 95       Rpld 13.03.03.C.2. 96 13.03.03.C.4. 97 14.02 2010-13 10- 5-10 2 4.19.02 C.       Rnbd 4.19.02 E.-G.       as 4.19.02 D.-F.       Added 4.19.02 C.5. 2012-3  5- 1-12 2(Exh. 1) 3.03.02 (table 3-4) 3       Added 4.21 4(Exh. 2) 5.04.02 (table 5-4) 5 12.05.02 6 14.02 2013-9 11-19-13 2 13.02.06 3 14.02 2015-08  7-21-15 2 3.03.02 4 4.01.02 5 14.02 2015-9  8- 4-15 2 3.04.04.E. 3 3.02 (table 3-3) fn. 8 4 3.03 (table 3-5) fn. 5 5       Added 3.05.02.F. 2015-16 12- 1-15 2 4.01.01.A. 4.01.08.B. 2016-4  3-15-16 1 14.02 2 3.01.06 2016-6 11- 1-16 2       Rpld 11.01-11.04       Added 11.01-11.04 14.02 2017-19 10-17-17 2 14.02 3 3.03.02 (table 3-4) 2018-02  2- 6-18 3 3.02.02 (table 3-2) 4 3.03.02 (table 3-4) 5(Att. A) 4.20 6(Att. B) 14.02 2018-13  4-17-18 2       Rpld 10.02 
(10.02.01-10.02.13)       Added 10.02 
(10.02.03-10.02.18) 3 14.02 2018-14  5-15-18 3(Exh. A) 3.04.05 2018-21 10- 2-18 2       Rpld 4.09 3 5.01.02 5.02-5.04 4 14.02 2018-24 11- 6-18 2       Rpld 9.01-9.07       Added 9.01-9.08 3 14.02  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Unified Land Development Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Florida Statutes. 
F.S. 
Section Section  
this Code 125.561 4.20.04 161.055 10.02.06 ch. 163 1.02 1.03 2.14.01 3.01.03 7.01 14.02 163.3161 2.02.03 163.3174 2.02.03 163.3177 2.02.03 163.3180(6) 7.04.02 7.07.02 163.3180(12) 7.04.02 7.07.05 163.3180(16)(e) 7.07.04 163.3194 2.02.03 163.3201 1.02 163.3202 1.02 ch. 166 1.02 2.14.01 4.21.03 12.05.02 ch. 177 2.08.01 2.08.04 2.08.05 9.02.01 14.02 177.101 2.08.06 193.461 14.02 320.01 14.02 320.01(1)1. 14.02 320.8249 10.02.14 365.172 4.20.07 4.20.10 365.172(13)(a) 4.20.02 366.02 10.02.06 ch. 373, pt. IV 9.04.02 373.019(21) 14.02 373.019(22) 14.02 373.036 10.02.06 373.403(13) 14.02 373.403(14) 14.02 373.4135 10.01.05 373.421(7) 10.01.03 373.4211 14.02 ch. 380 7.04.02 380.04 14.02 381.0065 10.02.06 381.986 3.03.02 14.02 381.986(11) 14.02 ch. 403 4.14.01 4.14.02 ch. 419 4.06 14.02 ch. 429 14.02 ch. 482 10.01.02 ch. 487 10.01.02 553.73(5) 10.02.09 553.73(10)(k) 10.02.06 561.20(7)(a) 14.02 604.50 10.02.06 ch. 847 4.02.02  
